                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  AN ANALYTIC FRAMEWORK FOR INTERPRETING INVESTMENT REGRESSIONS
              IN THE PRESENCE OF FINANCIAL CONSTRAINTS

                                       Andrew B. Abel
                                       Stavros Panageas

                                     Working Paper 26898
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26898


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020




Previous versions circulated as "The Impact of Financial Constraints on Investment, Dividends,
and q." We thank participants in seminars at the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and St. Louis
and the Penn Macro Lunch Group for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Andrew B. Abel and Stavros Panageas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
An Analytic Framework For Interpreting Investment Regressions In The Presence Of Financial
Constraints
Andrew B. Abel and Stavros Panageas
NBER Working Paper No. 26898
March 2020
JEL No. E22,G33,G35

                                           ABSTRACT

A financial constraint that prevents access to external funds induces non-classical measurement
error in average q as a proxy for unobservable marginal q. Unlike classical measurement error,
this measurement error biases upward the coefficient on average q in a univariate regression of
investment on average q. In a multiple regression of investment on average q and cash flow, the
coefficient on cash flow is positive. The positive cash-flow coefficient indicates the presence of a
financial constraint, but it does not indicate a shortage of liquidity to fund current investment. In
addition, the coefficient on average q is biased downward.


Andrew B. Abel
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2315 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
abel@wharton.upenn.edu

Stavros Panageas
Anderson School of Management
University of California, Los Angeles
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
stavros.panageas@anderson.ucla.edu
1         Introduction
Financial constraints can affect a firm's optimal capital investment, even when the constraints
are not binding. They can also affect the relationship between investment and average q ,
without changing the relationship between investment and suitably-defined marginal q . We
develop a simple dynamic stochastic model of a firm that faces an explicit financial constraint
and we derive the optimal capital investment and payout decisions of the firm.                   We also
derive the value of the firm, which allows us to derive expressions for average q and marginal
q . We show that even when the financial constraint is not binding, it reduces the value of
the firm, thereby reducing average q , marginal q , and investment. More interesting is our
finding that the financial constraint derives a wedge between marginal q and its commonly-
used empirical proxy, average q , even if average q and marginal q would be identically equal
to each other in an otherwise-identical model without financial constraints.                 This wedge
has important implications for regressions of the investment-capital ratio on average q , with
or without cash flow as an additional regressor.             Importantly, we demonstrate that the
estimated coefficient on cash flow in investment regressions conflates the impacts of financial
constraints and the impact of the expected present value of future profitability.
        By design, the non-financial aspects of the firm's decision problem are simple in order to
allow explicit solutions for various variables of interest. The firm's operating profit at any
point in time is the product of an exogenous profitability parameter and the capital stock.
The exogenous profitability parameter alternates stochastically in continuous time between
a positive value and a negative value, according to a Markov regime-switching process. The
firm can change its capital stock by purchasing or selling capital at a price normalized to one
and incurring an adjustment cost. The adjustment cost function is linearly homogeneous
in the rate of investment and the level of the capital stock and is convex in the rate of
investment. Therefore, the non-financial environment satisfies the Hayashi conditions,1 so
average q would equal marginal q in the absence of financial constraints. Consistent with
much of the literature, the adjustment cost function is quadratic in the investment-capital
ratio, so the optimal investment-capital ratio is linear in marginal q .
        To obtain closed-form expressions for various aspects of the firm's valuation and optimal
behavior, we consider the limiting case in which the adjustment cost scale factor becomes
arbitrarily large.      Rather than leading to very large adjustment costs when the firm im-
    1
    The proportionality of profit to the capital stock and the linear homogeneity of the cost of investment
together satisfy the Hayashi conditions.



                                                    2
plements its optimal investment policy, the total adjustment cost becomes negligible as the
adjustment cost scale factor becomes arbitrarily large. Nevertheless, as we show, the realized
marginal adjustment cost does not vanish, so optimal investment is given by the standard
equalization of marginal q and one plus the marginal adjustment cost.
       We introduce financial constraints in a very stark form.             We assume that once a firm
acquires and installs its initial capital stock, it cannot raise any external funds. The firm
cannot issue debt or equity, and it cannot pay negative dividends. When the favorable regime
prevails, the firm reaps positive profits from operations, which it can use to pay dividends,
undertake investment, or accumulate cash on hand. However, when the unfavorable regime
prevails, the firm has negative profits from operations. In order to be able to pay costs in
excess of revenues, the firm must use some of its accumulated cash on hand.2 If the firm
runs out of cash while profits are negative, it must terminate immediately and permanently,
thereby losing its claim on future cash flows from operations. If the anticipated foregone
cash flows are sufficiently large, the firm has an incentive to accumulate cash on hand in the
favorable regime in order to allow it to survive for at least a while when the next unfavorable
regime arrives.      Shareholders balance this incentive to accumulate cash on hand against
their desire to receive dividends sooner rather than later.
       In the presence of the financial constraints we analyze, cash on hand becomes a second
asset held by the firm in addition to its physical capital stock, so the firm's overall opti-
mization problem has three state variables (profitability, capital, and cash on hand). The
firm manages its two assets, cash and capital, through its payout and investment decisions,
respectively. The payout decision determines how much of its cash flow net of investment
the firm pays out as dividends and how much it retains within the firm. Importantly, the
addition of cash on hand as a state variable destroys the equality of average q and marginal
q despite the fact that the non-financial aspects of the firm satisfy the Hayashi conditions.
Nevertheless, the value function of the firm is linearly homogeneous in capital and cash on
hand, and we exploit this homogeneity to obtain closed-form solutions for the value of the
firm as well as for optimal investment and dividends.3
       With the quadratic specification of adjustment costs, the optimal investment-capital
   2
     The adjustment function is scaled so that any proceeds from selling capital, net of adjustment costs, will
not be sufficient to pay the excess of operating costs over revenues.
   3
     When the salvage value in the event of termination is zero, we can express the value of the firm per unit
of capital as a closed-form function of the primitive parameters of the firm's problem. When the salvage
value is positive, such a closed-form expression is not available, but we can express the value of the firm
per unit of capital as a closed-form function of the primitive parameters of the firm's problem and x , the
optimal target cash-to-capital ratio.


                                                      3
ratio is a linear function of suitably-defined marginal q , which is unobservable. Typically,
empirical analyses relate the investment-capital ratio to average q , adjusted for holdings of
liquid assets. As a prelude to analyzing the relationship between the optimal investment-
capital ratio and average q , we first analyze the relationship between marginal q and average
q . In particular, we examine the coefficient on average q in a univariate regression of marginal
q on average q . If average q were simply marginal q plus classical measurement error, the
coefficient on average q would be smaller than one. However, the error in average q as a
measure of marginal q is not classical, and we show that the coefficient on average q is likely
to be greater than one. Remarkably, this effect tends to increase the apparent response of the
optimal investment-capital ratio to average q , contrary to the conventional argument based
on classical measurement error. As a result, the presence of financial constraints is unlikely
to be the source of the small regression coefficients obtained in empirical investment-average
q relations, since financial constraints would induce the opposite bias.
   Our analysis then explores the role of cash flow in regressions of the investment-capital
ratio on both average q and cash flow. Consistent with typical empirical findings, our analysis
demonstrates that the introduction of cash flow as an additional regressor in investment
regressions reduces the OLS coefficient on average q . Also consistent with typical empirical
findings, the coefficient on cash flow is positive.   The conventional interpretation is that
the positive coefficient on cash flow reflects a shortage of cash on hand relative to desired
investment expenditures. Our analysis points to a different interpretation. We demonstrate
analytically that marginal q is the sum of average q and a term that reflects the financial
constraint.   The term reflecting the financial constraint is the product of an increasing
function of the shadow value of cash on hand (minus one) and the value of the firm per unit of
capital. The shadow value of cash on hand (minus one) is positive if and only if the financial
constraint is binding.   The cash flow coefficient in a regression of the investment-capital
ratio on average q and cash flow captures the effect of the financial constraint. However,
the interpretation is not that the cash flow coefficient reflects a shortage of cash on hand
to undertake desired investment.      Moreover, the estimated coefficient on cash flow also
contains a component reflecting a fraction of the impact of expected future profitability on
investment, effectively taking some of this impact away from the estimated coefficient on
average q .
   We show that there is one situation in which average q and marginal q are equal in the
presence of financial constraints. When the financial constraint is not binding, that is when
dividends are positive, marginal q and average q are equal.        In a sample of observations

                                               4
in which dividends are always positive, investment regressions have a coefficient on average
q that equals the inverse of the adjustment cost scale parameter and a coefficient on cash
flow that equals zero. This finding is consistent with Fazzari et al. (1988), hereafter FHP,
who argue that regressions of the investment-capital ratio on average q would perform best
when the sample is restricted to observations for which dividends are positive.       However,
this is not to say that financial constraints don't impact the firm's investment when it is
paying dividends, since marginal q , and hence investment, is reduced by the presence of
a contemporaneously nonbinding financial constraint that will bind in the future at some
unknown time.
   Section 1.1 reviews the literature on investment and q , including the impact of financial
constraints on the relationship among investment, q , and cash flow.        Section 2 presents
the physical environment of the firm, which comprises profit from operations, capital accu-
mulation, and costs of adjusting the capital stock. Financial constraints are introduced in
Section 3. To serve as a baseline for assessing the impact of financial constraints, Section 3.1
analyzes the valuation of the firm in the absence of financial constraints. The valuation of
the firm and optimal investment in the presence of these constraints are analyzed in Section
3.2. Financial constraints drive a wedge between average q and marginal q , even under the
Hayashi conditions. Section 4 analyzes this wedge and its implications for regressions of the
investment-capital ratio on average q , with and without cash flow as an additional regressor.
Financial constraints introduce the possibility that the firm will be forced to terminate at
some point, but shareholders may receive some salvage value upon termination.           Section
5 analyzes the impact of the salvage value on the firm's valuation and optimal investment.
Concluding remarks are in Section 6.


1.1    Literature Review
The notion that a firm's optimal rate of investment is linked to its valuation originated in
Keynes (1936). Brainard and Tobin (1968) gave empirical content to this link by defining
a ratio that Tobin (1969) called "q ," and the subsequent literature has dubbed Tobin's q .
The numerator of this ratio is the market value of a firm and the denominator of this ratio
is the replacement cost of the firm's capital stock. An appeal of Tobin's q is that it relies
on financial markets to evaluate the firm's current and future prospects, thereby relieving a
researcher from having to perform the appropriate calculation of the expected present value
of future marginal products of capital.     Mussa (1977) and Abel (1983) provided formal


                                               5
underpinnings of the q -theory of investment in optimizing models that feature convex costs
of adjusting the capital stock. This formal analysis reflects the distinction between average
q , which is the ratio defined by Brainard and Tobin, and marginal q , which is the ratio
of the marginal valuation of an additional unit of capital to the cost of that additional
unit of capital. In the convex adjustment cost framework, the optimal rate of investment
equates the marginal cost of investment, consisting of the purchase price plus the marginal
adjustment cost, with marginal q . However, marginal q is not directly observable. Hayashi
(1982) provided conditions under which marginal q and average q are equal, thereby allowing
researchers to use average q , which is observable, as a proxy for marginal q , which is the
appropriate variable to be equated with the marginal cost of investment.
   The Hayashi conditions are (1) current operating profits, after maximizing over any
variable factors of production, such as labor, are proportional to the capital stock; and (2)
the adjustment cost function is linearly homogeneous in investment and the capital stock.
The first of these two conditions would be satisfied by a perfectly competitive firm with
a production function that is linearly homogeneous in capital and the variable factors of
production. Implicit in most invocations of the Hayashi conditions is the assumption that
the firm does not face any financial constraints.
   A powerful implication of the q -theory of investment derived in an adjustment cost frame-
work without financial constraints is that marginal q is a sufficient statistic for investment.
Under the Hayashi conditions, marginal q and average q are identically equal, so average q ,
which is the observable construct used in much empirical work, is thus a sufficient statistic
for investment. FHP (1988) showed that, empirically, average q is not a sufficient statistic
for investment for firms that are likely to be financially constrained, such as firms that do not
pay dividends and firms that are growing rapidly. FHP found that for such firms, cash flow
has a positive effect on investment, even taking account of the supposedly-sufficient statistic,
average q . They interpret their finding as evidence that financial constraints impact capital
investment by these firms.
   FHP's interpretation of the positive coefficient on cash flow has faced three types of
challenges. Kaplan and Zingales (1997) challenged FHP's reliance on dividend-payout ratios
to categorize firms into three classes. FHP Class I firms have the lowest dividend-payout
ratios and are regarded by FHP as likely to be financially constrained. Kaplan and Zingales
developed an alternative classification scheme based on various criteria gleaned from financial
statements and other documents.        Contrary to FHP, they find evidence that cash-flow
sensitivities are highest for firms that are the least financially constrained.

                                               6
       A second type of challenge, that includes Gomes (2001), Cooper and Ejarque (2003),
Alti (2003) and Abel and Eberly (2011), has produced theoretical models for which an
investment regression on average q and cash flow would yield a positive coefficient on cash
flow, even though the models do not incorporate financial constraints.                   In these models,
none of which satisfy the Hayashi conditions, a positive coefficient on cash flow cannot be
viewed as evidence of financial constraints.
       A third type of challenge is based on measurement error in q . In a published comment
that appears in the same volume as FHP, Poterba (1988) states "If for any of these reasons
the measured Q variable provides an error-ridden indicator of the firm's true prospects, then
econometric results may find that current cash flow affects investment only because this
variable, just like measured Q, is correlated with the 'true' marginal q variable that firms
consider in making investment decisions." (p. 202) Whited (1992) developed an alternative
test for the impact of financial constraints based on estimating an Euler equation associated
with a firm's investment decision.           The Euler equation fits the data well for firms that
are not financially constrained but not for firms that are financially constrained, consistent
with investment being affected by financial constraints.               She reiterated the point that a
positive coefficient on cash flow might arise from measurement error in q ,4 and this point
was further echoed by Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1995)5 and in a survey article by Roberts
and Whited (2013)6 . Erickson and Whited (2000) addressed the measurement error head on
by developing and applying consistent higher-order moment estimators. More recently, Abel
(2018) developed a dynamic model of the firm that satsifies the Hayashi conditions and does
not face financial constraints. For such a firm, average q is identically equal to marginal q .
Abel derived closed-form expressions for the plims of the estimated coefficients on q and cash
flow in investment regressions, and showed analytically that classical measurement error in q
will lead to a positive coefficient on cash flow, even though there are no financial constraints.
       The equality of average q and marginal q is a crucial assumption for empirical analyses
that relate the investment-capital ratio to average q . However, even for perfectly competitive
   4
     Whited (1992), p. 1426, observed "cash flow may not be picking up the desired liquidity effect but may
be proxying either for an accelerator effect or for information about future investment opportunities not
captured by q ."
   5
     Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1995), p. 544, state "More generally, anything that systematically reduces
the signal-to-noise ratio of Tobin's Q (for example, measurement error or `excess volatility' of stock prices)
will shift explanatory power away from Tobin's Q toward cash flow, thus making such firms appear to be
financially constrained when in fact they are not.
   6
     Roberts and Whited (2013), p. 498, state that because of the high positive correlation between Tobin's
q and cash flow, "the coefficient on cash flow, j , is biased upwards. Therefore, even if the true coefficient
on cash flow is zero, the biased OLS coefficient can be positive."


                                                      7
firms with constant returns to scale in their production and adjustment cost functions,
measured average q can differ from marginal q , which is equated to the marginal cost of
investment. Ideally, average q would measure the contribution to firm value of its physical
capital stock.      However, the value of the firm, which is the numerator of average q , can
include the values of other assets, such as inventories, remaining depreciation tax shields on
existing capital, intangible assets, and financial assets, such as securities and cash on hand.
The values of these other assets are often subtracted from the total value of the firm in
constructing the numerator of average q . FHP, Whited (1992), and Peters and Taylor (2017)
subtract inventories from firm value in computing average q . In the seminal demonstration
of the equality of marginal q and average q , Hayashi (1982) subtracts the present value of
future tax savings due to depreciation deductions accruing to existing capital, and a similar
correction is employed by Summers (1981) and Hoshi and Kashyap (1990).
   Hayashi and Inoue (1991) consider a firm with multiple capital goods.                            Under linear
homogeneity of the production and adjustment cost functions, the value of a perfectly com-
petitive firm, V (K1 , ..., Kn ), would be linearly homogeneous in the n types of capital, so that
      n
V =         VKi Ki , where VKi is the marginal valuation of type i capital. The replacement cost
      i=1
                                        n
of the total capital stock is RC             pi Ki , where pi is the replacement cost of a unit of type
                                       i=1
                                                 VKi                                VKi
i capital. Marginal q for type i capital is       pi
                                                     .       If it turns out that    pi
                                                                                          is equal for all types i,
                   V
then average q ,   RC
                      ,   would equal this common value of marginal q . Peters and Taylor (2017)
treat intangible capital (arising from R&D investment and a portion of selling, general and
administrative expense) as a second type of capital.                   They impose conditions that make
marginal q for physical capital and marginal q for intangible capital identically equal to each
other. Among these conditions is the assumption that physical capital and intangible capital
are perfect substitutes in production. While this assumption may be plausible for physical
capital and intangible capital, it would not be appropriate in the context of our analysis,
where the two types of capital are physical capital and cash on hand.
   It might seem that it is straightforward to adjust the value of the firm for its holding
of cash on hand, since cash is easier to value than, say, inventories, or the present value of
future depreciation tax shields in an uncertain tax environment. Thus, for instance, Hoshi
and Kashyap (1990) and Peters and Taylor (2017) subtract cash from the market value of
the firm in the numerator of Tobin's q . Reducing the firm's value dollar-for-dollar for each
dollar of cash on hand is the correct adjustment in the absence of financial constraints.
However, in the presence of financial constraints, the value of a dollar of cash on hand can

                                                         8
exceed one dollar.     In this case, with the marginal value of a dollar of cash greater than
one, the correct adjustment to the firm's value would be to subtract the amount of cash on
hand, multiplied by the marginal value of cash. However, the marginal value of cash is not
directly observable, except when the firm is paying dividends.
   Bolton et al. (2011) emphasized the importance of the marginal value of cash in the
investment decision.    They developed a continuous-time model to analyze the investment
and liquidity management decisions of a firm that has costly access to external finance. Since
the use of external finance is costly, the shadow value of a dollar of cash of hand can exceed a
dollar. Put differently, the use of a dollar of cash to purchase and install capital can have a
cost that exceeds one. They showed that the standard q -theoretic condition that equates the
marginal cost of investment and the marginal valuation of a unit of installed capital needs
to be adjusted for the additional cost reflected in the shadow price of cash. Our analysis
also highlights that financial constraints increase the marginal value of cash on hand and the
consequent implication for optimal investment. Bolton, Chen, and Wang included a rich set
of opportunities for external finance and characterized features of optimal investment and
financial policy, though they did not derive closed-form solutions, nor did they address the
wedge between average q and marginal q caused by financial constraints. In contrast, we do
not allow external finance, which allows us to derive analytic solutions for optimal investment
and dividend policy, even though, unlike in Bolton, Chen, and Wang, profitability is serially
correlated. These solutions allow us to analyze the wedge between average q and marginal
q and the consequent effects on investment regressions. In addition, an important difference
between their model and ours is that in their model marginal q is constant in the absence of
financial constraints because they assume that profitability is i.i.d. By assuming persistent
profitability, we can study investment regressions in a framework where marginal q varies
both because of exogenous profitability shocks and the time-varying tightness of financial
constraints. The dependence of marginal q on profitability shocks, as well as on the tightness
of financial constraints, becomes important in our analysis of investment regressions.
   Abel and Panageas (2019) analyze the cash management problem of a firm that faces an
exogenous stochastic stream of cash flow from operations. In that framework, there is no
investment decision and the capital stock is assumed to be constant over time. Since there is
no investment, the cash management decision is simply a payout decision amounting to the
determination of how much cash to retain within the firm and how much cash to pay out as
dividends. Abel and Panageas assume that the salvage value of the firm is zero and derive a
closed-form solution to characterize optimal payout policy. The current paper goes beyond

                                               9
the analysis in Abel and Panageas in two ways. First, we introduce a capital investment
decision, so cash will have three potential uses: investment expenditures, dividends, and
accumulation of cash on hand, which allows us to analyze various investment regressions.
Second, we allow for a positive salvage value of the firm, which makes a closed-form solution
for the optimal target level of cash unavailable.          Nevertheless, we derive analytic results
about the impact of salvage value on firm valuation and optimal investment.


2         Profitability and Capital
Consider a firm in continuous time. It is owned by risk-neutral shareholders with rate of
time preference  > 0. Profit from operations at time t is t Kt , where Kt > 0 is the capital
stock at time t and t is profitability per unit of capital at time t.              Profitability, t , is
governed by a Markov regime-switching process with two regimes, H and L. In Regime H ,
t = H >  > 0. In Regime L, t = L < 0. The negative profitability in Regime L could
arise from some unavoidable cost of maintaining each unit of capital.7               When Regime H
prevails, there is an instantaneous hazard rate µL > 0 that the regime switches to Regime
L. When Regime L prevails, there is an instantaneous hazard rate µH > 0 that the regime
switches to Regime H .
        The firm can change its capital stock over time by undertaking gross investment at rate
It , which can be positive, negative, or zero. For simplicity, we assume that capital does not
depreciate, so net investment is

           t = it K t ,
          K                                                                                          (1)
                 It
where it         Kt
                       0. The total expenditure on gross investment has two components. The
first component is It , which is the cost of purchasing uninstalled capital at a price normalized
to one. If gross investment is negative, then -It = -it Kt > 0 represents the gross proceeds
from selling It units of capital.      The second component is the adjustment cost, c (it ) Kt ,
which is a linearly homogeneous function of It and Kt . To be consistent with much of the
    7
    For instance, instantaneous profit could be maxL pF (K, L) - wL - mK , where p is the exogenous price
of the firm's output, L is labor, w is the exogenous wage rate of labor, m is the exogenous maintenance
cost per unit of capital, and the function F (K, L) is linearly homogenous in K and L, with F (K, 0) = 0.
Profit can be rewritten as (maxl [pf (l) - wl] - m) K , where l  L/K and f (0) = 0. Equivalently, profit
is K , where   maxl [pf (l) - wl] - m, which will be negative for sufficiently small p > 0, even though
maxl [pf (l) - wl]  0 for any p > 0.




                                                   10
literature on investment and q , we assume that the adjustment cost function is quadratic in
i. Specifically,
                1
         c (i) = i2 ,                                                                                       (2)
                2
where  > 0 is the adjustment cost scale factor. Note that the adjustment cost is positive
for any nonzero rate of investment. Therefore, if gross investment is negative, that is, if the
firm sells -it Kt > 0 units of capital, its net proceeds from the sale of capital are reduced by
                                  1 2
the amount of the adjustment cost 2 it Kt .
       We impose the restriction
               1
         >        > 0,                                                                                      (3)
              -2L
which implies that the net proceeds from selling capital, - i + 1
                                                                2
                                                                  i2 K , must be less than
L . That is, the firm cannot meet its required payments of -L K > 0 by selling capital.8
This restriction on  does not imply that negative gross investment is never optimal. Indeed,
as we will show, in the presence of financial constraints, optimal gross investment will be
negative in Regime L when the firm's cash on hand is very low.
       We allow for the possibility that the firm terminates at some date, either because future
prospects are so unfavorable that the firm chooses to terminate or because financial con-
straints force the firm to terminate in a way we discuss in Section 3.          Upon termination for
whatever reason, the shareholders of the firm receive a salvage value K , where 0   < 1.
       The firm operates in continuous time but it is convenient to treat each episode in which
Regime H or Regime L continuously prevails as a single period in a quasi-discrete-time
framework. The lengths of the time periods are random and are generated by the Markov
regime-switching process for profitability.        We define three terms below to represent the
expected present value of cash flow, t , over a single regime and over the entire sequence of
future regimes.

Definition 1 Define

                H
   1. H         +µL
                      > 0 (Myopic value of Regime H )
   8
       The net flow of proceeds from selling capital is  (i) K , where  (i)  - i + 1  2
                                                                                   2 i .       Use  (i) =
                                                          1                        1       1    1   2        1
- (1 + i), and  (i) = - < 0 to obtain arg maxi  (i) =    -    and maxi  (i) = -   -    +   2   -        =   2 .
                  1
Therefore, if  > -2L
                     > 0, then the proceeds from selling capital,  (i) K , are smaller than -L K > 0, the
required payment in Regime L.


                                                   11
                L
    2. L        +µH
                      < 0 (Myopic value of Regime L)
              µL  µH
    3.        +µL +µH
                        < 1 (Roundtrip discount factor)

                                                  H
        The myopic value of Regime H , H          +µL
                                                      ,     is the expected present value of profitability
t over the duration of a single Regime H . We refer to this valuation as myopic because
it ignores any profitability after the particular Regime H ends. Similarly, the myopic value
                        L
of Regime L, L          +µH
                            ,   is the expected present value of profitability t over the duration
                                                                        µL  µH
of a single Regime L. The roundtrip discount factor                     +µL +µH
                                                                                  is the expected present
value of a dollar to be received upon the first return to the currently-prevailing regime after
the first occurrence of the other regime.9
        Definition 1 is useful in obtaining simple expressions for conditional expected present
values of profitability over the infinite future. Specifically,
                                                         
                 1      µL
          H        H +       L = E                          s e-(s-t) ds|t = H                           (4)
                1-      + µL                         t

and
                                                         
                 1      µH
          L        L +       H = E                          s e-(s-t) ds|t = L .                         (5)
                1-      + µH                         t

                                 1                   
Observe that H - L =            1-    +µH
                                          H     -   +µL
                                                        L        > 0.     The present values H and L
are useful in Section 3.1 in characterizing the value of the firm in the absence of financial
constraints.


3         A Financially Constrained Firm
In this section we introduce financial constraints and analyze their impact on optimal invest-
ment and payout policy. To make the financial constraints as stark as possible, we assume
that an ongoing firm cannot raise any external funds.                   That is, the firm cannot borrow,
issue new equity, or pay negative dividends. When the firm is in Regime L, it must make
required payments, -L K > 0, and can use previously accumulated cash on hand and any
proceeds, net of adjustment costs, from uninstalling and selling some of its capital.                   The
    9
     Suppose that Regime H , say, prevails at time t and continues to prevail until time t1 > t when Regime L
arrives. Regime L prevails until time t2 > t1 , when a new Regime H arrives. The roundtrip discount factor
is the expected present value as of time t of a dollar to be received at time t2 . Formally,  = E e-(t2 -t)
                                   µH  µL
= E e-(t2 -t1 ) E e-(t1 -t) =      +µH +µL
                                           .


                                                     12
restriction on the adjustment cost scale parameter  in equation (3) implies that the flow
of net proceeds from selling capital cannot be large enough to pay the entire -L K > 0.
Therefore, the firm must use some cash on hand to make this required payment. If the firm
has zero cash on hand, it will not be able to make the required payment and will have to
terminate permanently.10 In the event of termination, shareholders lose their claim on any
future positive cash flows but receive the salvage value K  0.                   The prospect of forced
termination provides an incentive for the firm to accumulate cash. However, the preference
of shareholders to receive dividends earlier rather than later limits the amount of cash that
the firm wants to carry on hand.
       Let Xt be the amount of cash on hand at time t. The equality of sources and uses of
cash can be written as

                  t + Dt + (it + c (it )) Kt .
         t K t = X                                                                                       (6)

The source of cash on the left hand side of equation (6) is net profits from operations, t Kt .
The uses of cash on the right hand side of equation are (1) accumulation of cash on hand,
X t ; (2) payment of dividends, Dt ; and (3) expenditure on investment, (it + c (it )) Kt , which
includes both the purchase price of capital and the adjustment cost. A negative value of X
would be equivalent to interest-free debt owed by the firm, and a negative value of D would
be equivalent to issuing equity. Since we do not allow the firm to issue debt or equity, the
financial constraints can be written as Xt  0 and Dt  0.
       With the financial constraints facing the firm, the stock of cash on hand, Xt , becomes an
additional state variable. The value function of the firm in Regime H , V H (K, X ), satisfies

         V H (K, X ) = max D+VX
                              H          +V H (K, X ) K
                                (K, X ) X              +µL V L (K, X ) - V H (K, X ) .(7)
                                           K
                          D,i

The maximand on the right hand side of equation (7) is the dividend, D, plus the capital
      1
gain, dt                                              , the change in the capital stock, K
         E {dV }, which reflects the change in cash, X                                   ,
and the expected change in value associated with a change in regime.

         j
Lemma 1 VX (X, K )  1, for j  {H, L}.

       Lemma 1 simply states that increasing a firm's cash on hand, X , by one dollar will
increase the firm's value by at least one dollar because that additional dollar can be paid
  10
     As shown in footnote 8, the maximal flow of net proceeds from negative gross investment is 21    K . In
this section we introduce the assumption that  is arbitrarily large, so the maximal flow of net proceeds from
selling capital is arbitrarily small.

                                                     13
immediately to shareholders and leave the value of the firm unchanged from its initial value
before receiving the dollar.
       Lemma 1 and the constraint D  0 imply maxD (1 - VX (K, X )) D = 0 so the ODE in
equation (7), using equations (1) and (6), becomes

         V H (K, X ) = max VX
                            H
                              (K, X ) H - (i + c (i)) K + VK
                                                           H
                                                             (K, X ) iK                                    (8)
                               i
                              +µL V L (K, X ) - V H (K, X ) .

       The value function V H (K, X ) is linearly homogeneous in K and X , so it is convenient
to write the value function as

         V H (K, X ) = v H (x) K ,                                                                         (9)
               Xt
where xt       Kt
                     0 is the cash-to-capital ratio. The marginal values of cash and capital are,
respectively,
          H            H
         VX (K, X ) = vx (x)                                                                              (10)

and
          H
         VK (K, X ) = v H (x) - xvx
                                  H
                                    (x) .                                                                 (11)

Divide the ODE in equation (8) by K and use equations (9)-(11) to obtain

         v H (x) = max vx
                        H
                          (x) H - (i + c (i)) + v H (x) - xvx
                                                            H
                                                              (x) i                                       (12)
                          i
                        +µL v L (x) - v H (x) .

       To solve the maximization on the right hand side of equation (12), differentiate the right
hand side of this equation with respect to i, and set this derivative equal to zero to obtain
the following first-order condition for investment
                       v H (x)
         1 + c (i) =     H (x)
                               - x.                                                                       (13)
                       vx
                                                                                     H
The right hand side of equation (13) is the ratio of the marginal value of capital, VK , to the
                                 H
marginal value of cash on hand, VX , which is marginal q ,11
          H         v H (x)
         qM (x)       H (x)
                            - x.                                                                          (14)
                    vx
  11                                                                           V H (K,X )
    The first-order condition in equation (13) can be written as 1 + c iH = VK  H       . Bolton et al. (2011),
                                                                               X (K,X )
p. 1546, express this first-order condition as "marginal cost of investment = (marginal q )/(marginal cost of
financing)," where their marginal q is VK (K, X ). Our definition of marginal q in equation (14) incorporates

                                                      14
                       H
Use the definition of qM (x) from equation (14) in the first-order condition in equation (13)
and the specification of the quadratic adjustment cost function in equation (2) to obtain the
optimal investment-capital ratio in Regime H
                   H
                  qM (x) - 1
       iH (x) =              .                                                                             (15)
                      
    Equation (15) is the standard q theory of investment with quadratic adjustment costs.
The optimal investment-capital ratio, i, is a linear function of marginal q with slope 1
                                                                                       
                                                                                         . As
shown in equation (25) below, marginal q is an increasing function of x. Therefore, equation
(15) implies that the optimal investment-capital ratio is an increasing function of cash on
hand, x. It is noteworthy that the impact of x on the optimal investment-capital ratio iH (x)
                           H                          H
operates entirely through qM (x). Given the value of qM , the amount of cash on hand, x,
has no independent effect on optimal investment, that is, marginal q is a sufficient statistic
                                                        H
for optimal investment.          However, marginal q , qM (x), is not directly observable because
                                   VK (K,X )
VK (K, X ), VX (K, X ), and        VX (K,X )
                                               are all unobservable.       In Section 4, we analyze the
relationship between average q , which is observable, and marginal q , which is not observable.
    In order to obtain closed-form solutions for the value of the firm in both regimes, we
                                                                   1 2
focus on a limiting case of the adjustment cost function c (i) K = 2 i K in which the scale
                                                            H
parameter  approaches infinity. Thus, for a given value of qM (x), equation (15) implies
                                                                          H (x)-1   2
                                           1                             qM
that lim iH (x) = 0 and lim c iH (x) = lim 2                                 
                                                                                        = 0. Remarkably, as
the adjustment cost scale factor  becomes arbitarily large, the adjustment cost evaluated at
the optimal investment-capital ratio, c iH (x) , approaches zero and hence the total cost of
investment iH (x) + c iH (x)           K also approaches zero. Nevertheless, the marginal adjust-
ment cost, c iH (x) = i, approaches the given value qM
                                                     H
                                                       (x) - 1, which is finite and, except
      H                                               H
when qM (x) = 1, nonzero. That is, for a given value qM (x) - 1, i approaches zero at the
same rate that  approaches infinity, so that the product i approaches a constant. The op-
                                                      H
timal value of i is an increasing linear function of qM (x), and hence for a sufficiently large,
but fixed, value of , the optimal investment-capital ratio i is an increasing linear function
    H
of qM (x) . The main benefit of focusing on the limiting case where  becomes large is that
we can ignore the impact of adjustment costs on marginal q . This simplification allows us
to solve for marginal q explicitly, as we show next.
VX (K, X ) into the denominator, so that the first-order condition in equation (13) is 1 + c iH = qM      H
                                                                                                            (x),
which simplifies the equation for optimal investment in equation (15). It is a definitional matter whether to
define marginal q as VK (K, X ) or V K (K,X )
                                    VX (K,X ) , neither of which is directly observable. With either definition,
average q is generally not equal to marginal q in the presence of financial constraints, as discussed in Section
4.

                                                      15
   For suffciently large , the terms iH (x) and c iH (x) are vanishingly small so that the
ODE in equation (12) approaches v H (x) = vx
                                           H
                                             (x) H + µL v L (x) - v H (x) , which, after
dividing both sides by  + µL , becomes
                               µL
      v H (x) = vx
                 H
                   (x) H +          v L (x) .                                          (16)
                               + µL
Similarly, in Regime L

       L         L       L  µH
      v (x) =   vx   (x)  +    H
                                 v H (x) .                                             (17)
                            +µ
   The ODEs in equations (16) and (17) hold for non-negative values of the cash-to-capital
ratio x that are small enough that it is optimal not to pay dividends. If Regime H prevails
long enough, then eventually cash on hand reaches a level x at which the marginal value
of a dollar of cash, vx (x), equals one. When cash on hand reaches x , the firm maintains
x = x in Regime H by paying out positive cash flow (net of investment expenditures, which
are arbitrarily small) as dividends.

Lemma 2 x > 0 if and only if v L (x ) > .

   The only reason for the firm to hold cash is to be able to survive, for at least a while,
when the next Regime L arrives.        Lemma 2 states that this opportunity to survive when
Regime L arrives is worthwhile only if the value of the firm when it holds x K exceeds the
salvage value aK when Regime L arrives.
   The critical value x is characterized by the following two boundary conditions
       H
      vx (x ) = 1                                                                      (18)

and
       H
      vxx (x ) = 0.                                                                    (19)

In Regime L, the firm uses cash on hand to make required cash outflows.         However, if
Regime L prevails long enough, cash on hand eventually falls to zero. When that happens,
the firm is forced to terminate immediately and permanently and shareholders receive the
salvage value K , as reflected in the following boundary condition

      v L (0) = .                                                                      (20)



                                                16
       The boundary conditions in equations (18) and (19) imply that a firm will never choose
to accumulate cash to a level higher than X = x K .12 Therefore, we confine attention to
x  [0, x ]. We present the distribution of the endogenous variable x in Section 4.1.
       Appendix B solves the ODEs in equations (16) and (17) along with the boundary con-
ditions conditions in equations (18), (19), and (20) in the case in which v L (x )   so that
the firm chooses to continue operating when Regime L arrives, at least for some values of x.
This appendix presents expressions for v H (x) and v L (x) that are closed-form functions of
the fundamental parameters (, H , L , µH , µL and the resulting H , L , and ) and x .
It also presents x as the root of a nonlinear equation; in the special case with zero salvage
value, i.e.,  = 0, this appendix presents a closed-form solution for x . Appendix B also
shows that v H (x) and v L (x) are both concave on [0, x ].


3.1       The Valuation of the Firm in the Absence of Financial Con-
          straints
Consider a firm that does not face any financial constraint. Let v j be the value of this firm
per unit of capital in Regime j when it has zero cash on hand. More generally, when cash
on hand can be positive, the value of the firm per unit of capital is v j + x. Therefore, the
             j
analogue of vx (x) in equations (16) and (17) is identically equal to one so evaluating these
equations at x = 0 yields

          H    µL
                H
         v = +    L
                    vL
               +µ

and

          L    µH
                L
         v = +    H
                    vH .
               +µ

This two-equation linear system has the solution v j = j for j  {H, L}, where j is the
expected present value of the infinite stream of profitability conditional on currently being
in Regime j (see equations (4) and (5)). However, the value of the firm must obey v L  ,
which is analogous to the boundary condition in equation (22). The following proposition
summarizes the valuation of firm in the absence of financial constraints.
   If the firm started its existence in Regime H with X > x K , it would immediately pay a dividend of
  12

X - x K . Once the value of x is less than or equal to x , it will remain less than or equal to x for the
remainder of the firm's life.


                                                   17
Proposition 1 In the absence of financial constraints, the value of the firm per unit of
capital in each regime is
                                  µL                        1      µL            µL
        v H = max H , H +                   = max             H +       L
                                                                          , H
                                                                              +        (21)
                                  + µL                     1-      + µL          + µL

         L             L               1 L  µH
        v = max  ,  = max                 +    H
                                                 H ,  .                                       (22)
                                      1-    +µ

      Consider two cases. Case I: L < . If L < , then the firm would choose to terminate
as soon as Regime L arrives and the shareholders would receive K upon termination of
the firm. In this case, the firm would remain alive for only a single Regime H so v L = 
                      µL
and v H = H +         +µL
                          .13    Case II: L  . In this case, the firm would not choose to
terminate in Regime L. In Regime L, the firm's value per unit of capital would be L and
the firm would operate forever (it would not terminate in Regime H , since H > L ). Since
the firm would operate forever, v L = L and v H = H .


3.2      Optimal Investment and Marginal q
In this model with quadratic adjustment costs, the optimal investment-capital ratio is a
                                                1
linear function of marginal q , with slope      
                                                    > 0, as shown for Regime H in equation (15). A
similar expression holds in Regime L, so that the optimal investment-capital ratio in each
regime is
                    j
                   qM (x) - 1
        ij (x) =              , for j  {H, L}                                                 (23)
                       
where
         j          v j (x)
        qM (x)       j      - x, for j  {H, L} .                                              (24)
                    vx  (x)
                 j
Differentiating qM (x) in equation (24) with respect to x yields
          j
        dqM (x)    v j (x) j
                =- j      2 vxx (x) > 0,            for 0  x < x and j  {H, L} .              (25)
          dx       vx (x)

Therefore, in both regimes, marginal q is strictly increasing in x on the domain [0, x ).
                                                                                        L
 13                                                                             µ
   The firm would not choose to terminate in Regime H because v H -  = H + +      µL
                                                                                     - =
 1    H                                                              H
+µL
      -  > 0, where the inequality follows from the assumptions that  >  > 0 and  < 1.



                                                      18
                                 j
       Now evaluate v j (x) and qM (x) at x = 0 and x = x , where these functions attain their
minimum and maximum values, respectively, in each regime. Propositions 2 and 3, which
present these values at x = 0 and x = x , respectively, will be useful in Section 4 when we
compare average q and marginal q.
                                   j
       First consider v j (0) and qM (0) for j  {H, L}.

Proposition 2 Suppose that x > 0. Then

                                   µL
   1. v H (0) = vx
                 H
                   (0) H +         +µL
                                          > H
       H                    µL     
   2. qM (0) = H +          +µL vx
                                 H (0)    H

   3. v L (0) = 
       L             
   4. qM (0) =      L (0)
                   vx
                            

       Equation (23) implies that optimal investment when x = 0 will be positive if and only
                 j
if marginal q , qM (0) > 1. Statement 2 of Proposition 2 implies that if H > 1, then the
optimal investment-capital ratio, iH (0), is positive. If H > 1, then even if the firm were
to terminate at the end of the current Regime H , the expected present value of operating
profits accruing to a unit of new capital, H , would be larger than the cost of adding that
unit of capital. Thus, optimal investment in Regime H is positive if H > 1.
       Since the salvage value per unit of capital, , is less than one, Statement 4 of Proposition
                L
2 implies that qM (0) < 1, so equation (23) implies that in Regime L optimal investment
is negative when x = 0. Negative gross investment involves selling capital. However, the
restriction in equation (3) implies that the proceeds, net of adjustment costs, from selling
capital will not be sufficient to pay the required outflow per unit of capital in Regime L,
-L > 0.         Therefore, when Regime L prevails, the ratio of cash to the capital stock, x,
will be declining14 and as soon as x reaches zero, the firm will be forced to terminate. The
shareholders receive the salvage value K when the firm terminates.
       Now consider the situation in which the firm is holding its maximal ratio of cash to capital,
that is, when x = x . As a preliminary step, it is useful to evaluate v j (x) and vx
                                                                                   j
                                                                                     (x) in both
regimes (j = H and j = L) when x = x > 0. The boundary condition in equation (18)
                                       H
provides one of these values, namely, vx (x ) = 1. To evaluate the corresponding derivative
  14                                          X                               x       X       K
                                                                                                      X               X
                                                                                                                      
    Even though K will be declining, x        K   will be declining because   x   =   X   -   K   =   X   - i where   X   <0
and i is arbitrarily small.


                                                        19
in Regime L, differentiate the ODE in equation (16) with respect to x and evaluate the
resulting equation at x = x to obtain

                                 µL
      H
     vx   (x ) =    H
                   vxx         H
                         (x )  +    L
                                       L
                                      vx (x ) ,         for x > 0.                             (26)
                                 +µ
                                 H
Now use the boundary conditions vx (x ) = 1 and vxx
                                                 H
                                                    (x ) = 0 from equations (18) and (19),
respectively, in equation (26) and rearrange to obtain
                    + µL
      L
     vx (x ) =           > 1,        for x > 0.                                                (27)
                    µL
   Equation (27) states that the marginal value of a dollar of cash on hand in Regime L
exceeds one dollar when x = x .            Therefore, when x = x in Regime L, it is optimal for
the firm to retain all of its cash rather than pay dividends. Of course, the firm will have
to use some of its cash in this situation to make the required payments -L K > 0, but
it is not optimal to use any of the cash to pay dividends.           Since v L (x) is concave on the
domain [0, x ], vx
                 L
                   (x) > 1 for all x in [0, x ]. Therefore, it is never optimal for the firm to
pay dividends in Regime L.
   Next calculate v L (x ) and v H (x ) for x > 0.          Evaluate the HJB for Regime H from
equation (16) at x = x and use the boundary condition vx
                                                       H
                                                         (x ) = 1 from equation (18) to
obtain
                            µL
     v H (x ) = H +              v L (x ) .                                                    (28)
                            + µL
                                                                                         +µL
Evaluate the HJB for Regime L from equation (17) at x = x and use vx
                                                                   L
                                                                     (x ) =              µL
                                                                                               from
equation (27) to obtain
                    + µL L    µH
     v L (x ) =            +       v H (x ) .                                                  (29)
                    µL        + µH
Equations (28) and (29) are two linear equations in v H (x ) and v L (x ).

Proposition 3 If x > 0, then

                   H +L
  1. v H (x ) =    1-
                             < vH
                   H +L
      H
  2. qM (x ) =     1-
                             - x < v H
                   +µL L +H
  3. v L (x ) =    µL   1-
                                    < vL
                   L +H
      L
  4. qM (x ) =      1-
                             - x < v L

                                                   20
                                                 j
         Remarkably, the values of v j (x ) and qM (x ) are invariant to the salvage value . We
explain this invariance in Section 5.
         Statement 3 of Proposition 3 and Lemma 2 together imply the following proposition.

                                         L +H          µL                                 µL
Proposition 4 x > 0                       1-
                                                  >    +µL
                                                                v H (x ) > H +            +µL
                                                                                              .

         Proposition 4 provides two alternative, but equivalent, necessary and sufficient conditions
                                                                                L +H         µL
for x > 0. The first necessary and sufficient condition,                         1-
                                                                                         >   +µL
                                                                                                 ,   is expressed in
terms of the primitive parameters of the firm's decision problem. The second necessary and
                                                   µL
sufficient condition, v H (x ) > H +               +µL
                                                       ,   is a simple comparison of the value of the firm
                                    
in Regime H when x = x and the value of the firm in Regime H if it never holds any cash
on hand. If the firm never holds any cash on hand, its value per unit of capital in Regime
H has two additive components: (1) H , which is the expected present value of the flow
                                                                                                             µL
of profits per unit of capital over the remainder of the current Regime H ; and (2)                          +µL
                                                                                                                 ,
which is the expected present value of the salvage value of a unit of capital that accrues to
the shareholders of the firm at the end of the current Regime H , when the firm is forced to
terminate because it cannot make the required payment -L K > 0 in Regime L.
         The firm will eventually, in finite time, experience a Regime L that lasts long enough to
completely exhaust its cash on hand and force it to terminate. Despite the finite lifetime
of the firm, the values of v H (x ) and v L (x ) can be expressed as expected present values of
weighted profitability over an infinite horizon,15
                                
           v j (x )  E              l(t)
                                   vx    (x ) t e-t dt|0 = j , j  {H, L} .                                       (30)
                            0

In equation (30) the value of the firm per unit of capital is the expected present value of
                                                                   l(t)
profitability at each point in time t, weighted by vx (x ), the marginal value of cash at x = x
                                                                                                     +µL
in the prevailing Regime l (t) at time t.                       H
                                                         Since vx (x ) = 1 and vx
                                                                                L
                                                                                  (x ) =             µL
                                                                                                           > 1, the
expected present values on the right hand side of equation (30) place a greater weight on L <
0 in Regime L than on H > 0 in Regime H . The additional weight on the losses in Regime
L takes account of the reduction in firm value associated with the eventual termination of
the firm when it runs out of cash in Regime L. The greater weight on negative profitabilities
                                                   +µL                                   l(t)
    15        H
         Use vx (x ) = 1 and vx
                              L
                                (x ) =             µL
                                                         > 1 to calculate E             0
                                                                                          vx (x ) t e-t dt|0 =   H
                       µL                                                            l(t)
=          1
          1-    H +       vL
                       +µL x
                               (x ) L      =       1
                                                  1-   H +  L             and   E   0
                                                                                      vx (x ) t e-t dt|0 = L       =
 1         L       L     µH              1 +µ
                                              L

1-        vx   (x )  +   +µH
                             H      =   1- µL
                                                   L
                                                   +       H
                                                               .



                                                           21
than on positive profitabilities resembles Bernanke's Bad News Principle, though in a weaker
form.
    The following Corollary to Proposition 3 shows how the presence of financial constraints
affects marginal q and the optimal investment-capital ratio.

Corollary 1 If x > 0, then for Regime j  {H, L} and 0  x  x ,

        j
    1. qM (x) < v j , where v j is the value of q (both marginal and average) in the absence of
        financial constraints.

    2. ij (x) < ij , where ij is the optimal value of the investment-capital ratio in the absence
        of financial constraints.

    Statement 2 in Corollary 1 highlights the impact of financial constraints on optimal
investment.      Specifically, in both regimes, financial constraints reduce the optimal value
of the investment-capital ratio relative to the optimal value of the investment-capital ratio
in the absence of financial constraints, regardless of whether the financial constraints are
currently binding. The channel by which financial constraints reduce optimal investment
is through a reduction in marginal q .     The relationship between the optimal investment-
capital ratio and marginal q is not affected by the introduction of financial constraints,
consistent with Chirinko (1993) who states "Even though financial market frictions impinge
on the firm, q is a forward-looking variable capturing the ramifications of these constraints
on all the firm's decisions." (p. 1903) Chirinko's statement does not specify whether q is
average q or marginal q . If we interpret Chirinko's statment to be about marginal q , then
his statement applies to our analysis.     However, marginal q is not directly observable, so
empirical analyses typically use average q as a proxy for marginal q . As we show in Section
4, financial constraints drive a wedge between average q and marginal q , and thereby affect
the relationship between the investment-capital ratio and average q .


4       Average q vs. Marginal q
With quadratic adjustment costs, the optimal investment-capital ratio, i, is a linear function
of marginal q , as shown in equation (23). A challenge for empirical analysis is that marginal
q is not directly observable. However, average q , which is the value of the firm divided by its
capital stock, is observable. In the absence of financing constraints, average q and marginal


                                               22
q are equal to each other under the Hayashi (1982) conditions that profits are proportional to
the capital stock and the adjustment cost function is linearly homogeneous in investment and
the capital stock.      Empirical studies typically appeal to the Hayashi conditions to justify
using average q as a proxy for marginal q in investment regressions. However, financing
constraints drive a wedge between average q and marginal q even if the Hayashi conditions
hold.      Therefore, using average q as a proxy for marginal q in an investment regression
introduces a form of measurement error in the regressor.            Unlike classical measurement
error, which biases an estimated coefficient toward zero, the measurement error in average q
is non-classical and, as we will show, biases the estimated coefficient on average q upward.
       In computing average q , empirical studies typically adjust the value of the firm by sub-
tracting the value of liquid assets from the overall value of the firm. In our model, liquid
assets are cash on hand, X , so the adjusted value of the firm in Regime j is V j (K, X ) - X .
The replacement cost of the capital stock is typically the cost of purchasing capital, not in-
cluding adjustment costs, which is simply K in our model. Therefore, average q in Regime
j is
          j        V j (K, X ) - X
         qA (x)                    = v j (x) - x, for j  {H, L} .                           (31)
                          K
Subtract the value of marginal q in equation (24) from the value of average q in equation
(31) to obtain
          j        j                   1
         qA (x) - qM (x) =   1-    j         v j (x)  0, for 0  x  x ,                      (32)
                                  vx   (x)
where the inequality follows from v j (x)  0 and vx
                                                  j
                                                    (x)  1. Therefore, average q is greater
than or equal to marginal q .
                               H
       The boundary condition vx (x ) = 1 in equation (18) implies
          H
         qM (x ) = v H (x ) - x = qA
                                   H
                                     (x ) ,                                                 (33)

so average q and marginal q are equal to each other in Regime H when x = x .
       In the case in which the salvage value of the firm is zero, i.e.,  = 0, the boundary
condition v L (0) =  in equation (20) implies
          L            L
         qA (0) = 0 = qM (0) , when  = 0                                                    (34)

so average q and marginal q are equal to each other in Regime L when x = 0 and  = 0.
Except for the two cases in equations (33) and (34), average q is strictly greater than marginal
q.

                                                   23
                        Marginal q


                         +                                                 A
                            -  
                        1-


                                     
                                     
                                                                                     Regime H

                              
                                                                       C
                                     Slope = 1                                                
                                                                                      >  =  > 
                                                          Slope > 1                  Slope of  < 1 < Slope of 
                   
                         + 
                      =     -  
                        1-
                                                     B
                                                          Regime L
                         
                                                                       
                                                                       

                                O                 +    +          
                                                                            +                     Average q
                                                                   0           -  
                                         =                  -              1-
                                                     1-




                 Figure 1: Marginal and Average q when salvage value, , equals zero.

       Figure 1 illustrates the relationship between average q on the horizontal axis and marginal
q on the vertical axis for the case in which the salvage value  equals zero. In this case,
there is a closed-form solution for x , as shown in equation (B.7) in Appendix B. (We
analyze the impact of positive  in Section 5.)                             Underlying this figure is the assumption
that L + H > 0, which is equivalent to x > 0 and vx
                                                  H
                                                    (0) > 1. The origin, Point O,
represents equation (34) in Regime L when the firm has no cash on hand. In this case, the
value of the firm is zero, so average q and marginal q are both zero. The curve connecting
Point O and Point B represents average q and marginal q in Regime L for values of x up
                                                                                           L
                                                                                         dqM                    L
                                                                                                              dqA
to and including x = x .             At the origin, where x = 0,                          dx
                                                                                                = 0 and        dx
                                                                                                                    > 0 so the slope
                                             16
of the curve is zero at the origin.                  For x > 0, both average q and marginal q increase as
x increases, so this curve slopes upward, reaching its maximum at Point B where x = x .
Importantly, except at the origin, this curve lies everywhere below the solid line through the
origin with slope equal to one.
       The values of average q and marginal q in Regime H are shown along the curve connecting
Point C and Point A. Again, since both average q and marginal q increase as x increases,
                                                                                 j
  16                                                                           dqA (x)      j
       Differentiating equation (31) with respect to x yields                    dx      = vx (x) - 1  0, with strict inequality
                                                                                                                                j
                                                                                                                              dqM (x)
everywhere except in Regime H at x = x . Differentiating equation (24) with respect to x yields                                 dx      =
    j
- vj (x) 2 vxx
            j
                 (x)  0, with strict inequality everywhere except in Regime L when x = 0 (where v (0) =  =                L
 [vx (x)]
0) and Regime H when x = x (where vxx
                                   H
                                      (x ) = 0).



                                                                  24
                               1


                              0.9


                              0.8


                              0.7


                              0.6


                              0.5


                              0.4


                              0.3


                              0.2


                              0.1


                               0
                                    0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4    0.5   0.6   0.7    0.8   0.9   1




                              Figure 2: An illustration of F (x, H ), F (x, L).

the slope of this curve is positive for all x. As x gets arbitrarily close to x , that is, in the
neighborhood of Point A, the curve becomes vertical.17 Equation (33) states that Point A
lies on the line through the origin with slope equal to one. However, all other points on this
curve lie below the this line.


4.1        The Distribution of Cash on Hand
Continue to assume that L + H > 0 so that x > 0. Consider a set of sample paths
generated by optimal payout and investment behavior.                               Specifically, each sample path is
generated by a firm that begins operation in Regime H with x = 0 and follows optimal
investment and payout policy. Eventually, the firm will terminate in some Regime L when
x = 0.        Along any such realized continuous-time path of xt , xt equals zero at precisely
two points in time--when the firm is born and when the firm dies. The distribution of the
continuous variable x in Regime H has a discrete mass at x = x because once x reaches x in
  17
       Evaluate the derivatives in footnote 16 at x = x , and use the boundary conditions in equations (18)
                          H
                        dqA  (x )                          dq H (x )      v H (x )
and (19), to obtain        dx     = vx H
                                         (x ) - 1 = 0 and M   dx     = - [v H
                                                                                      H     
                                                                                  2 vxx (x ) = 0. Therefore, to calculate
                                                                            x (x )]
           dq H (x)              H
                               dqM (x ) dqMH
                                             ( x )
the slope dqM H (x) |x=x =        dx    / dx requires L'Hopital's Rule. Calculating derivatives of the numerator
              A
                         dq H (x)                                             d2 qM
                                                                                  H
                                                                                    (x)           v H (x )
and denominator of dqM      H      and evaluating them at x = x yields dx          2    |x=x = - [v H
                                                                                                            H
                                                                                                         2 vxxx (x) < 0 and
                            A (x)                                                                   x (x )]
 2 H                                 H
d qA (x )                          dq (x)
   dx2    = vxxH
                  (x ) = 0, so dqM   H     approaches infinity as x approaches x .
                                     A (x)




                                                                25
Regime H , x remains equal to x for the remainder of that regime. Though the distribution
of x in Regime L does not have a mass at x = x , much of the mass of that distribution
is near x = x because there will be many transitions from Regime H into Regime L when
x = x .
       To describe the distribution of x more fully, let F (x, j ) be the probability, in a large
set of sample paths, of the joint event that Regime j prevails and cash on hand, xt < x.
Appendix C derives
                        1
         F (x, j ) =           a ebx - 1 for j  {H, L} and 0  x  x ,                                 (35)
                       |(j ) |
where a > 0 and b > 0 are defined in equations (C.46) and (C.36), respectively. The distri-
                                                 
bution of x has a mass equal to           1
                                         µL
                                            abebx   > 0 at x = x in Regime H . The regime-specific
                                                                                            -L
distribution functions are proportional to each other. Specifically, F (x, H ) =            H
                                                                                               F   (x, L).
                                 ab
The density is Fx (x, j ) =            ebx .   Figure 2 illustrates the functions F (x, L) and F (x, H )
                                |(j) |
for the following configuration of parameters:  = 0,  = 0.04, H = 0.25, L = -0.15,
µH = 0.25, and µL = 0.10. With these parameter values, x = 0.92.


4.2       Regressions on Average q
In this section we analyze various regressions in which average q is a regressor, either by itself
or along with cash flow as an additional regressor. We consider three scenarios of regressions
that are defined by the sample of observations (either Regimes H and L or Regime L only)
and the set of regressors (either average q only or both average q and cash flow). In order
to distinguish the coefficients in the various regressions, Table 4.2 presents the notation for
the various regression coefficients in the three scenarios.             In both Scenarios I and II, the
sample consists of both Regime H and Regime L. Scenarios I and II are distinguished from
each other by the number of regressors: in Scenario I, average q is the lone regressor, and
in Scenario II both average q and cash flow are regressors. Scenario III is distinguished by
its sample, which consists only of observations in Regime L.18
       Within each of the three scenarios, there are two regressions: one regression uses marginal
q as the dependent variable and the other regression uses the investment-capital ratio i as the
dependent variable. Within each scenario, the regression coefficients (except the intercept)
                                                                 1
in the regression with i as the dependent variable are           
                                                                     times the corresponding coefficients
  18
    Cash flow, , cannot be a regressor when the sample is limited to a single regime because there is no
within-regime variation in .


                                                       26
                Regressions with Marginal q as Dependent Variable
 Scenario                  Sample                     Regressor(s)              Coefficients
                                                                                      I
     I                Regimes H and L                      qA                       q
                                                                                 II
    II                Regimes H and L                   qA and                   q  and 
                                                                                     III
    III                  Regime L                          qA                       q

                        Table 1: Three different regression scenarios

in the regression with marginal q as the dependent variable because the optimal investment-
capital ratio i is a deterministic linear function of marginal q with slope 1
                                                                            
                                                                              . The regressions
with marginal q as the dependent variable are necessarily theoretical regressions because
                                            j
marginal q is not directly observable when vx (x) > 1. However, these theoretical regressions
are useful to examine because the magnitudes of the regression coefficients do not depend
on , provided that  is sufficiently large. We begin by analyzing regressions with marginal
q as the dependent value in all three scenarios and then we examine regressions with the
investment-capital ratio as the dependent variable.

4.2.1     Regressions of Marginal q on Average q

Before analyzing regressions of the investment-capital ratio on average q , we start by exam-
ining theoretical regressions of marginal q on average q . Since financing costs drive a wedge
between average q and marginal q , the regression coefficient can differ from one, even when
the Hayashi conditions hold.
    Figure 3 uses the density function of Figure 2 to illustrate the joint distribution of
marginal q and average q in the same two-dimensional diagram as in Figure 1 . The thickness
of the curve OB increases from the origin O to Point B, indicating the increasing density of
observations in Regime L as x increases from 0 at the origin to x at Point B. Similarly,
the curve extending from Point C to Point A represents observations in Regime H , with
increasing density as x increases from 0 at Point C to x at Point A. In addition, there is a
mass at Point A.
   Now consider the population regression of marginal q on average q using the full sample
of observations from both Regime L and Regime H (Scenario I). As indicated in Table 4.2,
I
q is the population regression coefficient on average q . The fitted line of this regression is
the steeply upward sloping line that passes a bit below Point A in the upper right portion
of Figure 3.   Since there is a mass of observations at Point A, and the density Fx (x, H )


                                              27
                             Figure 3: Regression of Marginal q on Average q.

    ab
=         ebx is increasing in x, much of the mass of observations in Regime H is located at
   |(j) |
or near Point A. Also, in Regime L, much of the mass of the distribution is near Point B
(though there is not a mass at Point B). Thus, most of the mass of the points in Figure
3 is located near Points A and B. Therefore, the fitted line passes close to these points,
                                                                            I
as shown by the regression line in Figure 3. The slope of this fitted line, q , exceeds one
because Point A pulls the regression line upward toward the 45-degree line for high values of
average q and Point B pulls the regression line away from the 45-degree line for low values of
                                                   I
average q . In this specific example, the slope is q = 1.33. Empirical analyses of investment
and q typically appeal to the Hayashi conditions to use average q as a proxy for marginal
q . Under the Hayashi conditions, and in the absence of financial constraints, any difference
between average q and marginal q is regarded as measurement error in average q .                       If the
measurement error is classical measurement error--that is, has zero mean and is uncorrelated
with marginal q --then a regression of marginal q on average q would have a positive slope
smaller than one. Remarkably, we have shown that in the presence of financial constraints,
the slope of the fitted line from the regression of marginal q on average q is greater than one.
Evidently, the measurement error associated with using average q as a proxy for marginal q
in the presence of financial constraints is not classical measurement error.19
    19
         Equation (32) provides an expression for this measurement error. Not only does this measurement error

                                                        28
     In the context of the model presented here, there is a simple way to create a sample of
observations that is free of non-classical measurement error in average q induced by financial
constraints. A sample that includes only observations at times when optimal dividends are
positive will not contain this measurement error. In the model presented here, the firm will
                                                           j
pay dividends only if the marginal value of cash on hand, vx (x), equals one. Substituting
 j
vx (x) = 1 into the expression for measurement error in equation (32) reveals that the
                                             j
measurement error in average q is zero when vx (x) = 1.                    In this model, the firm pays
dividends only in Regime H and only at a single value of x, namely, x .                         Because the
distribution of x has a potentially large mass at x = x in Regime H , a substantial fraction
of any set of observations on investment and average q will be associated with positive
dividends.
     If one constructs a sample from a set of ex ante identical firms (that is, firms with identical
values of , , H , L , µH , and µL , but idiosyncratic realizations of regimes) and includes
only observations for which dividends are positive, then all observations in the sample have
the same value of average q .         In such a sample, all observations have average q equal to
 H     
qA   (x ), so there is no variation in the independent variable in a regression of marginal q on
average q . To get variation in the independent variable, we could generate observations from
sample paths of different firms with different values of the parameters20 . Alternatively, one
might consider one or more ex ante identical firms that face multiple profitability regimes
and pay dividends in different regimes at different values of average q in each regime. While
the quantitative methods of this paper could be extended to analyze such a model, we do
not pursue this extension in the current paper.

4.2.2     Regressions of Marginal q on Average q and Cash Flow

Now consider the population regression of marginal q on average q and cash flow  (Scenario
II). The impact of adding cash flow as a second regressor is that Points A and B continue to
assert a strong influence on the fitted line, but do so without steepening the fitted line. In a
two-regime stochastic framework, there are only two values of cash flow, H > 0 and L < 0,
so cash flow is simply a binary variable that indicates the regime.                  Figure 4 exploits the
fact that cash flow is a binary variable to represent the 3-dimensional relationship among
have a positive mean, it is not independent of marginal q .
  20
     If the dependent variable is the investment-capital ratio i rather than marginal q , then the firms must
                                                                                                       1
have identical values of  so that the slope of the population regression of i on average q will equal    if all
of the observations have positive dividends.



                                                      29
             Figure 4: Regression of Marginal q on Average q and Cash Flow.

marginal q , average q , and cash flow in a 2-dimensional diagram.         The common slope
                                        II
of the two parallel dashed lines equals q  , the regression coefficient on average q in this
regression. The solid segment of the lower of the two lines is the fitted line of the regression
for observations in Regime L, when cash flow is L . The short solid segment of the higher of
the two lines is the fitted line of the regression for observations in Regime H , when cash flow
is H . The impact of cash flow is shown in Figure 4 as the vertical distance between the
two upward-sloping dashed lines, which is H - L  > 0, where  > 0 is the coefficient
on cash flow in a full-sample regression of marginal q on average q and cash flow .
   The distribution function in Figure 2 shows that most of the observations in Regime H
are located at or near Point A, which is a mass point. Figure 4 shows that within Regime
H there is very little variation in average q compared to the variation in average q in Regime
L. With so little variation in average q in Regime H , the within-regime variation in average
q has very little impact on the estimated coefficient of average q . To exaggerate for the sake
of expositional clarity, OLS recognizes that variation in average q within Regime H is nearly
worthless in estimating the coefficient on average q in a multiple regression; therefore, OLS
essentially treats all observations in Regime H as being located at Point A.
   The estimated coefficients in the multiple regression on average q and cash flow (Scenario

                                              30
         2.5
                                                                                    A



           2




         1.5




           1
                                                                                D

                                                   B
         0.5




           0




         -0.5
                0         0.5            1             1.5            2             2.5




Figure 5: Regression of Marginal q on Average q and Cash Flow and approximate two-step
procedure.

II) can be approximated by a 2-stage procedure. Stage 1 provides an alternative estimate
of the coefficient on average q using a univariate regression in Regime L (Scenario III) and
Stage 2 provides an alternative calculation of the coefficient on cash flow.
   Stage 1 : Using only the observations in Regime L, run a univariate regression of marginal
                                                                               III
q on average q (Scenario III) to obtain the coefficient on average q , denoted q   , and the
constant, 0 . Define and calculate
        L
       qM (x ) - 0 + q  qA (x ) ,
                     III L
                                                                                          (36)
                                                                     L
which is the value of the approximation error when average q equals qA (x ).
   Stage 2 : Find the point (call it Point D) on the fitted regression line from Stage 1 that
is vertically below Point A. Calculate , which is the distance from point D to point A,
and equate  with the impact of cash flow H - L  , to obtain an alternative measure



                                              31
 Scenario                     coefficent on average q                      cash flow coefficient
                                       I
 I                                   q   = 1.33                                  ---
                                      II
 II                                  q = 0.55                                    = 3.16
                                     III
 III                                 q   = 0.52                                   = 3.35


                      Table 2: A summary of the regression coefficients

of the coefficient on cash flow as
                
       = H            .                                                                        (37)
              - L
   Appendix D presents the details of the implementation of this 2-step procedure for the
parameter values underling the quantitative example in Figure 4. In the final row of Table
                                            III
2, labelled Scenario III, are the values of q   , the coefficient on average q obtained in Stage
1, and the value of   , the coefficient on cash flow deduced in Stage 2. These coefficients in
Scenario III are each about 5% different than the coefficients in the full-sample regression,
Scenario II, of the investment-capital ratio on average q and cash flow. Figure 5 illustrates
how well the 2-stage procedure approximates the multiple regression of marginal q on average
q and cash flow.

4.2.3   Investment Regressions

Now consider regressions in which the investment-capital ratio, i, is the dependent variable.
As discussed earlier, replacing marginal q with i as the dependent variable in the regressions
in Scenarios I, II, and III simply multiplies all of the regression coefficients (except for the
intercept) by 1
              
                .
   First consider the investment version of Scenario I, which is a univariate regression of the
investment-capital ratio (rather than marginal q ) on average q . The regression coefficient
is 1
    q
     I > 1
         
           , where the inequality follows from our finding that non-classical measurement
                          I
error in average q causes q to exceed one. Therefore, an OLS regression of the investment-
capital ratio on average q is likely to overstate 1
                                                  
                                                    , equivalently, understate the adjustment cost
parameter . This finding is the opposite of the typical argument, which says that because
of classical measurement error, the estimated coefficient 1
                                                           q
                                                             I is likely to understate     1
                                                                                               and
hence overstate the adjustment cost parameter .         Our finding implies that measurement
error arising from financial constraints cannot be the explanation for estimates of 1
                                                                                     q
                                                                                       I that
are typically regarded as too low.

                                               32
       The conventional wisdom is that in regressions of the investment-capital ratio on average
q and cash flow (Scenario II), the coefficient on average q measures the sensitivity of the
investment-capital ratio to the expectations of future marginal profits of capital and the
coefficient on cash flow reflects the impact of financing constraints on investment.                                           The
two-stage procedure discussed above leads to a different interpretation.                                          To analyze the
interpretation suggested by the 2-stage procedure, consider the impact on the investment-
capital ratio of a switch from Regime L to Regime H , when x = x .                                             First, we analyze
                                  H            L    
this impact, which is i (x ) - i (x ), within our model and then we analyze the impact on
iH (x ) - iL (x ) calculated from the coefficients of the 2-stage procedure.
       To calculate the impact within our model, use iH (x ) - iL (x ) =                                   
                                                                                                           1    H
                                                                                                               qM (x ) - qM
                                                                                                                          L
                                                                                                                            (x )
and the definitions of average q and marginal q to obtain21
                                           1 H                                       1 L           v L (x )
         iH (x ) - iL (x ) =                           L
                                             q (x ) - qA (x )                   +      vx (x ) - 1 L  .                        (38)
                                            A                                                      vx (x )
                                      impact of expected future profitability       scaled shadow price of constraint

The right hand side of equation (38) expresses the difference in the investment-capital ratio
when x = x in the two regimes as the sum of two components. The first component equals
the difference in average q when x = x in the two regimes­which is equal to the difference in
valuation, v H (x ) - v L (x )­multiplied by 1
                                             
                                               . This component, which is proportional to the
difference in valuation across the two regimes, captures the response of the investment-capital
ratio to the change in the present value of future profitability when the regime switches to
Regime H from Regime L.22 The second component is the product of (1) 1
                                                                     
                                                                              L
                                                                       , (2) vx (x ) - 1,
                                                                                              v L (x )
which is the shadow price of the constraint x  0, and (3)                                     vxL (x ) ,   which is the value of
the firm in Regime L when x = x , normalized by the marginal valuation of cash on hand,
 L
vx (x ). This component reflects the impact of the financial constraint x  0.
  21                                  j
       The definition of average q , qA (x)  v j (x)-x, implies qA
                                                                 H      L
                                                                   (x)-qA (x) = v H (x)-v L (x). The definition of
                                                                                                                            
                        v j (x)                                                                                         L
              j
marginal q , qM (x)      j
                        vx  (x)
                                                   H
                                  - x, along with vx (x ) = 1 implies qM
                                                                       H
                                                                         (x ) - qM
                                                                                 L
                                                                                   (x ) = v H (x ) - v   (x )
                                                                                                     v L (x )
                                                                                                              . There-
                                                                                                                        x
                                                                          L                                                    L   
                                                               v (x )                                       v (x )
fore, qMH
          (x ) - qML    
                     (x ) = v H (x ) - v L (x ) + v L (x ) - v   L   
                                                                           H
                                                                        = qA        L
                                                                             (x) - qA (x) + vx L
                                                                                                 (x ) - 1 v  L    .
                                                                 x (x )                                      x (x )
   22
      Since a regime is defined by the value of cash flow, , there is no within-regime variation in . Therefore,
all of the within-regime variation in average q arises from variation in cash on hand x, which affects the
expected present of cash flows over the lifetime of the firm by affecting the expected lifetime of the firm. For
instance, an increase in x allows the firm to live a longer period of time before it is forced to terminate in
some Regime L when it runs out of cash. This increase in the firm's projected longevity increases the value
                                    j
of the firm v j (x) and increases qA  (x) = v j (x) - x since vx
                                                               j
                                                                 (x) > 1 for 0  x < x . Thus, q    III
                                                                                                       reflects the
variation in average q that arises from within-Regime L variation in cash on hand x, but it does not reflect
                                                                                                                 III
the variation in average q that arises from a change in regime. Nevetheless, as we show, the value of q
              II
is close to q .


                                                                 33
       Now consider the impact on iH (x ) - iL (x ) implied by the 2-stage procedure. As shown
in Appendix D
                                   1 H                                                1             1
         iH (x ) - iL (x ) = q
                             III               L
                                     q (x ) - qA (x ) +                 H - L                      - .   (39)
                                    A                                                               
                              regression impact of average q      regression impact of cash flow

       The sum of the first two terms on the right hand side of equation (39) is the fitted value
of i (x ) minus the fitted value of iL (x ), where the fitted values in Regime j are calculated
   H

                           j
as a constant plus 1
                    q
                      III qA (x ) + 1
                                     
                                                                III
                                       j , and the coefficients q   and  are obtained from
the 2-stage procedure. The third term in equation (39) is proportional to the approximation
error  defined in equation (36).
       To compare the impacts of expected future profitability and the scaled impact of the
financial constraint within the model in equation (38) with the regression impacts of average
q and cash flow in the 2-stage procedure as shown in equation (39), rewrite equation (38) as


                                     1 H                       III 1
         iH (x ) - iL (x ) = q
                             III                  L
                                       qA (x ) - qA (x ) + 1 - q     q H (x ) - qA
                                                                                 L
                                                                                   (x )
                                                                    A
                                             Term 1                                    Term 2
                                                        L      
                                   1 L           v (x )
                               +     vx (x ) - 1 L                                                       (40)
                                                 vx (x )
                                             Term 3


       Terms 1 and 2 in equation (40) simply split the first term in equation (38), which is the
impact of expected future profitability, into two components, and Term 3 is the impact of
the scaled shadow price of the constraint, which is the second term in equation (38). The
mapping between equations (38) and (40) is shown by the first two columns of Table 3. The
regression impacts of average q and cash flow, based on equation (39), are shown in the third
column of Table 3.
       The regression impact of average q is simply equal to Term 1 in equation (40).                    The
regression impact of cash flow in equation (39) is approximately equal to the sum of Term
2 and Term 3 in equation (40).23 Finally, a comparison of column 1 and column 3 in Table
                                                                                     III
3 shows that the regression impact of average q in column 3 captures only a fraction q   of
the impact of expected future profitability in column 1. Also the regression impact of cash
  23
    The regression impact of cash flow in equation (39) differs from the sum of Term 2 and Term 3 in
                                                        1
equation (40) by the approximation error  multiplied by   .



                                                       34
Table 3: Impacts of expected future profitability and shadow price of the financial constraint
in the model and regression impacts of average q and cash flow in investment regressions.

flow in column 3 combines the scaled shadow price of the financial constraint and a fraction
    III
1 - q   of the impact of expected future profitability in column 1.


5     Impact of Salvage Value
                                         j
Proposition 3 implies that v j (x ) and qM (x ) are invariant to the salvage value  if x > 0.
This result may be surprising since the value of the firm when x = x equals the sum of (1)
cash on hand, x K , (2) the expected present value of the stream of operating profits, net
of investment costs, over the lifetime of the firm; and (3) the expected present value of the
salvage value received upon termination of the firm. It might seem that an increase in the
                                                      j
salvage value of capital would increase v j (x ) and qM (x ). In this section, we analyze the
impact of salvage value and resolve what might seem like a contradiction.
    In equations (B.1) and (B.2) in Appendix B, we present closed-form expressions for v H (x)




                                              35
and v L (x), given the optimal value of x , that can be rewritten, respectively, as

            v H (x)  g H (u)                                                                            (41)

where u  x - x and g H (u)  c1 e1 u + c2 e2 u and

            v L (x)  g L (u)                                                                            (42)
                         +µL
where g L (u)            µL
                               c1 1 - 1 H e1 u + c2 1 - 2 H e2 u .               Notably, the functions
 j
g (u), j  {H, L} are invariant to the salvage value .                    We exploit this invariance to
prove Propositions 5 and 6 below.

                                       dx
Proposition 5 If x > 0, then           d
                                            = - vL1
                                                  (0)
                                                      < 0.
                                                   x



          An increase in the salvage value  reduces x because an increase in salvage value reduces
the costliness of termination and thus reduces the incentive to hold cash on hand, x, as a
means to forestall termination. Indeed, the consequent reduction in x leads to an earlier
termination of the firm along every realization path of profitability t .24 Thus, for given
values of the parameters H , L , µH , and µL of the stochastic process for t , an increase in
the salvage value  reduces the expected lifetime of the firm.
          The definitions of g H (u) and g L (u) in equations (41) and (42), respectively imply

            v j (x, )  g j (x - x ()) , j  {H, L} .                                                     (43)

The following proposition exploits equation (43) to calculate the impacts of salvage value,
                          j
, on v j (x), vx
               j
                 (x) and qM (x).

                      j                     v j (x,)
Proposition 6 Define qM (x, )                j
                                            vx  (x,)
                                                       - x, for j  {H, L}. Then for 0  x  x ,

          j
      1. va (x, ) > 0
          j
      2. vxa (x, ) < 0
             j
            qM (x,)
      3.       
                      > 0.
     24
    More precisely, along every realization path of t , a firm with a higher value of  will terminate earlier
than or at the same time as an otherwise-identical firm with a lower value of .




                                                         36
     Figure 6: Impact of positive salvage value on the value function and optimal x .

   Proposition 6 states that for any given value of x, an increase in the salvage value 
increases marginal q , which implies that optimal investment increases also.            It may seem
obvious that increasing the salvage value of capital will effectively reduce the user cost of
capital and thus stimulate investment, but there are actually two channels that increase
investment. The first is the seemingly obvious channel, which increases the value of a unit
                                              v j (x,)
of capital, v j (x, ), in the numerator of     j
                                              vx  (x,)
                                                       ;    the second channel is that an increase in
                                                       j                                        v j (x,)
 reduces the shadow price of cash on        hand, vx       (x, ), which is the denominator of    j
                                                                                                vx  (x,)
                                                                                                         .
This reduction in the denominator further increases marginal q in addition to the increase
in marginal q resulting from the increase in the numerator.
   Figure 6 illustrates that an increase in the salvage value  increases the value of a unit of
capital for any given value of cash on hand, x, and yet the value of a unit of capital evaluated
at x = x is invariant to . The upward-sloping solid curve that passes through point A
shows the value of a unit of capital in Regime H on the vertical axis as a function of cash
on hand, x, on the horizontal axis. This curve is drawn for the case in which  = 0, that
is, for the case with zero salvage value. At point A, with  = 0, x = x=0 so the value of a
                                H +L
unit of capital is v H (x ) =   1-
                                       (Statement 1 of Proposition 3). At point A, the marginal

                                                   37
                  H
of cash on hand, vx (x), equals one according the boundary condition in equation (18). At
points on the solid curve that are to the left of point A, the marginal value of cash on hand
is greater than one, and at points on the solid curve that are to the right of point A, the
marginal value of cash on hand is identically equal to one.
   The upward-sloping dashed line that passes through point B shows the value of a unit of
capital in Regime H when the salvage value  = 1 > 0. As stated in Proposition 5, the
increase in  reduces x from its initial value x                       
                                               =0 to the lower value x=1 shown on the
horizontal axis. As indicated by Statement 1 in Proposition 6, the increase in  from zero
to a positive value increases v H (x) for every value of x.            As indicated by Statement 2 in
Proposition 6, the increase in  from zero to a positive value reduces the marginal value of
       H
cash, vx (x), for every value of x  [0, x                             
                                         =0 ). At point B, where x = x=1 , the value of a
                                          H +L
unit of capital is v H x=1 =              1-
                                                 , just as it is point A when the salvage value is zero.
   In simple economic terms, the introduction of a positive salvage value reduces the cost-
liness of termination, so the incentive to forestall termination is reduced.             Thus, the firm
chooses a lower value of x . But the lower value of x means that the firm will run out of
cash at an earlier date than it would if x remained equal to x=0 . Thus, the firm earns
operating profits over a shorter duration of time. So, the introduction of a positive salvage
value has three impacts on v H (x ). First, the introduction of a positive salvage value di-
rectly reduces cash on hand, x K . Second, the reduction in x shortens the firm's life and
reduces the expected present value of operating profits, net of investment costs, over its life-
time. Third, the introduction of a positive salvage value means that the firm collects some
positive amount  when it terminates, which tends to increase the value of the firm. Taken
together, these three effects add up to precisely zero and there is no impact on v H (x ).
   The introduction of a positive salvage value seems to strengthen our finding that financial
constraints bias upward the coefficient in a univariate regression of marginal q (equivalently,
the optimal investment-capital ratio) on average q . To see why, observe that in Figure 3,
in which the salvage value  equals zero, all points lie below the 45 degree line along which
marginal q equals average q , with two exceptions:                H
                                                                 qM (x ) = qA
                                                                            H
                                                                              (x ) as shown by Point
       L        L
A and qM (0) = qA (0) = 0 as shown by Point O. However, with a positive salvage value,
       L         v L (0)                      L
 > 0, qM (0) =   vxL (0)   =    L (0)
                               vx
                                        <  = qA (0) > 0. Therefore, if Figure 3 were redrawn for the
case in which the salvage value  is positive, the point on the lower curve where x = 0 in
Regime L would lie to the northeast of Point O, but below the 45 degree line, which tends
to steepen the regression line further.



                                                       38
6     Conclusion
Financial constraints affect the real decisions of firms, such as the capital investment decision.
To examine the impact of financial constraints, we introduced a stark financial constraint
that prevents an ongoing firm from using any form of external finance.            Formally, this
constraint is written as two constraints that prevent both cash on hand and dividends from
being negative. If the firm faces negative cash flow from operations when it has zero cash
on hand, then it must terminate immediately and permanently. The risk of such a liquidity
shortfall provides an incentive to accumulate cash on hand, but this incentive is tempered
by shareholders' preference to receive dividends sooner rather than later.
    Financial constraints reduce the value of the firm, thereby reducing marginal q and
reducing optimal investment. Notably, the reduction in the optimal rate of investment occurs
even when the financial constraints are not currently binding, but the financial constraints
would not be reflected by the regression coefficient on cash flow.
    The q -theory of investment is easily derived for a neoclassical firm that faces convex costs
of adjusting its capital stock and is free of any financial constraints. A powerful implication
of that theory is that marginal q is a sufficient statistic for optimal investment. Marginal q
is not directly observable, but average q , which is observable, is identically equal to marginal
q if the Hayashi conditions hold. Thus empirical analyses appeal to the Hayashi conditions
and use average q as a proxy for marginal q in investment regressions.          When cash flow
is included as a second regressor in those regressions, the coefficient on cash flow is often
positive. A positive coefficient on cash flow is interpreted by many researchers as evidence of
financial constraints, though other researchers interpret the positive coefficient as an artifact
of classical measurement error in average q .
    In this paper, we use the convex adjustment cost framework to examine optimal invest-
ment for a firm that satisfies the Hayashi conditions and faces the stark financial constraint
described above. Though the financial constraint reduces the optimal rate of investment, it
does not affect the relationship between the optimal investment-capital ratio and marginal
q . In particular, the financial constraint does not affect marginal q 's status as a sufficient
statistic for investment. However, the financial constraint drives a wedge between marginal
q and average q , which has an impact on investment regressions that use average q as a re-
gressor. For univariate regressions of the investment-capital ratio on average q , the financial
constraint biases the coefficient on average q upward, rather than downward as would be
the case with classical measurement error. The addition of cash flow as a second regressor


                                                39
in such investment regressions reduces the coefficient on average q ; and, importantly, the
coefficient on cash flow is positive.   The positive coefficient on cash flow is evidence of a
financial constraint since it is a consequence of the wedge between average q and marginal q
induced by financial constraints of the sort we have modeled. The coefficient on cash flow
comprises two components. One component reflects the financial constraint as an increasing
function of the marginal valuation of cash on hand multplied by the value of the firm per
unit of capital. The other component is a portion of the impact of expected future prof-
itability on investment, which diminishes the contribution of this impact to the coefficient
on average q . The cash flow coefficient is not simply a reflection of a liquidity shortfall that
limits investment.
   If the sample were to include only observations for which D > 0, so that the financial
constraint is not binding, the wedge between average q and marginal q would disappear. In
that case, in the absence of any other source of measurement error, average q would be a
sufficient statistic for investment in the sample, and the coefficient on cash flow would be
zero.   However, one must use caution in concluding that the zero coefficient is evidence
against the relevance of financial constraints. In this situation, the financial constraint is
not binding, but optimal investment is, neverthess, smaller than it would be in the complete
absence of financial constraints.




                                               40
References
Abel, A. (1983). Optimal investment under uncertainty. American Economic Review 73 (1),
  228­33.

Abel, A. B. (2018). The effects of q and cash flow on investment in the presence of measure-
  ment error. Journal of Financial Economics 128 (2), 363­377.

Abel, A. B. and J. C. Eberly (2011). How q and cash flow affect investment without frictions:
  An analytic explanation. The Review of Economic Studies 78 (4), 1179­1200.

Abel, A. B. and S. Panageas (2019). Precautionary saving in a financially-constrained firm.
  Working Paper.

Alti, A. (2003). How sensitive is investment to cash flow when financing is frictionless? The
  Journal of Finance 58 (2), 707­722.

Bolton, P., H. Chen, and N. Wang (2011). A unified theory of tobin's q, corporate investment,
  financing, and risk management. The Journal of Finance 66 (5), 1545­1578.

Brainard, W. C. and J. Tobin (1968). Pitfalls in financial model-building. Cowles Foundation
  Discussion Papers 244, Cowles Foundation for Research in Economics, Yale University.

Chirinko, R. S. (1993). Business fixed investment spending: Modeling strategies, empirical
  results, and policy implications. Journal of Economic Literature 31 (4), 1875­1911.

Cooper, R. and J. Ejarque (2003). Financial frictions and investment: requiem in q. Review
  of Economic Dynamics 6 (4), 710 ­ 728.

Erickson, T. and T. M. Whited (2000). Measurement Error and the Relationship between
  Investment and q. Journal of Political Economy 108 (5), 1027­1057.

Fazzari, S. M., R. G. Hubbard, and B. C. Petersen (1988). Financing constraints and
  corporate investment. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1988 (1), 141­195.

Gilchrist, S. and C. P. Himmelberg (1995). Evidence on the role of cash flow for investment.
  Journal of Monetary Economics 36 (3), 541 ­ 572.

Gomes, J. F. (2001). Financing investment. American Economic Review 91 (5), 1263­1285.


                                             41
Hayashi, F. (1982). Tobin's marginal q and average q: A neoclassical interpretation. Econo-
  metrica 50 (1), 213­224.

Hayashi, F. and T. Inoue (1991). The relation between firm growth and q with multiple cap-
  ital goods: Theory and evidence from panel data on japanese firms. Econometrica 59 (3),
  731­753.

Hoshi, T. and A. K. Kashyap (1990). Evidence on q and investment for japanese firms.
  Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 4 (4), 371 ­ 400.

Kaplan, S. N. and L. Zingales (1997). Do investment-cash flow sensitivities provide useful
  measures of financing constraints? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (1), 169­215.

Keynes, J. M. (1936). The general theory of employment, interest, and money. Macmillan
  Cambridge University Press.

Mussa, M. L. (1977). External and Internal Adjustment Costs and the Theory of Aggregate
  and Firm Investment. Economica 44 (174), 163­178.

Peters, R. H. and L. A. Taylor (2017). Intangible capital and the investment-q relation.
  Journal of Financial Economics 123 (2), 251­272.

Poterba, J. (1988). Comment on "financing constraints and corporate investment". Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity 1988 (1), 200­204.

Roberts, M. R. and T. M. Whited (2013). Chapter 7 - endogeneity in empirical corporate
  finance1. In G. M. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. M. Stulz (Eds.), Handbook of the
  Economics of Finance, Volume 2, pp. 493 ­ 572. Elsevier.

Summers, L. (1981). Taxation and corporate investment: a q-theory approach. Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity 1981 (1), 67­127.

Tobin, J. (1969). A general equilibrium approach to monetary theory. Journal of Money,
  Credit and Banking 1 (1), 15­29.

Whited, T. M. (1992). Debt, liquidity constraints, and corporate investment: Evidence from
  panel data. The Journal of Finance 47 (4), 1425­1460.




                                            42
                                                Appendix

A      Proofs
Proof of Lemma 1.               For any  > 0, X  0, and K > 0, V j (X + , K )  V j (X, K )+ ,
             V j (X +,K )-V j (X,K )                
so lim0                
                                        lim0        
                                                       = 1.
                                           L
Proof of Lemma 2.                 Since v (x) is strictly increasing (Lemma 1 and equation (10)),
x > 0 if and only if v L (x ) > v L (0).                 Then the boundary condition in equation (20),
v (0) = , implies that x > 0 if and only if v L (x ) > .
 L                                

Proof of Proposition 1. See paragraph immediately following Proposition 1.
Proof of Proposition 2.                   In Regime H , the HJB equation in equation (16) and the
boundary condition in equation (20), v L (0) = , together imply (Statement 1) v H (0) =
 H               µL
vx (0) H +       +µL
                           > H , where the inequality follows from   0 and vx
                                                                            H
                                                                              (0) > 1 when
                                                                                                  v H (x)
x > 0. Substituting this expression for v H (0) into the definition qM
                                                                     H
                                                                       (x)                        vxH (x)   - x and
                                    H                                µL   
setting x = 0 yields (Statement 2) qM (0) = H +                     +µL vx
                                                                         L (0)    H .
     Now consider Regime L.              Statement 3 is simply the boundary condition in equation
       L                             L
(20), v (0) = , which together with vx (0) > 1 (from Lemma 1 and equation(10)), implies
 L            
qM (0) =     L (0)
            vx
                     < .
Proof of Proposition 3.                Substitute equation (29) into equation (28) to obtain v H (x ) =
    µ   L        +µL L         µH                                                         µH  µL
H + + µL         µL
                           +   +µH
                                   vH   (x ) = H +L +v H (x ), where                      +µH +µL
                                                                                                  .    Therefore,
                                                                          µL
(Statement 1) v H (x ) =           1
                                  1-
                                        H +  L <           1
                                                          1-
                                                                 H +      +µL
                                                                                 L = v H , where the inequality
                            µL
follows from  < 1,          +µL
                                  < 1, and L < 0. Use the boundary condition vx
                                                                              H
                                                                                (x ) = 1 from
                                  H                    v H (x)
equation (18) and the definition qM (x)                vxH (x) -x   from equation (14) to obtain (Statement 2)
                                H +L
 H
qM (x) = v H (x )-x =             1-
                                        -x < v H , where the second equality and the inequality follow
                                                                                                        +µL L
from Statement 1. Substitute equation (28) into equation (29) to obtain v L (x ) =                      µL
                                                                                                            +
 µH              µH  µL                     +µL
 +µH
     H       +   +µH +µL
                         vL     (x ) =      µL
                                                    L + H + v L (x ).                  Therefore, (Statement 3)
              1 +µL                                           µH
v L (x ) =   1- µL
                            L + H <             1
                                               1-
                                                    L +       +µH
                                                                  H       = v L , where the inequality follows
     +µL                           µL      µH                                     +µL
from   µL
            > 1, L < 0, and +     µL
                                       = +  µH
                                               .                     L
                                                                Use vx (x ) =      µL
                                                                                      from equation (27) and
           L                                                            L   
                                                                                      L +H
 L
qM (x)  v vx
             (x)                              L
           L (x) - x to obtain (Statement 4) qM               (x ) =   v (x )
                                                                        L (x ) - x =
                                                                       vx
                                                                                  
                                                                                       1-
                                                                                            - x < v L , where
the second equality and the inequality follow from Statement 3.
                                                                                    j
Proof of Corollary 1.                Assume that x > 0 and consider 0  x  x . Then qM (x) 
 j            v j (x )
qM (x ) =      j
              vx  (x )
                         - x < v j (x ) < v j where the first inequality follows from the fact that


                                                           43
 j                                                                                j
qM (x) is increasing in x for 0  x  x , the equality is simply the definition of qM (x)
evaluated at x = x , the second inequality follows from vx
                                                         j
                                                           (x )  1 and x > 0 and the final
inequality follows from Statements 1 and 3 of Proposition 3.
Proof of Proposition 4. Lemma 2 and Statement 3 of Proposition 3 imply x > 0 
+µL L +H                       L +H       µL                         L +H       L +H
µL   1-
                    >           1-
                                      >   +µL
                                              .       Observe that    1-
                                                                            =   1-
                                                                                       - H = v H (x ) -
H
 , where the second equality follows from Statement 1 of Proposition 3.                      Therefore,
                    H          H   µL                           H           H    µL
x > 0  v (x ) -  >                 +µL
                                       ,     or equivalently, v (x ) >  +        +µL
                                                                                     .
Proof of Proposition 5.
     Since u  x - x , v L (0) = g L (-x ).              Therefore, the boundary condition v L (0) = 
(equation 20) can be written as g (-x ) = , which can be implicitly differentiated to obtain
dx          1
d
     = - g (- x )
                  = - vL1
                        (0)
                            < 0.
                           x
                                                                              j
Proof of Proposition 6. Differentiate equation (43) with respect to x obtain vx (x, ) =
g j (x - x ()) > 0, where the inequality follows from Lemma 1. Differentiate equation (43)
with respect to  to obtain vj
                              (x, ) = -g j (x - x ()) x () > 0, where the inequality
                                j
follows from Proposition 5 and vx (x, ) = g j (x - x ()) > 0. Therefore, an increase in 
increases the value of a unit capital, v j (x, ), at any given level of cash on hand in either
regime.
                                                                                  j
     To determine the impact of  on the marginal valuation of cash in Regime j , vx , first differ-
         j
entiate vx (x, ) = g j (x - x ()) with respect to x to obtain vxx
                                                               j
                                                                  (x, ) = g j (x - x ()) 
0, for 0  x  x , where the inequality follows from the concavity of v j (x) for 0  x  x
and is strict for 0  x < x . Now differentiate vx
                                                j
                                                  (x, ) = g j (x - x ()) with respect to
            j
 to obtain vx (x, ) = -g j (x - x ()) x ()  0, for 0  x  x , where the inequality
                                j
follows from Proposition 5 and vxx (x, ) = g j (x - x ())  0. Therefore, an increase in
                                          j
 reduces the marginal valuation of cash, vx (x, ), at any given value of x.
                                                                                    j             j
                    j                 v j (x,)                                     qM (x,)       va (x,)
     Differentiate qM (x, )            j
                                      vx  (x,)
                                                -   x with respect to  to obtain      
                                                                                             =    j
                                                                                                 vx (x,)
                                                                                                           -
 v j (x,)        j                             
  j         2   vx (x, ) > 0 for 0  x  x .
[vx (x,)]




                                                        44
B           Solution of the ODEs in Equations (16) and (17) and
            boundary conditions conditions in equations (18),
            (19), and (20)
This appendix first presents, and then verifies, the solutions to the ODEs in equations
(16) and (17) and boundary conditions conditions in equations (18), (19), and (20). The
solutions for the value of the firm in Regime H and Regime L are in equations (B.1) and
(B.2), respectively.               The solution for x is the root of h (u) = 0 where h (u) is defined in
                                                L +H           µL
equation (B.6), provided that                    1-
                                                           >   +µL
                                                                        so that (from Proposition 4) x > 0.
                                                       )
            v H (x) = c1 e1 (x-x ) + c2 e2 (x-x                                                                        (B.1)

and
                               + µL             1 (x-x )        + µL                
            v L (x) = c1        L
                                    1 -  1  H
                                              e          + c 2    L
                                                                     1 - 2 H e2 (x-x )                                 (B.2)
                               µ                                µ
                                   1
where 1 < 0 < 2 <                  H
                                           are the roots of the characteristic equation25
                                  1    1                1 1
            q ( )   2 -            H
                                     + L           +        (1 - ) = 0, i = 1, 2                                       (B.3)
                                                        H L
and
                     1    2
            c1 =            < 0,                                                                                       (B.4)
                   2 -  1 1
and
                     1    1
            c2 =            > 0.                                                                                       (B.5)
                   1 -  2 2

            L +H              µL
       If    1-
                        >     +µL
                                  ,     then x is the unique positive root of h (u) = 0, where26
                                                                                     µL
            h (u)  c1 1 - 1 H e-1 u + c2 1 - 2 H e-2 u -                                  .                            (B.6)
                                                                                     + µL
                                             1 1                                                     1
  25
   Since q ( ) > 0 and q (0) =               H L
                                                   (1 - ) < 0, 1 < 0 < 2 . In addition, since q      H
                                                                                                          = - 1
                                                                                                              H
                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                   L
                                                                                                                           > 0,
2 < 1 H .
  26                           1       1                    1 1                                          1     2       1
       Since 1 + 2 =           H
                                    + L
                                             and 1 2 =      H L
                                                                   (1 - ), it follows that c1 + c2 =   2 -1    1   -   2     =
                                    1    1
                                    H + L
2  2                                               H   L
2 -1  1                1 +2                         +
2 -1 1 2        =      1 2    =   1
                                    
                                     1
                                        
                                       (1-)
                                               =   1-      . Use this expression for c1 + c2 and the fact that c1 1 + c2 2 =
                                  H L
                                                                        µL                                         µL
1 to obtain h (0) = c1 1 - 1 H + c2 1 - 2 H -                           +µL
                                                                               = c1 + c2 - (c1 1 + c2 2 ) H -      +µL
                                                                                                                             =
H +L               H    µL          L +H           µL                                      L +H        µL
1-      - -             =
                        +µL
                                   - 1-      will be positive if and only if
                                                   +µL
                                                                                    -        > 0 which is
                                                                                            1-         +µL
                                                                                                           
                         
the case if and only if x > 0. Differentiate the expression for h (u) in equation (B.6) to obtain h (u) =
                                                                                     L
                                                                                       +H       µL
-c1 1 1 - 1 H e-1 u - c2 2 1 - 2 H e-2 u < 0. Since we are assuming that  1            -    - +  µL
                                                                                                     > 0,
we have h (0) > 0 and h (u) < 0, so h (u) = 0 has a unique positive root.

                                                                   45
   In the special case in which the salvage value, , equals zero, there is a closed-form
expression for x .
                      1
      x = max             ln (1 + ) , 0 ,           if  = 0                                       (B.7)
                    2 - 1
where
                 L + H
                              (2 - 1 ) .                                                          (B.8)
            1 -  - (L + H ) 2

   To verify the solutions in equations (B.1) and (B.2), first differentiate each of these
equations with respect to x to obtain
                                                )
       H
      vx (x) = 1 c1 e1 (x-x ) + 2 c2 e2 (x-x                                                      (B.9)

and
                       + µL           1 (x-x )           + µL                
       L
      vx (x) = 1 c1      L
                            1 -  1 H
                                     e         +  2 c 2    L
                                                              1 - 2 H e2 (x-x ) .                (B.10)
                       µ                                 µ
   Use equations (B.2) and (B.9) to write the right hand side of equation (16) as

                       µL                                                           )
       H
      vx (x) H +            v L (x) =      1 c1 e1 (x-x ) + 2 c2 e2 (x-x                H
                       + µL
                                                                    L                       )
                                             µL               c1 +
                                                                 µL
                                                                   µ
                                                                           1 - 1 H e1 (x-x
                                          +                            L                     )
                                             + µL         +c2 +
                                                              µL
                                                                µ
                                                                           1 - 2 H e2 (x-x

which simplifies to
                      µL                                      
       H
      vx (x) H +         L
                           v L (x) = c1 e1 (x-x ) + c2 e2 (x-x ) .                               (B.11)
                      +µ
Note that the right hand side equation (B.11) equals the expression for v H (x) in equation
(B.1).
   Use equations (B.1) and (B.10) to write the right hand side of equation (17) as
                                                          L                             )
       L       L   µH                          1 c1 +
                                                    µL
                                                      µ
                                                                 1 - 1 H e1 (x-x
      vx   (x)  +       v H (x) =                     µL                        2 (x-x )
                                                                                            L
                   + µH                       +2 c2 +
                                                    µ L          1 - 2      H
                                                                                e
                                               H
                                               µ          1 (x-x )        2 (x-x )
                                          +         c 1 e          + c 2 e
                                               + µH



                                                     46
                     µL  µH
which, using         +µL +µH
                             ,   simplifies to
                                                                                     )
        L       L   µH     H          + µL        1 L 1 - 1 H +  c1 e1 (x-x
       vx   (x)  +       v   ( x ) =                                                  )   . (B.12)
                    + µH              µL         + 2 L 1 - 2 H +  c2 e2 (x-x

     Evaluating the characteristic function in equation (B.3) at the roots i , i = 1, 2, yields
 L i
 H 2
     - L + H i + 1 -  = 0, which implies  + L i - H L i
                                                      2
                                                        = 1 - H i ,
equivalently,

       i L 1 - i H +  = 1 - H i , i = 1, 2.                                                 (B.13)

     Use equation (B.13) to rewrite equation (B.12) as
                                                                        )
        L             µH                + µL      1 - H 1 c1 e1 (x-x
       vx (x) L +          v H
                               ( x ) =                                   )    .             (B.14)
                      + µH              µL       + 1 - H 2 c2 e2 (x-x

Note that the right hand side equation (B.14) equals the expression for v L (x) in equation
(B.2). Thus, we have verified that the expressions for v H (x) and v L (x) in equations (B.1)
and (B.2) satisfy the ODEs in equations (16) and (17), respectively.
     Next we verify the boundary conditions.          Differentiate v H (x) in equation (B.1) twice
                             H
with respect to x, evaluate vx          H
                               (x) and vxx (x) at x = x , and use the definitions of c1 and c2
in equations (B.4) and (B.5) to obtain
        H
       vx (x ) = c1 1 + c2 2 = 1                                                            (B.15)

and
        H
       vxx (x ) = c1 1
                     2       2
                       + c 2 2 = 0,                                                         (B.16)

which are the boundary conditions in equations (18) and (19), respectively.
     Evaluate v L (x) in equation (B.2) at x = 0, to obtain
                   + µL         -1 x       + µL              
        L
       v (0) = c1    L
                              H
                        1 - 1  e     + c2    L
                                                1 - 2 H e-2 x ,                             (B.17)
                   µ                       µ
which can be rewritten as
                    + µL            µL
       v L (0) =         h ( x ) +        = ,                                               (B.18)
                    µL              + µL
where the second equality follows from h (x ) = 0.           Equation (B.18) is equivalent to the
boundary condition in equation (20).

                                                 47
                                                                                      c1       2
       For the special case in which  = 0, rearrange equation (B.17) using            c2
                                                                                           = - 2
                                                                                               2 , which is
                                                                                                1
implied by equations (B.4) and (B.5), to obtain
                            2
                            1 1 - 2  H
         e(2 -1 )x = Z      2
                                       > 0,          if  = 0.                                       (B.19)
                            2 1 - 1  H
                                                                               1
The fact that Z > 0 in equation (B.19) follows from 1 < 0 < 2 <                H
                                                                                 .   Take the ln of both
sides of equation (B.19) to obtain
                 1
         x =         ln Z , if Z  1 and  = 0.                                                       (B.20)
               2 - 1
       Evaluate the characteristic polynominal at the roots i and j , i = j , to obtain27
         2                   -1
         1 1 - 2 H =             1 -  - L + H 1                                                     (B.21)
                             H L
and
         2                   -1
         2 1 - 1 H =         H  L
                                  1 -  - L + H 2 .                                                  (B.22)
                              
Use equations (B.21) and (B.22) to rewrite the definition of Z in equation (B.19) as
               1 -  - L + H 1
         Z                       .                                                                  (B.23)
               1 -  - (L + H ) 2
       Add and subtract L + H 2 in the numerator of Z in equation (B.23) and rearrange
to obtain
                       L + H (2 - 1 )
         Z =1+                         = 1 + ,                                                      (B.24)
                     1 -  - (L + H ) 2
where the second equality uses the definition of  in equation (B.8). Observe that if  = 0,
then x > 0 if and only if Z > 1, which is the case if and only if L + H > 0.28
       Repeated differentiation of equations (B.1) and (B.2) with respect to x leads to the
                           H              L                                                   H
following expressions for v( j ) (x) and v(j ) (x), which are the j -th order derivatives of v (x)
and v L (x), respectively, with respect to x.

          H                     
                         j 1 (x-x )              )
                                          j 2 (x-x
         v( j ) (x) = c1 1 e        + c2  2 e                                                       (B.25)
  27
      i2
         1 - j H = i     2
                           - i2
                                j H . Equation (B.3) implies i 2
                                                                 = 1  H + L
                                                                           1
                                                                               i - 1    1
                                                                                     H L (1 - ) and i j
      1 1                                             1
= H L (1 - ), i = j , so i 1 - j   2         H
                                                  =  H
                                                             1         1 1
                                                         + L i - H L (1 - ) - i H 1               1
                                                                                              H L (1 - )
         1 1      L     H                     H                     1 1      L      H
=        H L
                  +  i - (1 - ) - i  (1 - )                 =      H L
                                                                            +  i - (1 - )                 =
    1 1               L      H
- H L 1 -  -  +  i .
   28
      This statement requires 1 -  - L + H 2 > 0. Since 1 < 0 < 2 and H > 0, the left hand side
of equation (B.22) is positive. In addition, since L < 0, the right hand side of equation (B.22) is positive
if and only if 1 -  - L + H 2 > 0.

                                                     48
           L              + µL        H      j 1 (x-x )    + µL               j 2 (x-x )
          v( j ) (x) =      L
                               1 -  1   c 1  1 e        +    L
                                                                1 - 2  H c 2  2 e        . (B.26)
                          µ                                µ
                                                                                         1
        Since c1 < 0, c2 > 0 (equations B.4 and B.5) and 1 < 0 < 2 <                     H
                                                                                           ,   it follows that
 H                         L
v( j)   (x) > 0 and       v( j)   (x) > 0 for j = 1, 3, 5, ....   In particular, the third derivatives of the
                          H                   L
value functions v (x) and v (x) both positive.
               H
        Since vxxx                           H
                   (x) > 0, it follows that vxx        H
                                                (x) < vxx (x ) = 0 for 0  x < x .                  Therefore,
v H (x) is strictly concave for 0  x < x . Use equations (B.25) and (B.26) to obtain

           L             + µL H                  j 1 (x-x )          j 2 (x-x )
          v( j)   (x) =    L
                              v(j ) (x) - 1 H c1 1 e        - 2 H c2 2 e        .                      (B.27)
                         µ
Evaluate equation (B.27) for j = 2 at x = x , and use vxx
                                                       H
                                                          (x ) = 0 to obtain
                                   + µL 3
           L
          vxx (x ) = -H                         3
                                        1 c 1 + 2 c2 < 0.                                              (B.28)
                                   µL
               L
        Since vxxx                   L
                   (x) > 0, we have vxx        L
                                        (x) < vxx (x ) < 0 for 0  x  x . Therefore, v L (x) is
strictly concave for 0  x  x .


C          The Cumulative Distribution Function of x
The endogenous level of cash on hand, xt , does not have a stationary distribution because
the firm eventually will encounter a Regime L that lasts long enough to deplete cash on
hand and force termination of the firm. Instead of stationary distribution, we focus on the
distribution of xt over the time interval extending from the firm's birth during a Regime H
at a time normalized to be 0 until the firm's death at time   min {t > 0 : xt = 0}.                        To
derive the distribution function F (x, j ), j  {H, L}, we use indicator functions to indicate
at each t  [0,  ] which regime prevails and whether xt <  for 0    x .
        Let g H (x) denote an arbitrary indicator function and define
                                      
          y H (xt )  Et                  g H (z ) dz ,                                                  (C.1)
                                  t

which is the measure of time that the indicator function g H (z ) = 1 during the interval of
time from t to  given that Regime H prevails at time t when cash on hand is xt . Similarly,
define
                                      
          y L (xt )  Et                  g L (z ) dz .                                                  (C.2)
                                  t



                                                            49
Setting the expected change of the left hand side of equation (C.1) equal to the expected
change of the right hand side of equation (C.1) yields
       H
      yx (xt ) H + µL y L (xt ) - y H (xt ) = -g H (xt ) .                              (C.3)

Similarly,
       L
      yx (xt ) L + µH y H (xt ) - y L (xt ) = -g L (xt ) .                              (C.4)

   Rearranging equations (C.3) and (C.4), and stacking them together yields
                                µL     µL
          H
         yx (x)                 H
                                      - H    y H (x)         - 1
                                                               Hg
                                                                  H
                                                                    (x)
                      =           H   µH
                                                        +                   .           (C.5)
          L
         yx (x)                -µL    L
                                             y L (x)         - 1L g L (x)

Associated with the system of ODEs are the boundary conditions
       H
      yx (x ) = 0                                                                       (C.6)

and

      y L (0) = 0.                                                                      (C.7)
                                              H
   The boundary condition in equation (C.6), yx (x ) = 0, reflects the fact that an optimiz-
ing firm will not accumulate cash greater than x . If for some reason, it were to find itself
with xt > x , it would pay an immediate dividend of xt - x . Thus, having xt > x would
                                                                         H
not extend the firm's liftetime, and would leave  unchanged. Therefore, yx (x ) = 0. The
boundary condition in equation (C.7), y L (0) = 0, simply reflects the fact that if the firm
has zero cash on hand while Regime L prevails, it will terminate immediately.
                      µL                    µH
   Define mH          H
                           > 0 and mL       L
                                                 < 0.   Assume that the unconditional mean of
 is positive, which implies that µH  + µL L > 0.
                                            H
                                                                Therefore, since H L < 0 and
               1
mH + mL =     H L
                       µL L + µH H , it follows that

      mH + mL < 0.                                                                      (C.8)

   Rewrite equation (C.5) as

      Yx (x) = M Y (x) + G (x)                                                          (C.9)

where
                     y H (x)
      Y (x)                                                                            (C.10)
                     y L (x)

                                                  50
                 mH      -mH
       M                                                                           (C.11)
                -mL          mL

and
                     - 1
                       Hg
                          H
                            (x)
       G (x)                            .                                          (C.12)
                     - 1L g L (x)

     Let 1  2 be the eigenvalues of M . Since 1 + 2 = trM = mH + mL and 1 2 =
det M = 0, we have

       1 = mH + mL < 0                                                             (C.13)

and

       2 = 0.                                                                      (C.14)

     mH                                                              1
            is an eigenvector of M with eigenvalue 1 = mH + mL and       is an eigenvector
   -mL                                                               1
of M with eigenvalue 2 = 0.
     Diagonalize M using

                mH + mL 0
                                                                                   (C.15)
                     0        0

and
                mH       1
       P                                                                           (C.16)
                -mL 1
so

                     1            1     -1
       P -1 =                                .                                     (C.17)
                mH   + mL         m L
                                        mH

It is straightforward to verify that

       M = P P -1                                                                  (C.18)

and

        = P -1 M P.                                                                (C.19)



                                                 51
   Pre-multiply equation (C.9) by P -1 to obtain

      P -1 Yx (x) = P -1 M P P -1 Y (x) + P -1 G (x)                                         (C.20)

which implies the diagonalized system

      Wx (x) = W (x) + H (x)                                                                 (C.21)

where

      W (x)  P -1 Y (x)                                                                      (C.22)

and

      H (x)  P -1 G (x) .                                                                    (C.23)

   Therefore,

                   1               - 1
                                     Hg
                                        H
                                          (x) +      L
                                                      1 L
                                                        g (x)
      H (x) =                                                        .                       (C.24)
                m + mL
                 H
                                 -mL 1
                                     Hg
                                        H
                                          (x) -        H 1 L
                                                     m L g (x)
   The diagonalized system is

        dw1 (x) /dx            mH + mL 0             w1 (x)          1       - 1
                                                                               Hg
                                                                                  H (x) +
                                                                                            L
                                                                                             1 L
                                                                                               g (x)
                       =                                      +                                            (C.25)
        dw2 (x) /dx                0            0    w2 (x)        H
                                                                  m + mL   -mL 1
                                                                               Hg
                                                                                  H (x) -   m 1
                                                                                              H     L
                                                                                                 L g (x)


   Because the equation for dwi (x) /dx is a first-order linear constant coefficient nonhomo-
geneous ODE in wi (x), but is independent of wj (x), j = i, the general solution is
                                                                                       
               e(m +m )x c1 + mH +
                   H    L
                                     1     x -(mH +mL )z     1 H          1 L
                                       mL 0
                                            e             -  H
                                                               g  ( z ) + L
                                                                            g ( z ) dz
     W (x) =                             x
                                                                                        .(C.26)
                                   1          L 1  H         H  1  L
                          c2 - mH +mL 0 m H g (z ) + m L g (z ) dz

Note that
                   w1 (0)              c1
      W (0) =                  =            .                                                (C.27)
                   w2 (0)              c2
   Use Y (x) = P W (x) so that

         y H (x)            mH     1        w1 (x)
            L
                   =           L
                                                                                             (C.28)
         y (x)              -m     1        w2 (x)
which implies

         y H (x)            mH w1 (x) + w2 (x)
                   =                                                                         (C.29)
         y L (x)            -mL w1 (x) + w2 (x)

                                                     52
and hence

      y H (x) - y L (x) = mH + mL w1 (x) .                                                             (C.30)

   Substitute the boundary condition y L (0) = 0 from equation (C.7) into equation (C.30)
and use w1 (0) = c1 from equation (C.27) to obtain

      y H (0) = mH + mL c1 .                                                                           (C.31)
                                                                             H
   To determine the value of the constant c1 , apply the boundary condition yx (x ) = 0
                                                          H
from equation (C.6). Observe that equation (C.5) implies yx (x) = mH y H (x) - y L (x) -
1 H
H
  g   (x) and then use equation (C.30) to obtain
       H                                         1 H
      yx (x) = mH mH + mL w1 (x) -                 g (x) .                                             (C.32)
                                                 H
Evaluate equation (C.32) at x = x , set the right hand side of the resulting equation equal
to zero and rearrange to obtain
                                      1 H 
      mH mH + mL w1 (x ) =              g (x )                                                         (C.33)
                                      H
   Evaluate the first element of the right hand side of equation (C.26) at x = x and
substitute the resulting expression for w1 (x ) into equation (C.33) to obtain

                       1             1 H  -(mH +mL )x
      c1 =                             g (x ) e                                                        (C.34)
              mH   (mH     +   mL ) H
                                   x
                       1                          1            1
                                     e-(m +m )z - H g H (z ) + L g L (z ) dz.
                                         H  L
              -
                  mH   + mL      0                            

   Substitute the value for c1 from equation (C.34) into equation (C.31) and use mH H = µL
to obtain
                                                      x
              1                                                          )z - 1 g H (z ) + 1 g L (z ) dz.(C.35)
      y (0) = L g H (x ) e-(m +m )x -
                                   
                                                          e-(m
                             H  L                                H +mL
       H
             µ                                    0                          H             L
   To make following expressions more compact, define
                                      µL   µH
      b  - mH + mL = -                   +            > 0,                                             (C.36)
                                      H    L
so equation (C.35) can be rewritten as
                                           x
              1                                        1 H         1
      y (0) = L g H (x ) ebx -
       H
                                               ebz -    H
                                                          g (z ) + L g L (z ) dz.                      (C.37)
             µ                         0                          
   We are particularly interested in y H (0) in the three cases below, which have different
specifications of the pair of indicator functions g H (x) and g L (x).

                                                          53
Case 1 g H,1 (x) = g L,1 (x) = 1 for 0  x  x , so that
                                 
         H,1
     y         (0) = E0             dt      = E0 { } > 0.                                                           (C.38)
                             0

In this case, the expression for y H (0) in equation (C.37) becomes
                        1 bx               1   1        1 bx
     y H,1 (0) =          e +                -            e - 1 > 0.                                                (C.39)
                       µL                  H   L        b

Case 2 g H,2 (x) = 0, g L,2 (x) = 1{xt <,s=L} for 0  x  x , so that
                                        
     y H,2 (0, ) = E0                      1{xt <,s=L} dt     = F (, L) E0 { } > 0.                                 (C.40)
                                    0

In this case, the expression for y H (0) in equation (C.37) becomes
                            1 1 b
     y H,2 (0, ) = -            e -1 .                                                                              (C.41)
                            L b
Case 3 g H,3 (x) = 1{xt <,s=H } , g L,3 (x) = 0 for 0  x  x , so that
                                        
         H,3
     y         (0, ) = E0                  1{xt <,s=H } dt    = F (, H ) E0 { } > 0.                                (C.42)
                                    0

In this case, g H,3 (x) = 1 for 0  x <   x , but g H,3 (x ) = 0, so the expression for y H (0)
in equation (C.37) becomes
                           1 1 b
     y H,3 (0, ) =             e - 1 > 0.                                                                           (C.43)
                           H b
                                                                                  y H,2 (0,)
   Equations (C.38) and (C.40) imply that F (, L) =                                 y H,1 (0)
                                                                                                so that equations (C.39)
and (C.41) imply
                       -1                           1
     F (, L) =                                                                eb - 1 > 0, for 0    x .              (C.44)
                       L     b bx
                               e           +   1
                                                    -   1
                                                             (e   bx   - 1)
                            µL                 H        L

                                                                                            y H,3 (0,)
Similarly, equations (C.38) and (C.42) imply that F (, H ) =                                  y H,1 (0)
                                                                                                          so that equations
(C.39) and (C.43) imply
                        1                           1
     F (, H ) =                                                               eb - 1 > 0, for 0   < x . (C.45)
                        H    b bx
                               e           +    1
                                                    -   1
                                                             (e   bx   - 1)
                            µL                  H       L


Finally, to express the distribution even more compactly, define
                                    1
     a                                                       >0                                                     (C.46)
                b bx        1           1
               µL
                  e    +    H
                                    -   L
                                               (ebx - 1)

                                                                   54
and use the definition of a to rewrite equations (C.44) and (C.45) as
                    -1
      F (x, L) =       a ebx - 1 > 0, for 0  x  x                                          (C.47)
                    L
                    1
      F (x, H ) =     a ebx - 1 > 0, for 0  x  x                                           (C.48)
                    H

and hence
                                      1       
      1 - F (x , L) - F (x , H ) =     L
                                         abebx > 0.                                        (C.49)
                                     µ
Finally, equations (C.47) and (C.48) can be represented as
                     1
      F (x, j ) =           a ebx - 1 > 0, for j  {H, L} and 0  x  x                       (C.50)
                    |(j ) |


D        Implementing the Two-Stage Procedure
This appendix provides additional details for the two-stage procedure.          Stage 1 of the 2-
stage procedure is simply an OLS regression within Regime L. Stage 2 uses the distance
                                                                      H
 between points A and D. The coordinates of point A are (qA , qM ) = qA (x ) , qA
                                                                                H
                                                                                  (x )
         H
because qM (x ) = qA
                   H
                     (x ). Point D is the point on the fitted regression line from Stage 1,
    III
0 + q                                                      H
        qA , that is vertically below Point A, where qA = qA (x ). Therefore, the coordinates
                             H
of Point D are (qA , qM ) = qA (x ) , 0 + q  qA (x ) , so , the vertical distance between
                                          III H

Points A and D, is
             III
       = 1 - q    H
                 qA (x ) - 0 .                                                                 (D.1)

Use the definition of the approximation error  in equation (36) to eliminate 0 from equation
(D.1) and obtain
             III
       = 1 - q    H
                 qA (x ) +  - qM
                               L
                                 (x ) + q  qA (x ) .
                                        III L
                                                                                               (D.2)
                              j                                v L (x)
    Next use the definitions qA (x)  v j (x) - x and qM
                                                      L
                                                        (x)    vxL (x)   - x in equation (D.2) to
obtain
                                      v L (x )
             III
       = 1 - q   v H (x ) +  -          L   
                                                    v (x ) .
                                                 III L
                                               + q                                             (D.3)
                                      vx (x )
                                                                          H +L                 +µL
    Use the facts from equation (27) and Proposition 3 that v H (x ) =    1-
                                                                               ,    L
                                                                                   vx (x ) =   µL
                                                                                                   ,
                          L +H
and v L (x ) = vx
                L
                  (x )     1-
                                 to rearrange equation (D.3) to obtain an expression for  in

                                                55
                                                                          III
terms of the parameters of the firm's problem and the estimated values of q   and the
approximation error  ,

            III                   L + H
      = 1 - q   H + q
                    III
                                        + .                                              (D.4)
                                µL 1 - 
   Remarkably, the expression for  in equation (D.4) does not include x , so  is easily
calculated from the fundamental parameters and the results of the univariate regression in
Stage 1, without having to compute x .
        H
   Use qA (x ) - qA
                  L
                    (x ) = v H (x ) - v L (x ) and the expression for the distance  shown in
equation (D.3), along with Term 2 and Term 3 from equation (40), to obtain
                           1          1 H      1
     Term 2 + Term 3 =       ( -  ) =    - L  -  .                                       (D.5)
                                               
After the second equals sign in equation (D.5), the first term is the regression impact of cash
flow in equation (39) and the second term is proportional to the approximation error  .




                                              56
