                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              EXTERNALITIES IN INTERNATIONAL TAX ENFORCEMENT:
                            THEORY AND EVIDENCE

                                       Thomas R. Tørsløv
                                        Ludvig S. Wier
                                        Gabriel Zucman

                                       Working Paper 26899
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26899


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2020




We thank the Danish Tax Administration for data access and many conversations, Alan
Auerbach, Johannes Becker, David Bradbury, Richard Bolwijn, Iain Campbell, Kimberly
Clausing, Alex Cobham, Mihir Desai, Michael Devereux, Fritz Foley, Maya Forstater, Teresa
Fort, Jason Furman, Martin Hearson, Niels Johannesen, Petr Janský, Michael Keen, Edward
Kleinbard, Claus Kreiner, Paul Krugman, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, Pierre Moscovici, Casey
Mulligan, Gaetan Nicodeme, Mitchell Petersen, Thomas Piketty, Nadine Riedel, Dani Rodrik,
Emmanuel Saez, Antoinette Schoar, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, Amir Sufi, Felix Tintelnot, John
Van Reenen, Margrethe Vestager, Eric Zwick, and numerous seminar and conference participants
for helpful comments and reactions. Zucman acknowledges financial support from the FRIPRO
program of the Research Council of Norway. The authors retain sole responsibility for the views
expressed in this research, and they do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Thomas R. Tørsløv, Ludvig S. Wier, and Gabriel Zucman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Externalities in International Tax Enforcement: Theory and Evidence
Thomas R. Tørsløv, Ludvig S. Wier, and Gabriel Zucman
NBER Working Paper No. 26899
March 2020
JEL No. H25,H26,H87

                                         ABSTRACT

We show that the fiscal authorities of high-tax countries can lack the incentives to combat profit
shifting to tax havens. Instead, they have incentives to focus their enforcement efforts on
relocating profits booked by multinationals in other high-tax countries, crowding out the
enforcement on transactions that shift profits to tax havens, and reducing the global tax payments
of multinational companies. This incentive problem can help explain why profit shifting to low-
tax countries persists despite its tax revenue cost for high-tax countries. The predictions of our
model are motivated and supported by the analysis of two new datasets: the universe of transfer
price corrections conducted by the Danish tax authority, and new cross-country data on
international tax enforcement. Both of these datasets shows that that tax authorities in high-tax
countries focus their transfer pricing enforcement effort on correcting transactions with other
high-tax countries rather than transactions involving tax havens.

Thomas R. Tørsløv                               Gabriel Zucman
University of Copenhagen,                       Department of Economics
Øster Farimagsgade 5                            University of California, Berkeley
DK-1353 Copenhagen                              530 Evans Hall, #3880
thomas.torslov@econ.ku.dk                       Berkeley, CA 94720
                                                and NBER
Ludvig S. Wier                                  zucman@berkeley.edu
UC Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
ludvig.wier@econ.ku.dk
1         Introduction
Multinational firms can avoid taxes by shifting profits from high-tax countries to low-tax coun-
tries. A number of studies suggest that this profit shifting causes substantial losses of tax
revenue (Crivelli, de Mooij and Keen, 2015; Bolwijn et al., 2018; Clausing, 2016; Tørsløv et al.,
2018). In principle, tax authorities in high-tax countries can attempt to reduce profit shifting by
increasing the monitoring of intra-group transactions and enforcing more strongly the rules gov-
erning the pricing of these transactions.1 Moreover, many countries have general anti-avoidance
provisions, according to which transactions that are undertaken with the primary goal of avoid-
ing taxes are illegal. This legal framework is a potentially powerful tool to curb profit shifting
to sparsely populated, zero-tax countries such as Bermuda where little real activity takes place.
Why, despite the sizable revenue losses involved, does profit shifting nonetheless persist?
        This paper provides a novel answer to this question by studying the incentives faced by tax
authorities. We show theoretically that the fiscal authorities of high-tax countries can lack the
incentives to combat profit shifting to tax havens. Instead, they have incentives to focus their
enforcement efforts on relocating profits booked by multinationals in other high-tax countries,
which crowds out the enforcement on transactions that shift profits to tax havens and does not
increase the global tax payments of multinational companies. This incentive problem can help
explain why profit shifting to low-tax countries persists, even when the legal framework (such
as general anti-avoidance provisions) to curb it exists.
        To understand the logic of the argument, take the case of Denmark, a country where the
corporate tax rate is 22%. One euro of profit re-located to Denmark by the Danish tax authority
is worth the same to Denmark whether it comes from Sweden, where the corporate tax rate
is also 22%, or from Bermuda, where the corporate tax rate is 0%. That is, the Danish tax
authority does not internalize the externality of reducing the corporate tax base in the partner
country. But it may be easier for the Danish tax authority to relocate one euro booked by a
multinational company in Sweden, for two reasons. First, it is more likely to succeed, because
firms are unlikely to spend much resources opposing this transfer price correction: for them,
whether profits are booked in Denmark or Sweden makes little difference to their global tax
bill, since the tax rates in Denmark and Sweden are the same. Second, if there is a dispute
between Denmark and Sweden, it is likely to be settled relatively quickly through the dispute
    1
    The general principle governing the pricing of intra-group transactions is that these transactions should
be conducted at arm's length, that is, as if the subsidiaries trading goods, services, or assets internally were
unrelated. See, e.g., Zucman (2014) for a description and history of these rules.



                                                       1
resolution agreements in force among OECD countries and EU countries. The correction of
transactions between Denmark and Sweden crowds out the correction of transactions between
Denmark and low-tax countries. Such corrections are harder to make as firms spend more
legal resources to defend their transfer pricing optimization, and take more time (due to a
lack of cooperation with some tax havens). In this paper, we formalize this argument and make
precise the conditions under which it is optimal for high-tax countries to focus their enforcement
resources on relocating profits booked in other high-tax countries.
   Our theoretical predictions are motivated and supported by two novel datasets analyzed for
the first time in this paper. We first analyze the universe of transfer price corrections initiated
by the Danish tax authority--confidential micro-data internal to the Danish administration to
which we were granted access in the context of this research. We find that the vast majority of
transfer price corrections (about 82%) initiated by the Danish tax authorities involve other high-
tax countries. As Denmark has a moderate corporate tax rate (22% in 2015), this finding implies
that the majority of transfer price corrections initiated by Denmark involve countries with higher
rates and ultimately lower the taxes paid by the targeted multinationals globally. According
to our estimates, the combined transfer price enforcement efforts of the Danish authorities
increased the Danish tax collection by e315 million per year on average over the years 2008,
2009 and 2015, but lowered tax collection abroad by e333 million. This result is at odds with
the popular perception that the enforcement activities of tax authorities increase the taxes paid
by multinationals. We furthermore go through Danish court cases and find that the likelihood
of multinationals appealing a transfer price correction is 50% higher whenever the transfer price
correction involves a tax haven -- consistent with the model prediction of multinationals putting
up a fight whenever a correction disfavors their global tax bill.
   Second, we analyze data on tax disputes between tax authorities by drawing on a survey of
tax authorities conducted by the audit firm EY, in which EY asked 26 major economies which
countries were the main focus of their transfer price correction efforts. Consistent with our
theory, the data show that the majority of high-tax countries enforcement effort are directed at
other high-tax countries. These corrections typically do not increase the taxes paid by multina-
tionals, but merely re-shuffle tax payments across high-tax places. From a global perspective,
such corrections are welfare decreasing, since they consume resources without changing global
tax payments. In effect, non-haven countries steal revenue from each other while letting tax
havens flourish.
   Our findings have policy implications. There is an ongoing international effort to facilitate


                                                2
dispute resolution settlement in transfer pricing cases between high-tax countries. Our results
highlight a previously overlooked adverse effect of facilitating dispute resolution: making it
easier for high-tax countries to correct each other incentivizes more transfer price corrections
between high-tax countries and as a result crowds out tax haven cases. The easier it is for, say,
the French tax authority to relocate profits booked in Germany, the less resources it may devote
to chasing the profits shifted to Bermuda--potentially increasing shifting to low-tax locales.
Similarly, current efforts to implement minimum taxation at a country-by-country basis e.g.
through controlled foreign corporation (CFC) rules could further impact the incentives facing
tax-authorities. Under current proposals of country-by-country minimum taxation income de-
clared in a tax haven may in part be subject to taxation in a high-tax country, while income
declared in another high-tax country will not be. Thus, going after intentional profit shifting to
tax havens may produce less tax revenue to the tax authority than going after income currently
declared in a high-tax country. This could exacerbate the existing incentive for tax authorities
not to go after profits booked in tax havens and thus -- in turn -- exacerbate profit shifting.
This result changes if the country-by-country minimum tax is sufficiently high, such that the
incentive for firms to shift profits disappears.
   Our results highlight an overlooked inefficiency in the current international tax system. The
uncertainties involved in determining arm's-length prices are large enough that they can soak
up substantial enforcement resources, even though the related enforcement initiatives do not
increase global corporate tax payments. International organizations as a whole argue that a
fundamental corporate tax reform is needed to curb firms intentional profit shifting to tax
havens. A number of such proposals suggests to abandon the idea of transfer pricing entirely
(E.g. through formula apportionment or destination-based-cash-flow taxation). This paper
highlights another reason to pursue such reform -- it may save public and corporate resources
on wasteful inconsequential tax enforcement.
   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the related literature. In Section 3, we
discuss the institutional background of international tax corrections. In Section 4, we turn to
the data and study the patterns in transfer price corrections. Section 5 presents our benchmark
theoretical model and Section 6 considers a number of extensions. We conclude in Section 7
where we discuss the implications of our results for policy.




                                                   3
2     Related Literature
2.1    Profit Shifting and Transfer Pricing
A body of work suggests that multinationals shift profits to low-tax places to avoid taxation.
Grubert and Mutti (1991) and Hines and Rice (1994) were the first to document the correlation
between firm profitability and corporate tax rates at the country level. Since then, a number
of studies have found that the relationship between firm profitability and tax rates is likely
to be causal and primarily driven by profit shifting (see Heckemeyer and Overesch, 2013, and
Dharmapala, 2014, for an overview). Recent research suggests that profit shifting is non-linear,
with a greater sensitivity of reported profits to large tax rate differentials, i.e., relatively more
profit shifting to very low-tax locales (Dowd et al. 2017, Liu et al. 2017, Wier 2020).
    Using customs data, a series of studies find that firms deviate from the arm's-length principle
when trading with affiliates in low-tax countries (e.g., Bernard et al. 2006, Clausing 2003, Cristea
and Nguyen 2016, Davies et al. 2018, Liu et al. forthcoming, and Wier 2020). There is also
evidence of tax-motivated manipulations of intra-group transactions prices for services (Hebous
and Johannesen 2015). Finally, there is evidence of firms shifting profits to tax havens by
shifting debt, intangible property, and risk (Huizinga et al. 2008a, 2008b; Becker et al. 2018).
A number of studies estimate that the global loss of corporate tax revenue is sizable, of the order
of 10% to 20% of global corporate tax revenue (Clausing 2016, Tørsløv et al. 2018, UNCTAD
2015). For comparison, Alvarez-Martinez et al. (2018) find that profit shifting between high-
tax countries is small, about a tenth of the tax revenue loss due to profit shifting to low-tax
countries.
    Our contribution to this literature is to provide a new explanation for why this profit shifting
persists, despite the substantial tax revenue cost for high-tax countries.

2.2    International Tax Enforcement
Our paper is also related to the literature on tax enforcement. In the classical Allingham
and Sandmo (1972) model, there is an exogenous audit rate and penalty for non-compliance.
Firms deviate from the true arm's length price until the point where the marginal tax saving
equals the marginal increase in the expected penalty. For an internal optimum to exist, it is
assumed that the likelihood of an audit increases with the size of the transfer price deviation
and/or that the penalty rises convexly with the transfer price deviation. The incentives of
the tax authority are not taken into consideration. This framework, originally developed to


                                                 4
study individual income tax evasion, does not capture some key features of international tax
enforcement. Through interviews with practitioners, Becker and Davis (2014) document that
transfer pricing cases rarely involve penalties (but merely corrections) and that the likelihood
of audit is mainly driven by firm size. This is also the case in Denmark, where Danish State
Auditors in fact criticized the tax authority for not applying penalties and ignoring smaller
multinationals/transactions (DSA, 2014).
    Becker and Davis (2014) propose an alternative theoretical model to analyze transfer price
manipulation, in which multinationals are audited with certainty by high-tax countries and thus
can only avoid taxes with their tacit acceptance. The equilibrium transfer price is the outcome
of a negotiation game between a high-tax country's tax authority, a low-tax country's, and
a firm. Like the Allingham-Sandmo model, the Becker and Davies (2014) model predicts we
should only observe enforcement efforts that increase the global tax bill of multinationals. As
we will see, however, in the data we observe many enforcement initiatives that do not. Our
paper provides an explanation for this apparent puzzle.
    Last, a number of papers provide theories of why profit shifting persists focusing on the
idea that higher-tax countries might gain on balance from profit shifting (e.g., by lowering the
effective marginal tax rate on especially mobile firms; see, e.g., Hong and Smart, 2010; Haufler
et al., 2018). The tax authorities of high-tax countries might perceive that profit shifting and
tangible capital mobility are strongly substitutable--with less shifting there would be more
outflows of tangible capital, with potentially adverse effects on wages and employment--and
rationally choose to limit enforcement for that reason. In the public debate, however, few elected
officials in high-tax countries seem to openly defend profit shifting; rather, the more widespread
position seems to be that this phenomenon ought to be combated by tax authorities. Our paper
analyzes why profit shifting can persist in the current international tax system even if there is
a sincere political will to curb it.


3     Institutional Background
In this section we describe the institutional framework that governs the conduct of transfer price
corrections.

3.1    The Transfer Pricing Unit
To ensure profits are taxed according to the prevailing internationally-agreed rules, tax au-
thorities in high-tax countries routinely audit companies. This work is usually carried out by

                                                5
dedicated transfer pricing units operating inside tax authorities. Concretely, transfer pricing
units can ask for transfer pricing documentation, i.e., detailed reports prepared by firms to
justify their internal transactions. These reports are usually long and hence time-consuming
to audit. With limited resources available, the tax authorities must prioritize which companies
are asked to deliver transfer pricing documentation. This prioritization is guided by the data
available to the tax authorities, which is often scarce. In the case of Denmark, it is based on a
screening of their financial and tax return data.2
       After receiving the transfer pricing documentation, the transfer pricing unit checks that
intra-group transactions are conducted at arm's length. When they consider it is not the case,
they can ask multinationals to correct transactions. These corrections are usually referred to as
"transfer price" corrections, even though the corrections go beyond transfer prices per se. All
aspects of multinational activity are examined, including not only the transfer prices of goods
and services, but also debt shifting, intra-group sales of intangibles, and potential abuses of
double-tax treaties.
       Unlike other form of tax enforcement, the enforcement of transfer prices is asymmetrical: it
can only raise tax revenue. In the context of individual income tax audits, auditors investigate
both over- and underpayment of taxes and hence audits can result in a reduction in taxes paid.
This is not the case when it comes to transfer price enforcement, since each country tries to
increase its own tax base. France, for example, audits French companies with the aim to correct
transactions that are disadvantageous to France but ignores any findings that would result in a
lowering of the French tax base. The same goes for other countries.
       As stated by the OECD (2010, pp. 2), "transfer pricing is not an exact science." A variety of
methods are used to determine the arm's-length price (cost-plus pricing, comparable unrelated
transactions, comparable related transactions, profit splits, etc.). Moreover, in some cases (e.g.,
service payments such as royalties, purchases of intellectual property such as brands) the correct
arm's-length price is not conceptually clear (Devereux and Vella, 2017). As a result there is
some uncertainty involved in setting arm's-length prices, which implies that firms will at times
be at odds with tax authorities even when they do not voluntarily engage in tax-minimization
behavior.
       To conduct a tax adjustment the tax authority must first argue that the arm's length princi-
ple has not been well applied by the multinational. Concretely, the authorities must be able to
   2
    Source: DSA (2014) and conversations with the Danish Transfer Pricing Unit. Historically, 100-400 firms
have been asked to deliver documentation each year. Based on the transfer price documentation the tax authority
may chose to conduct a transfer price correction. Historically, 50-100 corrections are conducted each year.



                                                      6
point to specific transactions that would have been priced differently if they had been conducted
at arm's length, i.e., by unrelated parties. The firm can appeal this correction, and the courts
may overturn the decision.
       Two points are worth noting here. First, there is an information and resource asymmetry
between firms and tax authorities. Firms have a thorough understanding of their own business
and are advised by transfer pricing specialists (both in house and in accounting firms). Globally,
around 330,000 people work in transfer pricing, of which about one percent are employed by
tax authorities (see Figure 1).3 That is, for each person working in transfer pricing within tax
authorities, there are about 100 working in the private sector. Intra-group transactions are
not systematically monitored by tax authorities; rather, enforcement relies primarily on self-
regulation, which comes at a sizable cost for the private sector. According to our estimates the
private sector spent about $25 billion on transfer pricing services in 2019.4
       Second, tax authorities depend on the corresponding country's tax authority. If a tax au-
thority considers conducting a transfer price correction it will reach out to the corresponding
country's tax authority to obtain crucial information on the entity in scoped such as transactions
through this entity with other foreign affiliates and non-affiliates. Say e.g. that a tax authority
suspects that a coffee producer is selling its coffee to cheaply to a foreign affiliate in a tax haven
and that this foreign affiliate is reselling the coffee at a much higher price - having the effect of
shifting profits to the tax haven. In this example, the tax authority trying to prove its point
relies on the tax haven to deliver information on the entity's price-setting in transactions not
involving the country initiating the correction. The corresponding country can hence supply
supplementary information about the firm this eases the process of conducting a transfer price
correction. Contrary, if the corresponding tax authority is not cooperating, this complicates the
process.

3.2       Mutual Agreement Procedures
If a tax authority unilaterally increases the profits of a firm operating in its jurisdiction without
another tax authority lowering the profits of the same firm, profits may be double counted and
double taxed. International agreements exist to ensure that an increase in the tax base of a
   3
      328,261 is the number of individuals that LinkedIn highlights when searching "transfer pricing" under
"people" (as of January 4, 2020). Spot checks confirm that LinkedIn correctly identifies individuals working with
transfer pricing. The number of individuals working in government with transfer pricing is first identified by
filtering the search by industry to "government adminstration" only (3,368 as of January 4, 2020 and corroborated
by the head count in EY's Transfer Pricing Tax Authority Survey from 2014
    4
      Here using the average base salary of a transfer pricing specialist ($74,000 as of Jan 4, 2020) computed by
Glassdoor https://www.glassdoor.com/Salaries/transfer-pricing-salary-SRCH_KO0,16.htm


                                                       7
multinational in one country is offset by a corresponding reduction in another. The procedure
is as follows. After a tax authority has decided on a transfer price correction, the targeted firm
may ask the tax authority to enter into a Mutual Agreement Procedure with the partner country
(or countries) where taxable income has presumably been overbooked. The tax authority that
increased its own tax base must then approach the partner country (or countries) and ask
them to reduce their tax base (i.e., in effect, to pay for the transfer price correction). If an
agreement is reached, this procedure results in a relocation of taxable income across countries.
If no agreement is reached, then taxable income increases in one country without any offsetting
decrease elsewhere. Within the European Union, an agreement is almost guaranteed: a strict
system--known as the Arbitrage Convention--is in place to ensure that disputes among EU
countries are settled within two years. If the tax authorities do not come to terms in that time
frame, an external panel is brought in to settle the case.5 Worldwide more than 90% of mutual
agreement procedures result in some form of agreement (either a corresponding reduction or
withdrawal of initial claim).6
       Since the end of the 1990s, there has been a push to advance mutual agreement procedures.
The OECD has played a key role in this process through the 1996 OECD Model Tax Convention
(article 25) and in 2014 through its Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS) initiative, whose
action 14 seeks to "make dispute resolution mechanisms more effective." In parallel, the EU has
enhanced dispute resolution through the EU Arbitration Convention and the EU joint transfer
pricing forum. In this forum EU states are held accountable as to the ease and speed with which
they facilitate dispute resolutions.
       The push for facilitating mutual agreement procedures has dramatically lowered the length
of procedures and increased the number of cases markedly -- particularly in high-tax countries.
The OECD has since 2006 collected statistics on the number of newly started and closed mutual
agreement procedures by country. The number of cases has from 2006 to 2018 more than
doubled; from 1036 initiated cases in 2006 to 2385 initiated cases in 2018.7 The push for making
dispute settlement more efficient accelerated in 2016, when the OECD began implementing the
BEPS project through the inclusive framework (consisting of 137 countries) were all countries
   5
     Mutual agreement procedures should not be conflated with Advance Pricing Agreements (APA). By using
APAs, companies can get a contractual agreement with tax authorities that the authorities will not contest a
transaction at a later point. See Becker et al. (2014) for an analysis of advance pricing agreements. Our paper
does not study advance pricing agreements.
   6
     See OECD MAP statistics 2016-2018
   7
     See OECD MAP Statistics (n.d.). Note that the increase in cases is likely larger as the numbers prior
to OECD established guidelines in 2016 may double count cases (https://www.oecd.org/tax/dispute/
mutual-agreement-procedure-statistics.htm)



                                                      8
taking part where required to improve dispute settlement mechanisms. This led to a dramatic
decrease in the average time taken to settle disputes after 2016: from 40 months to less than
7 months.8 The result was also an astounding 59% increase in initiated mutual agreement
procedures from 2016-18. This push was primarily driven by an increase of new cases in non-
tax havens who where the target in 87% of new procedures (see appendix Figure A3).


4     An Empirical Analysis of Transfer Price Corrections
In this section we analyze the universe of transfer price corrections in Denmark using a unique
micro-dataset, and we study patterns in transfer price corrections internationally using a newly
assembled macro dataset. We start by the Danish case before extending the analysis to other
countries.

4.1    The Universe of Transfer Price Corrections in Denmark
For the purpose of this research, the Danish tax authority has given us access to internal
confidential micro-data on the universe of transfer price corrections undertaken by the Danish
tax authority for the years 2008 and 2014-15 (the only years for which comprehensive data
is available). These corrections pertains to the transfer prices of goods and services, but also
debt shifting, intra-group sales of intangibles, and potential abuses of double-tax treaties. This
is the key data source for this paper, which includes the increase in the tax base demanded
by the tax administration and the counterpart country targeted. The ultimate outcome of
these corrections will be the result of whether the tax payer appeal to the courts or asks for a
mutual agreement procedure (or both). To shed light on the ultimate outcome we additionally
obtained data on the initiated court appeal cases for the years 2011-16 and the closed mutual
agreement procedures 2008-15. These different data sources could, unfortunately, not be linked
to provide a full end-to-end view of the transfer price corrections but do nonetheless show us a
comprehensive picture of the full process.
    Table 1 presents summary statistics of the Danish tax authority's transfer pricing corrections
and compares the results to available macroeconomic estimates of profit shifting out of Denmark.
    Macroeconomic estimates of profit shifting out of Denmark suggest that from 2012-2015,
about e2,2 billion per annum were shifted on net out of Denmark to other countries, the
equivalent of 6% of the Danish corporate tax base (Panel A, col. 1). Cols. 2 and 3 decompose
   8
     See https://www.oecd.org/tax/dispute/mutual-agreement-procedure-statistics-2017.htm. Note
that the the average time for cases after 2016 is truncated due to some cases being open still.


                                                9
this total into profits shifted out of Denmark to tax havens 9 in 2015 as estimated by Tørsløv et
al. (2018), and profits shifted out of Denmark to non non-haven countries in 2012 as estimated
by Alvarez-Martinez et al. (2018). Alvarez-Martinez et al. (2018) estimate that Denmark
attracts profits from non-haven countries, because of its moderately low corporate tax rate of
25% in 2012 (further reduced to 22% in 2015). More precisely, Alvarez-Martinez et al. (2018)
estimate that Denmark is a net recipient of e455 million from non-tax havens (e532 million in
profits shifted inwards minus e77 million in profits shifted outwards) in 2012. These amounts
are small, however, in comparison to the profits shifted out of Denmark to tax havens, which
amount to about e2,670 million in 2015 according to Tørsløv et al. (2018) (col. 3).
       Panel B presents summary statistics on the transfer price corrections conducted by the
Danish tax authority.That is, tax adjustments made by the Danish tax authority that require
the firm to report more income in Denmark. In 2008, 2014, and 2015 Denmark conducted in
total 185 transfer pricing corrections, or 62 cases on average per year (col. 1). These corrections
included a variety of topics such as internal debt, transfer of intellectual property, and the price
of headquarter services.10 On average over 2008, 2009 and 2015, corrections amounted to e1.5
billion a year, the equivalent of about 4 percent of the Danish corporate tax base. This large
amount is the result of 62 cases per year, meaning that the average case size is large (e24
million). Small cases are not prioritized due to the high costs of conducting a transfer price
correction (DSA, 2014).
       Our analysis of the Danish transfer pricing cases reveals two main findings.
       First, the vast majority of transfer price corrections (about 75%) initiated by the Danish
tax authorities involve other high-tax countries. This fraction is larger (82%) when cases are
dollar-weighted. That is, only 18% (e266 million per year) of the profits relocated to Denmark
by the Danish tax authorities come from correcting transactions involving tax havens (col. 4).
This implies that the Danish authorities' enforcement initiatives bring back into the Danish
tax net about 10% (e266 million out of e2,670 million) of the amount of profits shifted out of
Denmark to tax havens. Meanwhile, the Danish authorities manage to relocate large amounts
of profits booked by firms in other high-tax countries, i.e., in countries where it is unlikely that
   9
      The list of tax havens includes Belgium, Cyprus, Ireland, Netherlands, Hong Kong, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Puerto Rico, Switzerland, Singapore and all the small offshore financial centers listed in Table
1 of Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2010): Andorra, Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba, The Bahamas, Bahrain,
Barbados, Belize, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Gibraltar, Grenada, Guernsey, the
Isle of Man, Jersey, Lebanon, Liecht- enstein, Macao, Mauritius, Monaco, the Netherlands Antilles, Panama,
Samoa, Seychelles, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent & Grenadines, Turks and Caicos, Vanuatu.
   10
      The Danish State Auditors released information on the composition of these cases in their report on transfer
pricing from 2014. In terms of amounts, by far the most important type of correction involved intra-group sales
of intangible assets, which accounted for more than 75% of tax adjustments (DSA, 2014).

                                                       10
there is intentional outward profit shifting. The enforcement efforts of the Danish tax authority
appear to raise Danish tax revenue primarily by correcting unintentional mistakes made by firms
in their transactions with related parties in high-tax countries, rather than intentional profit
shifting to low-tax locales.
       Figure 2 provides a granular depiction of the Danish tax authority's transfer pricing en-
forcement activities, by showing the distribution of the tax differentials (Danish tax rate minus
foreign country's tax rate) for the universe of cases pursued by the authority. As discussed
in Section 2, a large literature documents the effect of statutory tax rate differentials on the
pricing of intra-group goods and service transactions. On a priori grounds, we thus expect that
transactions involving countries with lower corporate tax rates than Denmark should be over-
represented in the Danish tax authorities' enforcement efforts. Interestingly, however, we find
that 80% of the transfer pricing cases initiated by Denmark involve countries with similar or
higher tax rates than Denmark. The average tax differential (Danish tax rate minus counterpart
country rate) is -4.1% and statistically significant.
       One potential concern with this result is that the bulk of firms related to Danish companies
(parents, subsidiaries, or sister companies) might be located in high-tax countries. It is therefore
useful to consider how the geographical distribution of the Danish tax authority's transfer pricing
corrections would look like if audits were conducted randomly and the tax authority always found
something when doing an audit.11 To construct this benchmark we use the ORBIS database from
Bureau van Dijk, from which we can construct the distribution of tax differentials between all
Danish multinational entities (parents or subsidiaries) and their foreign related parties. Because
Denmark has a moderately low corporate tax rate (in the range of 22%-25% during the 2008­
2015 period), the average tax differential between Denmark and the countries where related
parties are located is negative (-2.3%). Interestingly, however, the average tax differential for
the cases pursued by the tax authority (-4.1%) is smaller than the random tax differential (-
2.3%). In other words, the Danish tax authority targets transactions involving high-tax countries
over-and-above the geography of intra-group links. We do a similar analysis relying on the total
inward and outward FDI income and obtain very similar results (see Appendix figure A1).
       The second result from our analysis is that overall, if fully realized, the transfer price cor-
rections of the Danish tax authority have an overall slightly negative effect on the global tax
bill of the targeted multinationals. By using statutory corporate tax rates (from KPMG), we
can estimate the final net effect of the Danish authorities' transfer pricing enforcement effort
  11
    Since the tax law can be hard to interpret and international tax enforcement efforts are asymmetric (they
can only raise revenue), even random audits would result in extra tax collection.


                                                     11
on the global tax bills of the targeted firms.12 The result are reported in the Panel C of Table
1. The Danish transfer price corrections increased tax payments in Denmark by e315 million
on average per year. But, if fully realized, they reduced tax payments abroad by e333 million,
implying a reduction in the global tax bill of the targeted multinationals of e19 million.13 In
comparison to the Danish tax base, the net impact is essentially zero, but the gross increase in
Danish tax revenue is of course still very real. That is, Danish transfer price corrections are not
impacted by their tax externality abroad.
       The ultimate impact of the initial tax adjustments on the tax bill of the multinationals op-
erating in Denmark depends on the outcome of the mutual agreement procedure (if a procedure
is started) and whether the correction is upheld in court (if the adjustment is appealed). Mu-
tual agreement procedures and court cases are lengthy affairs and the Danish tax authority has
not attempted to track the cases from start until final outcome. From interviews and internal
project plans we found that transfer price correction are very rarely overruled in court, but that
mutual agreement procedures usually result in a 30% reduction in the initial claim. To investi-
gate the final outcome of transfer price corrections, we received data on completed (non-zero)
mutual agreement procedures for the period 2008-2015. Due to the lengthy mutual agreement
procedures, these completed cases are for the most part likely initiated before the beginning of
our data set on transfer price corrections. Note that this data cannot be directly interpreted as
the final outcome of all initiated transfer price corrections, as firms could potentially repeal the
correction in court and firms may decide not to initiate a mutual agreement procedure following
a correction (this will in particular be the case if the taxes paid in the corresponding country
are negligible).The distribution of completed mutual agreement procedure cases is plotted in
Appendix Figure A2. We see that in the case of completed mutual agreement procedures more
than 90% of these had a negative tax differential, implying that the global tax burden on the firm
in scope fell. The average tax differential in completed mutual agreement cases is -4.5%, which
is slightly lower than the tax differential in the initial transfer price corrections. The mutual
agreement procedural data hence supports the results from the transfer price correction data:
that Danish international tax enforcement efforts systematically targets high-tax countries.
       Intuitively, firms trying to minimize their global tax bill may fight a transfer price correction
whenever this increases the global tax bill and be less resistant whenever it does not. The firm
  12
     For non-tax havens we use the official statutory corporate tax rates reported by KPMG (2018). For tax
havens we use the effective tax rates on profits shifted inwards computed in Tørsløv et. al (2018).
  13
     These results do not take into account the fact that some corrections might ultimately be successfully
overturned in court, since we do not observe the final court decisions. If we assume an eventual success rate of
70% uniform across cases, our results imply a decrease in the multinationals' tax bill of e12 million.


                                                      12
might resist a transfer price correction through a multitude of actions. Firstly, the firm can
deliver extensive transfer price documentation in favor of their current pricing, ensuring that
the transfer price correction never occurs. We do not have data on this, as we did not get access
to the transfer price documentation.14 Secondly, following a transfer price correction, the firm
might fight a transfer price correction by appealing it to the courts. We were able to obtain on
list on all initiated court appeals of Danish transfer pricing corrections that were initiated in
the period 2011-2016. We were, unfortunately, not able to link this data with the data set on
transfer price corrections. Furthermore, we do not know the final outcome of the cases (such as
whether the appeal was retracted). In the upper panel of Figure 3, we plot the distribution of
tax differentials in the initiated court cases. Interestingly, the distribution of court cases shifts to
the right both in comparison to the transfer price correction curve and the full distribution of tax
differential between Danish and foreign entities. This suggests that firms have a systematically
higher tendency to appeal a transfer price correction whenever this correction increases their
global tax bill. From interviews with Danish tax officials we learned that firms often initiate a
court case as a safety net while mutual agreement procedures are under way. This is to ensure
that they can appeal the correction in court if there is no corresponding correction abroad.
In the bottom panel of Figure 3, we try to correct for this behavior by restricting the sample
of court cases to those involving EU countries, in which the likelihood of a mutual agreement
procedure is high. In this case we see the distribution of tax differential shift further to the
right, which supports the notion that firms seem to respond to the tax-differential in their appeal
decisions.
       To summarize, despite evidence that there is intentional profit shifting to tax havens and
little intentional outward profit shifting to high-tax countries, we find that the Danish tax au-
thority corrects few transactions involving tax havens and focuses its resources on correcting
transactions involving high-tax countries. As Denmark has a moderate corporate tax rate (22%
since 2016), this finding implies that the majority of transfer price corrections initiated by Den-
mark involve countries with higher rates. Because most transfer price corrections initiated by
Denmark are followed by successful mutual agreement procedures, these corrections ultimately
lower the taxes paid by the targeted multinationals. This result is at odds with the popular
perception that the enforcement activities of tax authorities increase the taxes paid by multi-
  14
     As anecdotal evidence, we interviewed retired tax officials in the European Commission and they supported
the notion that firms would provide more extensive documentation for transactions with tax havens. An inter-
esting question for future research would be to study how the extent and quality of transfer price documentation
correlates with tax differentials.



                                                      13
nationals. Additionally, we find that firms are systematically more likely to appeal a correction
whenever the correction increases the global tax bill of the firm.

4.2    International Patterns in Transfer Price Corrections
We complement our analysis of Danish enforcement activities micro-data by analyzing three
cross-country aggregate data sources: the EY (2014) transfer price authority survey, Mutual
Agreement Procedure statistics from the European Union joint transfer pricing forum and the
OECD mutual agreement procedure statistics. These data are less detailed than the Danish
data, since they are not at the case-level but aggregated across country; but they cover a large
cross-section of countries.
   In 2014, the audit firm EY conducted a transfer price authority survey in which they asked 26
major economies which countries were the main focus of their transfer price correction efforts.
As shown by the top panel of Figure 4, throughout the world countries most often targeted
in transfer price disputes are high-tax countries. The United States comes first, followed by
Germany, and Japan. Among tax havens, only Switzerland and the Netherlands show up as
being sometimes targeted. Ireland (which according to Tørsløv et al. (2018) is the number one
profit shifting destination) is never named among the top-3 targets. Tax authorities also say
they look at "low-tax jurisdictions" in the EY survey, but with the exception of Switzerland
and the Netherlands, prominent tax havens are almost never named by tax authorities as being
involved in actual disputes. Although tax authorities might intend to go after tax havens, actual
transfer price corrections seem to mostly involve non-havens.
   Strikingly, if we restrict the EY sample to the countries that have mutual agreement pro-
cedures in place, then tax havens feature even more rarely as being targeted, as shown by the
bottom panel of Figure 4. The Cayman Islands, Singapore, Hong Kong and the British Vir-
gin Islands are never named among the top 3 targets, and the Netherlands and Switzerland
move further down the ranking. This finding is consistent with the notion that mutual agree-
ment procedures that facilitate dispute settlements between high-tax countries may crowd out
enforcement on tax havens, which we discuss in section 6.1.
   Figure 5 shows the distribution of active mutual agreement procedures under the Arbitrage
Convention in the European Union in 2011, the most recent year for which bilateral information
is available. These are cases where (i) a transfer price correction has been conducted by a EU
country, (ii) the targeted firm has asked the tax authority to initiate a mutual agreement
procedure to lower the tax base in the partner country, and (iii) the Arbitration Convention


                                               14
has been invoked, giving the tax authorities involved a 2-year deadline before an external panel
is brought in. Strikingly, we see that only 10.7% of mutual agreement procedures initiated
by high-tax EU countries involve an EU tax haven15 , while close to 90% involve EU high-tax
countries. One caveat to keep in mind here is that a company may not bother to request a
mutual agreement procedure if profits are being relocated away from a tax haven where the
firm's effective tax rate is close to zero. The EY and Danish data do not suffer from this
limitation, since they do not condition on the existence of a mutual agreement procedure.
      In an effort to curb profit shifting the OECD has started the "Inclusive framework on Base
Erosion and Profit Shifting". This framework consists of 137 member countries (including all
major tax havens) that all committed to publish statistics on the number of mutual agreement
procedures opened, closed, and the inventory of ongoing cases.16 In Figure 6, we plot the the
number of mutual agreement cases closed in 2018 by the target country (the country set to
give up tax base). Strikingly, only 8% of all mutual agreement procedures closed targeted tax
havens. Again, the number of cases against Ireland is remarkably low, just 8 cases closed in
2018. Similarly, Singapore, the World's second largest tax haven according to Tørsløv et al.
(2020) only closed 11 cases. Again there is the caveat that a company may not bother to request
a mutual agreement procedure if profits are being relocated away from a tax haven where the
firm is not paying any taxes. This may aid to explain why no mutual agreement procedures
where closed in prominent tax havens such as the Cayman Islands, Jersey and Isle of Man.
Nonetheless, the Danish data, EY data and mutual agreement procedure data all tell a very
similar story: the focus of international tax enforcement does not seem to be tax havens but
instead high-tax countries.


5       Explaining the Patterns in International Tax Enforce-
        ment: Benchmark Model
Why, if there is intentional (and by some estimates large) profit shifting to tax havens, do tax
authorities in high-tax countries focus on correcting non-intentional mistakes in transactions
involving high-tax countries? This section presents a model that can explain this puzzle.
      In our model, a tax authority in a high-tax country seeks to maximize the amount of rev-
enue collected from transfer price corrections. The tax authority faces a constraint on the
total amount of corrections that it can undertake in a given year. We assume there are two
 15
      As defined by Tørsløv et al. (2018): Belgium, Cyprus, Ireland, Malta, Netherlands and Luxembourg
 16
      The statistics follow agreed reporting framework and are made publicly available on the OECD webpage


                                                     15
representative firms: a non-tax planning firm and a tax planning firm
   The non-tax planning firm conducts intra-group transactions between subsidiaries located
in high-tax countries with identical tax rates. It has thus no incentive to shift profits between
subsidiaries. However, when setting its transfer prices the non-tax planning firm makes non-
intentional mistakes leading to transfer prices deviating from the arm's-length price on certain
transactions. These mistakes are not systematic: if these mistakes were left uncorrected, the
non-tax planning firm's aggregate income in each country would not deviate from the situation
where all transactions were priced according to the arm's-length principle. Nonetheless, the
tax authority of each high-tax country has an incentive to correct these mistakes, because
these corrections increase the tax base in the correcting country (at the expense of the partner
country). Corrections may fail with some likelihood if the firm challenges the correction in
court or during the mutual agreement procedures. A successful transfer price correction of a
transaction between the two high-tax countries will not affect the global tax payments of the
firm.
   The tax planning firm seeks to shift as much income as possible from high-tax countries to
low-tax countries. The firm does this by mispricing an internal service transaction between the
high-tax country and the low-tax country. The optimal behavior of the tax planning firm is to
always choose a transfer price that maximizes the amount of profit book in the tax haven but
does not get corrected. That is, the tax-planning firm will shift profits to the tax haven up to
the point where for the high-tax country's tax authority, the marginal yield of correcting the
non-tax planning firm and the tax planning firm is the same. As mutual agreement procedures
facilitate correcting the non-tax planning firm, such procedures increase the yield of correcting
the non-tax planning firm. When the yield of correcting the non-tax planning firm increases this
in turn allows the tax-planning firm to shift more income to the low-tax country without being
corrected. As a result, mutual agreement procedures can increase intentional profit shifting
to tax havens, by shifting the resources of the tax authority from intentional profit shifting
to unintentional mistakes. Similarly, we find that country-by-country minimum taxation can
lower the incentive for tax authorities to pursue profits reported in tax havens and hence increase
intentional profit shifting.
   We extend the model to allow high-tax authorities to invest in obtaining revenue from other
high-tax countries through transfer price corrections. We find that high-tax countries will enter
into an arm's race and invest in relocating tax bases from each other despite this having no
effect on global tax revenue--hence leading to a socially sub-optimal equilibrium.


                                                16
   Additionally, similar to the findings of Becker and Davies (2014), we find that the tax-
planning firm will incur large legal costs to fight the tax authority in the high-tax county and
hence disincentivize the authority to correct its transactions with the low-tax country.

5.1     Setup of the Model
We begin with the simplest setup: A tax authority in a high-tax country deciding whether to
correct transactions with another high-tax country or to correct a transaction with a low-tax
country.


The model consists of three agents:

  1. A non-tax planning firm consisting of 2 entities: one in high-tax country H1 and the other
       in high-tax country H2.

  2. A tax authority operating in high-tax country H1.

  3. A tax planning firm consisting of 2 entities: one in high-tax country H1 and the other in
       low-tax country L.

The choice variables of the agents are:

  1. The tax planning firm decides how to set the transfer price pL on its internal transaction
       between the high-tax country H1 and the low-tax country L.

  2. Country H1 decides which transfer prices to correct.

The exogenous variables of the model are:

  1. pa , the arm's length price (constant for simplicity)

  2. N , the continuum of services imported by the non-tax planning firm in country H1 from
       its affiliate in country H2.

  3. tH 1 , tH 2 , and tL , the corporate tax rates in countries H1, H2 and L, respectively. We
       assume that tH 1 = tH 2 >> tL .

  4.   i   = pH    a
              i - p , the accidental transfer price deviation on transactions between the two

       high-tax countries. We assume these mistakes are unknown and unintentionally made by
       the non-tax planning firm, but known by the tax authority. Further, we assume these
       mistakes follow a uniform distribution with standard deviation b and mean zero.

                                               17
      ¯ , the resource constraint facing the tax authority in country H1.
   5. N

Variables that are exogenous in the basic model, but later made endogenous:

   1. H , the ease of doing transfer price corrections between the two high-tax countries H1 and
         H2.

   2. L , the ease of country H1 doing a transfer price correction involving the low-tax country
         L.

5.2       The Non-Tax Planning Firm
The non-tax planning firm has an affiliate in country H1 which is importing a continuum of
                                                                                                    N
services indexed by i from its affiliate in country H2 at the price pH
                                                                     i ; by definition             0
                                                                                                        i di = N .
An increase in any of the transfer prices applied will increase the taxable income of the firm in
country H2 and lower the taxable income in country H1 by the same amount, leaving the global
income of the firm unchanged. For simplicity, we further assume that tH 1 = tH 2 , such that the
global tax bill of the firm is also unaffected by the transfer price. That is, an increase in pH
                                                                                               i by

1 will lower tax receipts in country H1 by tH 1 but increase the tax receipts in country H2 by
tH 2 = tH 1 and hence leave global tax receipts unchanged.


       Lemma 1: As tH 2 = tH 1 , a transfer price correction of transactions between the two high-
tax countries does not effect global tax receipts.


       According to prevailing tax rules, the non-tax planning firm should price its intra-group
transactions at the arm's-length price pa , which is for simplicity assumed to be constant across
services. However, due to the lack of tax consequences of the transfer price chosen, the firm
is inattentive and does not always apply the arm's-length principle.17 This leads the non-tax
planning firm to accidentally mis-price its transactions by          i   = pH    a
                                                                            i - p . We assume that these

mistakes are uniformly distributed around the correct transfer price such that                 i    U (-b, b)
          N
and      0    i   di = 0. If all transactions between the two high-tax countries where priced correctly
                                                       N
the total value of internal imports would be          0
                                                           pa di = pa . If the non-tax planning firm was
  17
    This assumption can be justified by assuming a fixed cost of knowing the actual arm's-length price pa
or an increased focus on non-tax considerations. Non-tax considerations relates to efficiency transfer pricing
(as generally taught in Management Accounting) -- that is, ensuring transfer pricing reflects the needs and
opportunity costs of the firm - e.g. an optimal transfer price on head quarter services might be zero if a firm
has idle resources in the head quarter. See Nielsen and Raimondos-Moller (2008) for a fuller discussion of the
trade-off between tax and non-tax motivated transfer pricing.

                                                      18
                                                                     N
never corrected the total value of internal imports would be        0
                                                                         pa -   i   di = pa . This implies
that while individual transactions between the two high-tax countries may be mis-priced there
is no aggregate deviation from the arm's-length principle.


   Lemma 2: If the transfer prices of the non-tax planning firm are not corrected by the
tax authorities, there will be no aggregate deviation from the arm's-length principle as arm's-
length price deviations on individual transactions between the two high-tax countries are non-
systematic.



5.3    The Tax Authority in Country H1
We first consider the behavior of the tax authority in country H1 and assume that it seeks to
maximize the tax revenue collected from transfer price corrections. We additionally assume that
the tax authority has a limited amount of resources, which implies that following through with
one transfer price correction lowers the amount of resources available to pursue another case.
We model this constraint simply by assuming that the tax authority can do a maximum of N    ¯
                                ¯ <1.
corrections per year, where 0 < N
   Corrections may ultimately be invalidated or reduced in the context of a mutual agreement
procedures and/or in court. We allow the expected decrease in the initial correction to depend
on the partner country. We let (1 - H ) denote the expected decrease in a correction of the
non-tax planning firm and (1 - L ) denote the expected decrease in a correction of the tax
planning firm. A plausible hypothesis is that the tax-planning firm will resist corrections that
move taxable income from the low-tax country to the high-tax country (as these corrections
increase its global tax payments), implying that L < H . This assumption, however, is not
necessary to show Proposition 1 below.

5.4    Correcting Mistakes Only
We begin by disregarding the tax-planning firm and describe a situation where the tax authority
only corrects the mistakes of the non-tax planning firm. The expected yield to the tax authority
of correcting service transaction i of the non-tax planning firm is tH 1 H i . For any z  [-b, b] we
denote the number of service transactions for which     i   > z as F (z ) and following the properties
of the uniform distribution we note that:




                                                19
                                               b-z
                                                F (z ) =                                   (1)
                                                2b
   The tax authority will correct the N¯ largest mistakes ( i ) of the non-tax planning firm
                            ¯ cases. We let N denote the the N
conditional on i > 0 in all N                                   ¯ 'th largest mistake and note
that:

                                    N  b- N       ¯ => N = b - 2bN  ¯
                              F(        )=    =N                                               (2)
                                         2b
    This implies that the correction of the N ¯ 'th largest mistake of the non-tax planning firm
                                             ¯ ). If Y N < 0 the tax authority will not correct all
will generate a yield of Y N = tH 1 H (b - 2bN
¯ corrections (as doing so would reduce the taxable income of country H1) but only correct the
N
number of transactions for which Y N > 0. From equation 2 it follows that:
                                             ¯ ) > 0 => N
                               tH 1 H (b - 2bN           ¯>1                             (3)
                                                              2
   The tax authority will hence correct N  ¯ transactions unless N
                                                                 ¯ > 1 in which case the tax
                                                                      2

authority will only correct   1
                              2
                                  transactions. At the optimum the expected marginal yield (Y  ) of
correcting the non-tax planning firm alone is:
                                         
                                                       ¯      ¯       1
                                         tH 1 H (b - 2bN ) if N <
                                                                      2
                                  Y =                                                           (4)
                                                                 ¯
                                                                      1
                                         0                    if N
                                         
                                                                      2


5.5     Intentional Profit Shifting in Equilibrium
The tax-planning firm imports one service from its affiliate in the low-tax country L at transfer
price pL . The goal of the tax planning firm is to maximize pL such that it transfers as much
income as possible from the high tax country to the low tax country. The expected yield to
the tax authority of correcting the tax planning firm is tH 1 L (pL - pa ). The tax-planning firm
knows the expected marginal yield of correcting the non-tax planning firm (Y  ) and will hence
ensure that the tax authority does not correct pL by making it more attractive to correct the
marginal transaction of the non-tax planning firm. The optimal transfer price pL
                                                                                thus satisfies:



                                             Y  = tH 1 L (pL  a
                                                            -p )                                (5)

                                               
                                                         ¯      ¯     1
                                                L (b - 2bN ) if N <
                                                H
                                                                      2
                                               
                                  pL  a
                                    -p =                                                        (6)
                                                                 ¯
                                                                      1
                                                  0           if N
                                               
                                                                      2


                                                      20
                                                   ¯ >
      If the tax authority has sufficient capacity N                 1
                                                                         the tax authority can pursue all cases
                                                                     2

that increase the taxable income of country H1 and there is hence no need for the tax authority
in country H1 to prioritize between cases (they just pursue them all). In such a case the tax
planning firm will not be able to shift any profits to the low-tax country. In practice, we know
that the tax authority have to do some prioritization and cannot pursue all cases so we focus
                                                                            ¯ < 1 .18 In this case
on the situation where the tax authority is sufficiently constrained, i.e., N   2

we have the following Proposition:


                                                                       ¯ <
      Proposition 1: If the tax authority is sufficiently constrained (N                        1
                                                                                                  ),   the amount of
                                                                                                2

intentionally shifted profits to the low-tax country (pL   a
                                                        - p ) depends positively on b (the size

of the mistakes made by the non-tax planning firm), negatively on L (the ability to correct
the tax-planning firm) and positively on H (the ability to correct the mistakes of the non-tax
planning firm).


      Proposition 1 shows how corrections of of non-intentional profit shifting crowds out correc-
tions of intentional profit shifting by the tax-planning firm. The larger the mistakes of the
non-tax planning firm (b ) and the larger the success rate of correcting these mistakes (H /L ),
less resources will be devoted to correct intentional profit shifting and, as a result, the higher
the transfer price deviation pL   a
                               - p will be.


5.6       Global Maximum Tax Collection vs Equilibrium
What would be the optimal allocation of resources if the tax authority aimed to maximize global
tax collections? As the two high-tax countries have identical tax rates, a transfer price correc-
tion between these two countries does not impact global tax collections (lemma 1 ) Furthermore,
                                                  ¯ < 1 ), corrections of intentional profit shifting
If the tax authority is sufficiently constrained (N              2

to the low-tax country will be crowded out by corrections between the two high-tax countries in
equilibrium (proposition 1 ). From lemma 1 and proposition 1 it hence follows that corrections
of transactions between the two high-tax countries (which in isolation have a neutral impact on
global tax collections) lowers global tax collections by replacing corrections of intentiona profit
shifting (that generate a global tax surplus).


                                                                       ¯ < 1 ), corrections of in-
      Proposition 2: If the tax authority is sufficiently constrained (N   2
 18
      In reality tax authorities only have capacity to audit a tiny fraction of transactions.



                                                          21
tentional profit shifting to the low-tax country will be crowded out by corrections between the two
high-tax countries in equilibrium. As a result, tax collections fall below the global maximum


    Proposition 2 is the result of the tax authority failing to take into account the tax externality
that occurs in the correction of transfer prices. That is, the tax authority fails to take into
account the reduction in foreign tax collection that occurs whenever it corrects transfer prices.
By failing to internalize this tax externality the tax authority chooses to conduct transfer price
corrections that have zero impact on the multinational firms global tax bill instead of prioritizing
intentional profit shifting. This situation is pareto-inferior as all countries could be made better
of by the tax authority only correcting the intentional profit shifting and sharing the additional
tax receipts.


6     Extensions of the Model
6.1    Potential Adverse Effects of Improving Mutual Agreement Pro-
       cedures
Mutual agreement procedures (MAP) facilitates an agreement between tax authorities, such
that the a transfer price correction in one country is met by an equal reduction in the tax base
of the counterpart country. This matters a lot when the counterpart country has a high tax rate
and matters less if the the counterpart country has a low tax rate. In the extreme case where
the counterpart country has a zero tax rate there is no point of initiating dispute resolution, as
there is no tax consequence of lowering the tax base in a country with a zero tax rate. Hence,
by construction, improvements in the mutual agreement procedure incentivizes corrections of
transactions between high-tax countries more than it incentivizes corrections involving a low-
tax country. This is consistent with the empirical findings from section 3.2, that the recent
mutual agreement procedure drive led to a marked increase in procedures targeting high-tax
countries but only a marginal increase in procedures targeting tax havens. We can simplistically
model the impact of the mutual agreement procedures as an increase in the relative yield from
correcting transactions between high-tax countries compared to transactions with the low-tax
                               H
country, i.e. an increase in   L
                                 .   It then follows that:


    Corollary 1.1: Potential adverse effects of improving mutual agreement procedures. If we
                                                                                       H
interpret an improvement of the mutual agreement procedures as an increase in          L
                                                                                           it follows
from proposition 1 that improving mutual agreement procedures will increase the amount of

                                                    22
profits shifted to the low-tax country--insofar as the tax authority is sufficiently capacity con-
strained (N ¯ < 1 ).
                  2



       By increasing the yield of correcting transactions with high-tax countries, mutual agreement
procedures increase the opportunity cost of correcting transactions with low-tax countries. The
shift of resources by the tax authority allows the tax-planning firm to shift more income to
tax havens. This implies that recent policies aimed at strengthening mutual agreement proce-
dures may have increased the scope for intentional and tax-motivated profit shifting and that
the current push for mandatory dispute settlement may further increase tax-motivated profit
shifting.

6.2       Potential Adverse Effects of Country-By-Country Minimum Tax-
          ation
A large number of countries have implemented country-by-country minimum taxation through
controlled foreign corporation (CFC) rules such as the US GILTI regime.19 The OECD sec-
retariat is currently pushing a global roll-out of such policy through the Global Anti-Profit
Shifting proposal (OECD 2019b). Under country-by-country minimum taxation a foreign sub-
sidiary facing tax rate below a set minimum tax rate t < tmin will be taxed on the residual
difference t - tmin in the home country.
       To understand the potential impact on the incentives facing the tax authority we now in-
troduce country-by-country minimum taxation in country H1. To begin with we assume that
the the minimum tax rate is above the tax rate in the low-tax country (tL < tmin ) but below
the rate in the high-tax country H2 (tH > tmin ) and that both multinationals have their parent
in country H1. These assumptions characterizes the current country-by-country minimum tax
rules already implemented and the OECD (2019b) proposal (see section 7). In this case profits
reported by the tax-planning firm will already be subject to some taxation in country H1 (taxed
at tmin - tL ) while none of the reported profits in country H2 are subject to taxation in country
H1. If the tax authority in country H1 was to correct a transfer price deviation the expected
value under country-by-country minimum taxation now falls to (tH 1 - tmin )L (pL - pa ), which
is a fraction 1 - tmin of the expected value without minimum taxation. Country-by-country
minimum taxation in this case lowers the expected value to the tax authority of correcting
the tax planning firm. In turn this allows the tax planning firm to shift more profits to the
  19
    https://www.irs.gov/newsroom/irs-and-treasury-issue-guidance-related-to-global-intangible-low-taxed-
income-gilti


                                                     23
low-tax country, as the tax authority will be less prone to correcting these transactions. The
new equilibrium level of intentional profit shifting becomes

                                                          ¯      ¯
                                           H                           1
                                      L ·(1-tmin ) (b - 2bN ) if N <
                                                                       2
                          pL  a
                            -p =                                                               (7)
                                                                  ¯
                                                                       1
                                        0                      if N
                                     
                                                                       2

   Intentional profit shifting to the low-tax country hence increases by a factor of 1 - tmin
if the tax authority is sufficiently constrained. Of course this result changes dramatically if
the minimum tax is set equal to the tax rate in country H1 (world wide taxation), such that
tmin = tH 1 = tH 2 in which case the tax planning firm has no incentive to shift profits (as they
will be taxed at the same rate everywhere).


   Proposition 3: The existence of country-by-country minimum taxation, which is bind-
ing for the low-tax country and non-binding in the high-tax country, will increase intentional
profit shifting in equilibrium -- insofar as the tax authority is sufficiently capacity constrained
 ¯ < 1/2)
(N


   In the following we will, for the sake of simplicity, ignore the existence of country-by-country
minimum taxation.

6.3    Tactical Use of Transfer Price Documentation and Legal Pres-
       sure
So far the tax-planning firm has only chosen the tax-minimizing transfer price pL
                                                                                 (and the non-

tax-planning firm has not chosen anything). We now introduce the option of investing in higher-
quality transfer price documentation, applying legal pressure (e.g., through court procedures)
and creating a veil of opacity (e.g., through limited liability companies). The simplest way to
model this is by making i endogenous such that firms can lower the chance of a successful
transfer price corrections by incurring legal costs C . We assume that:

                                        i      2 i
                                          < 0, 2 > 0                                           (8)
                                        C      C

As there is no benefit to the non-tax planning firm of lowering the likelihood of a transfer price
corrections, the non-tax-planning firm will not incur any legal costs (C = 0). By contrast,
following proposition 1 the tax-planning firm can increase its tax benefit from transfer mis-
pricing by lowering the likelihood of a transfer price correction as long as the tax authority is

                                                24
sufficiently resource constrained. The maximization problem for the tax-planning firm in this
case becomes (here using eq. 7):

                                          
                                                              (tH -tL )H          ¯) - C      ¯<   1
                                          M axwrt
                                                         C        L
                                                                         (b   - 2bN        if N    2
   M axwrt   C   (tH - tL ) · (pL  a
                                 -p ) =                                                                (9)
                                          M ax
                                                    wrt C    [(0 - C ]                        ¯
                                                                                           if N    1
                                                                                                   2

                                                                                      ¯ < 1 ) the
   From eq. 9 and 8 it follows that if the tax authority is sufficiently constrained (N   2

tax-planning firm will incur legal costs up to the point in which the marginal benefit of distract-
ing the tax authority equals the marginal cost -(tH - tL )H (b - 2bN   ¯ ) = C => C > 0. That
                                                                                       L

is, insofar the tax authority is sufficiently resource constrained, the tax-planning firm will invest
in making it difficult to correct its intentional profit shifting. This implies that, all other things
equal, it will be more costly to the tax authority to correct the tax-planning firms intentional
profit shifting than correcting unintentional mistakes by the non-tax planning firm. As a result,
the tax authority will be less likely to target the tax-planing firm in transfer pricing corrections
and profit shifting increases (following proposition 1).


   Proposition 4: In equilibrium the tax planning firm will incur legal costs C > 0 to dissuade
the tax authority to correct its intentional profit shifting -- insofar the tax authority is sufficiently
constrained (N¯ < 1/2). This increases profit shifting in equilibrium.


6.4    High-Tax Countries Arms Race
We now introduce the tax authority of high-tax country H2 with an analogue objective of
                                                                            ¯H 1 , N
country H1. We allow the tax authorities to have differing capacity and let N      ¯H 2 denote the
constraint in country H1 and H2, respectively. We continue to assume that the tax authorities
are constrained to the point where N¯H 1 , N
                                           ¯H 2 < 1 . Without loss of generality simplicity we
                                                  2

assume that the only multinational operating in country H2 is the non-tax planning firm. While
the tax authority in country H1 wants to correct the mistakes of the non-tax planning firm
whenever the transfer price is too high (      i   = pH    a
                                                      i - p > 0) the tax authority in country H2

faces the opposite incentive (as the host of the exporting affiliate). Its tax base increases with
pH                                                                     H    a
 i and hence it will aim to correct transfer prices that are too low (pi - p < 0). We allow
                                                                                    H1
the enforcement capacities (proxied by H ) of the 2 tax authority to differ. We let H  denote
                                                        H2
the success rate of the tax authority in country H1 and H  denote the success rate of the tax
authority in country H2.

                                                    25
   Remembering that the number of services for which i > z is given by eq. 1, it follows that
                       ¯H 1 largest corrections of the non-tax planning firm in country H1 is:
the total value of the N

                            ¯H 1
                            N
                                                                     N¯H 1
                 H1
           t H 1 H                                   H1
                                   b - 2bx dx = tH 1 H  bx - bx2                    H1
                                                                             = tH 1 H    ¯H 2 - 2bN
                                                                                                  ¯2 )
                                                                                       (bN                  (10)
                                                                     0                              H1
                        0
                               ¯H 2 largest corrections of the non-tax planning firm in country
   Similarly, the value of the N
H2 is:

                       ¯H 2
                       N
                                                                      N¯H 2
     -        H2
         tH 2 H                                    H2
                              -(b - 2bx) dx = tH 2 H  bx - bx2                       H2
                                                                              = tH 2 H    ¯H 2 - 2bN
                                                                                                   ¯H
                                                                                        (bN          2
                                                                                                       2)   (11)
                                                                      0
                   0

   The total direct impact of all transfer price corrections on the tax base of each country is the
sum of each country's own corrections less the corrections of the partner country. Additionally,
as we have assumed that tH 1 = tH 2 the direct net impact on global tax revenue of any transfer
price correction between the two high-tax countries is always zero. Finally, following corollary
1.1, global tax collection fall whenever the tax authority in country H1 corrects transactions
with country H2, as these corrections crowds out the enforcement of the tax-planning firm.
   We now allow the success rate of each tax authority to be the result of an investment in tax
capacity of I (human capital, technology, etc.):

                                                H1
                                              H                  2 H
                                                                   H1
                                                    > 0,               <0                                   (12)
                                              I H 1             2I H 1

                                      H2
                                   H             2 H H2
                                          > 0 ,          <0                              (13)
                                   dI H 2       d2 I H 2
   Where IH 1 is the investment made by country H1 and IH 2 is the investment made by country
H2. From a social point of view any investment in conducting transfer price corrections between
the two high-tax countries is sub-optimal. In the case of country H2 correcting country H1, these
corrections have no impact on global tax payments and there carry a social cost but no social
value. In the case of country H1 correcting country H2, these corrections in fact lower global tax
payments by crowding out enforcement of transactions to the low-tax country -- hence allowing
the tax-planning firm to push the envelope further and shift more profits. However, each tax
authority simply tries to maximize the sum of corrections and in a Nash-equilibrium both tax
authorities will therefore invest in H up to the point where the marginal (private) return equals
the marginal cost.

                                             H1
                                            H            ¯H 1 - 2bN
                                                                  ¯2
                                             H1
                                                = t H 1 bN          H1                                      (14)
                                            I

                                                           26
                                    H2
                                   H            ¯H 2 - 2bN
                                                         ¯2
                                    H1
                                       = t H 2 bN          H2                                  (15)
                                   I
   Several interesting conclusions are visible from eq. 14 and 15. First, both high-tax countries
will invest a positive amount in obtaining revenue from each other by correcting mistakes in
a Nash-equilibrium--leading to a sub-optimal outcome from a global perspective. Second, all
                                                                ¯H 2 will invest more in ob-
other things equal, the tax authority with the highest capacity N
taining relocating the base from the other high-tax country and as a result obtain a higher
share of total tax revenue. This second point has important implications when considering
the dynamic of transfer price corrections between high- and low-income countries. Concretely,
one might fear that resource-constrained tax-authorities in developing countries cannot match
the efforts of high-income countries and as a result lose in this (non-tax driven) game for profits.


   Proposition 4: In a Nash-equilibrium, both high-tax countries will invest in relocating some
tax base from away from the other country, despite this having no effect on global tax revenue--
hence leading to a socially sub-optimal equilibrium. All other things equal, the tax authority with
the highest tax capacity will end up obtaining the most tax revenue.

6.5    An Alternative Explanation: Tax Authority Lowering Effective
       Taxation To Attract Domestic Investment
Another explanation for the observed patterns in transfer price enforcement (i.e., the lack of
enforcement against tax havens) is that tax authorities may not really be interested in en-
forcing taxes on multinationals. With territorial tax systems, lax enforcement can encourage
domestic investment by lowering effective marginal tax rates on multinationals. The tax author-
ities of high-tax countries might perceive that profit shifting and capital mobility are strongly
substitutable--with less shifting there would be more outflows of tangible capital, with poten-
tially adverse effects on wages and employment--and rationally chose to limit enforcement for
that reason (see e.g Hong and Smart (2010) for a formalization of the argument that individual
governments might welcome tax havens). From the viewpoint of the individual tax authority
you can increase the tax revenue (in your country) while keeping constant (or even lowering)
the excess burden of taxation. Following, for example, the theoretical framework for optimal
tax administration of Keen and Slemrod (2017) the tax authority should prioritize cases that
would lower the tax burden of the firm--i.e., the tax authority should, ceteris paribus, chose
cases involving high-tax countries as the corresponding party.


                                                27
7       Conclusion
This paper investigates the enforcement of taxes on multinational companies. Empirically, the
available evidence suggests that tax authorities in high-tax countries seem to spend the bulk
of their resources correcting non-intentional deviations from arm's length pricing occurring in
transactions between high tax countries, while spending a relatively small fraction of their
resources correcting transactions involving tax havens. We show how this behavior can be
explained by the incentives that tax authorities face. Tax authorities do not internalize the
externality of their transfer price corrections on foreign nations. We further show how this
current incentive structure can lead to a socially sub-optimal arms race, where high-tax countries
spend resources on stealing a bit of revenue from each other with little impact on the global
tax bill of multinationals. Meanwhile, tax-planning firms reap the benefits of distracted tax
authorities by shifting more profits to tax havens.
      Our results suggest that current policy efforts aimed at encouraging international dispute
resolution settlements might exacerbate profit shifting to tax havens. The OECD has launched
an initiative to curb base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS). Action 14 of this plan calls for more
effective dispute resolution mechanisms (OECD, 2015). 135 member countries of the inclusive
framework have committed to implement a minimum standard to strengthen the effectiveness
and efficiency of mutual agreement procedures.20 Moreover, the current OECD secretariat BEPS
2.0 proposal suggests introducing mandatory dispute settlement mechanisms: `it would be es-
sential to consider existing and possible new approaches to dispute prevention and resolution,
including mandatory and effective dispute prevention and resolution mechanisms to ensure the
elimination of protracted disputes and double taxation ' (OECD 2019, pp.16). What this exactly
entails is unclear, but the EU's Arbitrage Convention, where an external panel may ultimately
decide the appropriate transfer price, may be the model OECD wish to copy. The European
Union does not only promote dispute resolution through the Arbitrage Convention, but addi-
tionally through the joint transfer pricing where the ease of disputes is continuously improved.21
But the easier it is for, say, the French tax authority to relocate profits booked in Germany,
the less resources France may devote to chasing the profits shifted to Bermuda--potentially in-
creasing shifting to low-tax locales. The efforts at the OECD and the EU in promoting dispute
resolution may as a result have the adverse effect of incentivizing corrections between high-tax
 20
   https://www.oecd.org/tax/beps/beps-actions/action14/
 21
   https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/business/company-tax/transfer-pricing-eu-context/
joint-transfer-pricing-forum_en



                                                28
countries and as a result may crowd out corrections of intentional profit shifting.
       We also highlight the potential adverse effects of country-by-country minimum taxation
currently being pushed by the OECD secretariat in the Global Anti-Base Erosion proposal
OECD (2019b) and already implemented in a wide range of countries.22 . The issue is that
the country-by-country minimum rate already implemented in some countries are commonly
substantially below the high-tax country average tax rate as is the case for the minimum tax
discussed in the OECD.23 This implies that under country-by-country minimum taxation, tax
authorities will find that the benefit of correcting transfer prices are lower in cases involving
tax havens. Say that a host country with a tax rate of 25% has a minimum tax rate of foreign
entities of 12% and that a tax-planning firm has shifted their income to Ireland paying an
effective tax rate of 0%. In this case, bringing e1 of profits back to the home country from
Ireland will only create a net revenue increase corresponding to the tax rate differential 25%-
12% -- whereas the reward of bringing e1 from a high-tax country will be the full 25%. Hence
low country-by-country minimum taxes may suffer from the fallacy of redirecting the attention
of tax authorities away from intentional profit shifting towards unintentional mistakes. The
impact of introducing a high minimum tax (at the level of the home economy) are very different
as they could eliminate the incentive to shift profits.
       As with other issues in international taxation, a coordinated effort (such as a federal transfer
pricing unit at the EU level) could go along way towards fixing the problem. Another potential
solution involves abandoning the transfer pricing principle. A number of proposals for fun-
damental reforms that would make profit shifting harder have recently been formulated, for
instance the adoption of a destination-based corporate cash flow tax (Auerbach, 2010) or the
use of a formulary apportionment system (e.g., Avi-Yonah and Clausing, 2007). Alternatively,
a combination of reforms could be imposed; such as source taxation (world-wide taxation) for
domiciled firms combined with formula apportionment for foreign subsidiaries (see Saez and
Zucman 2019 for a discussion of this). This paper suggests that these reforms might save public
and corporate resources by freeing resources currently used for wasteful tax enforcement.




  22
     Most recently the US GILTI rules resembles minimum taxation rules. See https://taxfoundation.org/
cfc-rules-around-the-world for an overview
  23
     The global average corporate tax rate in 2019 was 24% (KPMG Corporate Tax Tables) but the OECD 2019b
discusses examples of a 15% minimum tax rate. US GILTI implies a minimum tax rate of less than 13% on
some types of profits and lower still for others. UK, Spanish and South African CFC rules kicks in at 75% of
the home country tax rates -- Chinese and French CFC rules kicks in at 50% of the home country rate
References
Auerbach, Alan J. 2010. "A Modern Corporate Tax." The Hamilton Project/Center for
American Progress, December.
Alvarez-Martinez, M., Barrios, S., d'Andria, D., Gesualdo, M., Nicod`             eme, G. and
Pycroft, J. 2018. "How Large is the Corporate Tax Base Erosion and Profit Shifting? A
General Equilibrium Approach".
Avi-Yonah, Reuven S., and Kimberly A. Clausing. 2007. "Reforming Corporate Taxa-
tion in a Global Economy: A Proposal to Adopt Formulary Apportionment", Hamilton Paper
Discussion project 2007-08.
Becker, Johannes and Ronald B. Davies. 2014. "A Negotiation-Based Model of Tax-
Induced Transfer Pricing". CESifo working paper #4892.
Becker, J., Davies, R.B. and Jakobs, G. 2017. "The economics of advance pricing agree-
ments". Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 134, pp.255-268.
Becker, J., Johannesen, N. and Riedel, N. 2018. "Taxation and the allocation of risk
inside the multinational firm".
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter K. Schott. 2006. "Transfer
Pricing by U.S. Based Multinational Firms". NBER working paper #12493.
Clausing, Kimberly A. 2003. "Tax-motivated transfer pricing and US intrafirm trade prices".
Journal of Public Economics, 87: 2207­2223.
Clausing, Kimberly A. 2016. "The Effect of Profit Shifting on the Corporate Tax Base in
the United States and Beyond." National Tax Journal, 69(4), 905­934.
Cristea, Anca D. and Daniel X. Nguyen. 2016. "Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms:
New Evidence from Foreign Firm Ownerships." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
8(3): 170­202.
DSA -- Danish State Auditors (Rigsrevisionen). 2014. "Beretning til Statsrevisorerne
om SKATs indsats p° atransfer pricingomr°
                                        adet". available online at http://www.rigsrevisionen.
dk/
Davies, R. B., Martin, J., Parenti, M., and Toubal, F. 2018. "Knocking on tax haven's
door: Multinational firms and transfer pricing". Review of Economics and Statistics, 100(1),
120-134.
Devereux, Michael P. and John Vella. 2017. "Implications of digitalization for interna-
tional corporate tax reform." Oxford University Center for Business Taxation Working paper
17/07.
Dharmapala, Dhammika. 2014. "What Do We Know About Base Erosion and Profit Shift-
ing? A Review of the Empirical Literature."" CESIFO Working Paper #4612.
Dowd, Tim, Paul Landefeld, and Anne Moore. 2017. "Profit Shifting of U.S. Multina-
tionals." Journal of Public Economics, 148: 1­13
EY. 2014. "2014 global transfer pricing tax authority survey" available online at https://www.
ey.com/
Haufler, Andreas, Mohammed Mardancd and Dirk Schindler. 2018. "Double tax
discrimination to attract FDI and fight profit shifting: The role of CFC rules." Journal of
International Economics, 114: 24­43.

                                            30
Hebous, S. and Johannesen, N. 2015. "At your service! The role of tax havens in interna-
tional trade with services".
Heckemeyer, Jost H., and Michael Overesch. 2013. "Multinationals? Profit Response to
Tax Differentials: Effect Size and Shifting Channels." ZEW Discussion Papers 13-045.
Hines, James R. Jr and Eric Rice. 1994. "Fiscal Paradise: Foreign Tax Havens and
American Business." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(1): 149-182.
Hong, Qing, and Michael Smart. 2010. "In Praise of Tax Havens: International Tax
Planning and Foreign Direct Investment." European Economic Review, 54(1): 82­95.
Huizinga, Harry, and Luc Laeven. 2008a. "International profit shifting within multina-
tionals: a multi- country perspective." Journal of Public Economics, vol. 92, 1164­1182.
Huizinga, Harry, Luc Laeven, and Gaetan Nicodeme. 2008b. "Capital Structure and
International Debt Shifting," Journal of Financial Economics, 88 (1), 80­118.
Kanbur, Ravi and Keen, Michael. 1993. "Jeux Sans Fronti`       eres: Tax Competition and Tax
Coordination When Countries Differ in Size." American Economic Review, 83(4): 877­892.
Liu, L., Schmidt-Eisenlohr, T. and Guo, D. 2017. "International transfer pricing and tax
avoidance: Evidence from linked trade-tax statistics in the UK." FRB International Finance
Discussion Paper, (1214).
Nielsen, S., and P. Raimondos-Moller (2008). `Taxes and Decision Rights in Multinationals'.
Journal of Public Economic Theory, 10(2), 245­58.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. n.d. "OECD MAP Statis-
tics" OECD Publishing. Link
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2010. "OECD Transfer
Pricing Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and Tax Administrations 2010." OECD Pub-
lishing.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2015. "Base Erosion and
Profit Shifting, Final Report" OECD Publishing.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2019a. "Public consulta-
tion document Secretariat Proposal for a "Unified Approach" under Pillar One" OECD Pub-
lishing.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2019b. "Public consulta-
tion document Global Anti-Base Erosion Proposal ("GloBE") - Pillar Two" OECD Publishing.
PWC. 2017. "Improved dispute solution within the EU regarding double taxation", available
online at https://blogg.pwc.se/taxmatters-en/
Slemrod, Joel and John D. Wilson. 2009. "Tax competition with parasitic tax havens."
Journal of Public Economics, 93, 1261­1270.
Tørsløv, T.R., Wier, L.S. and Zucman, G. 2018. "The missing profits of nations (No.
w24701)". National Bureau of Economic Research.
UNCTAD 2015. "World Investment Report: Reforming International Investment Gover-
nance". UNCTAD.
Wier, Ludvig 2020. "Tax-motivated transfer mispricing in South Africa: Direct evidence
using transaction data". Journal of Public Economics, (184)
Zucman, Gabriel. 2014. "Taxing Across Borders: Tracking Personal Wealth and Corporate
Profits," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(4), 121­148.

                                            31
Saez, Emmanuel and Zucman, Gabriel. 2019. "The Triumph of Injustice: How The Rich
Dodge Taxes and How To Make Them Pay" W.W. Norton & Company




                                       32
     Table 1: Danish profit shifting and transfer price corrections per year (2008, 2014, 2015)

            Table 1: Danish estimated profit shifting and corrections per year (2008, 2014, 2015)
                                                              [1]             [2]                [3]
  Panel a: Tax-motivated profit shifting                All countries   Non-tax havens       Tax havens
  Amounts ( , Millions)                                      2215            -455              2670
  % of tax base                                               6%             -2%                8%
  Panel b: Transfer price corrections
  Corrections (# of cases)                                                         62                        44                       18
  Corrections ( , Millions)                                                       1456                      1190                     266
  Corrections (% of total)                                                        100%                      82%                      18%
  Panel c: Estimated tax revenue impact ( , Millions)
  Implied increase in tax revenue in Denmark                                       315                       264                      51
  Implied decrease in tax revenue abroad                                           333                       323                      10
  Net change in global tax bill if fully realized                                  -19                       -59                      41




Notes: This table documents the mismatch between the outcome of Danish transfer pricing cases and the estimated direction of tax-motivated profit shifting.
Panel a: Reports the estimated intentional and systematic tax-motivated profit shifting - a negative number suggests that Denmark is a net recipient of
profits. Tax motivated profit shifting between non tax havens is based on Alvarez-Martinez et al. (2018) - because Denmark is a moderately low-taxed
country, the estimates suggests that Denmark is a net-recipient of tax-motivated profit shifting from non-tax havens. Tax motivated profit shifting between
non tax havens is based on Tørsløv et al. (2018). Panel b: Reports the outcome of the Danish tax authorities prosecution of transfer pricing cases. Panel
c: Reports the ultimate impact on tax collection of the Danish transfer price corrections in Denmark and abroad (assuming that the corrections are not
overturned in court and that dispute resolution is effective). Source: Danish Inland Revenue, Alvarez-Martinez et al. 2018, Tørsløv et al. (2018), KPMG
(2018), Author calculations (see text)
                              Figure 1: Private vs public employment in transfer pricing

          1000' employees
          350
                                                                                                         324.5
          300

          250


          200
                                                    Wage bill  25 Billion

          150

          100


            50

                                              3.4
             0
                                        Government                                                       Private

Notes: This figure shows the share of transfer pricing specialists working in the public and private sector. 328,261 is the number of individuals that LinkedIn
highlights when searching "transfer pricing" under "people" (as of January 4, 2020). Spot checks confirm that LinkedIn correctly identifies individuals
working with transfer pricing. The number of individuals working in government with transfer pricing is first identified by filtering the search by industry
to "government adminstration" only (3,368 as of January 4, 2020) and corroborated by the head count in EY's Transfer Pricing Tax Authority Survey from
2014. The Wage bill is estimated using the average base salary of a transfer pricing specialist ($74,000 as of Jan 4, 2020) computed by Glassdoor. Source:
Author computations based on LinkedIn, EY and Glassdoor data
         Figure 2: Tax differentials in transfer price corrections versus in the full population




                            1           .8
               Cummulative distribution
                             .6




                                                                               (1) Tax differential all subsidiaries: -2.3***
                                                                               (2) Tax differential all TP cases:     -4.1***
                                                                               (1)-(2) difference:                    -1.8***
                   .4       .2
                            0




                                             -20      -10               0              10               20                                30
                                                      Tax differential = Danish tax rate - foreign tax rate

                                                   Transfer price cases by DK                      All DK multinational entities

Notes: This figure shows the cumulative distribution of the tax differentials across all Danish transfer pricing cases and across all Danish vis-a-vis foreign
firm linkages. The tax differential is defined as the Danish corporate tax rate less the counterpart country tax rate. Tax rates are from KPMG (2018). The
blue line shows the distribution of tax differentials in all transfer price corrections in 2008, 2014 and 2015. The red line shows the tax differential between
all Danish multinational entities (subsidiaries and parents) and their foreign related parties. Source: Danish Inland Revenue, Tørsløv et al. (2018), KPMG
(2018), and authors' computations (see text)
Figure 3: The multinational firm fighting back... when it suits them

                                                             Tax differential across court cases




                                                                                        Tax differential court cases: +2.0

                                          Tax differential
                                          TP cases:-4.1




                                                               Tax differential all subsidiaries: -2.3




                                    Tax differential across court cases (excl. cases with low MAP opportunity)
                       1       .8
           Cummulative density




                                                                                        Tax differential court cases: +3.7
                       .6




                                             Tax differential
                                             TP cases:-4.1
              .4       .2




                                                               Tax differential all subsidiaries: -2.3
                       0




                                    -20               -10                 0              10               20             30
                                                             Tax differential = Danish tax rate - foreign

                                               Transfer price corrections           All Danish subsidiaries
                                               Court cases (excl. cases with low MAP opportunity)

Note: This figure shows the cumulative distribution of the tax differentials across court cases where the firm objects to a correction.
The tax differential is defined as the Danish corporate tax rate less the counterpart country tax rate. The red line shows the tax
differential between all Danish multinational entities (subsidiaries and parents) and their foreign related parties. The green line
shows the tax differentials across court cases where the firm objects to a correction (the top panel includes all cases while the
bottom panel includes only cases involving EU countries where the likelihood of dispute settlement is larger). Source: Danish Inland
Revenue, Tørsløv et al. (2018), KPMG (2018), and authors' computations (see text)
         Figure 4: Global top targets in transfer price corrections


                                                              Countries most often targeted in transfer price disputes
      # of times country is
      among top 3 targets
        14

        12

        10

         8

         6

         4

         2

         0




                                                                                                                                                                                   Czech...
             United States




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Panama
                                                                   Japan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sweden
                                                     Netherlands




                                                                                                                                China




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Poland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BVI
                                                                                                             Austria




                                                                                                                                                    Singapore


                                                                                                                                                                          Canada




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Hong Kong
                                                                                         Korea
                                                                                                 Australia


                                                                                                                       Norway




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Finland




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Barbados
                                       Switzerland



                                                                           UK
                                                                                France
                             Germany




                                                                                                                                        Cayman I.


                                                                                                                                                                Denmark



                                                                                                                                                                                              Taiwan




                                                              Countries most often targeted in transfer price disputes (by
      # of times country is
      among top 3 targets                                              countries with a functioning MAP-system)
        12

        10

         8

         6

         4

         2

         0




Notes: The top panel shows the most frequently cited top-3 targets in transfer price correction cases among 26
major economies surveyed by EY in 2014. The bottom panel restricts the sample of surveyed countries to those
with a functioning mutual agreement procedure in place. Tax havens are defined as in Tørsløv et al. (2018) and
marked in orange. Source: EY (2014), Author calculations (see text)
                                    Figure 5: Mutual agreement procedures in the EU



         % of total             Counterpart in Mutual Agreement Procedures in the EU
         100%

           90%

           80%

           70%

           60%

           50%

           40%

           30%

           20%

           10%

            0%
                                     EU high tax country                                               EU tax haven



Notes: The graph shows the counterpart in EU mutual agreement procedures initiated by an EU high-tax country with Arbitrage Convention invoked --
meaning these are cases where disputes have to be settled within 2 years. EU tax havens are defined as in Tørsløv et al. (2018). Source: EU joint transfer
pricing forum, Tørsløv et al. (2018)
                                     Figure 6: Mutual agreement procedures globally

                Target country mutual agreement procedure (closed cases, 2018)

250



200

                                   Share of procedures with tax haven as target: 8%
150
                                   Share of procedures with high-tax country as target: 92%

100



  50



   0
                 Canada




                Portugal
                    Israel
               Denmark
           United States




            Netherlands




           Luxembourg

             Hong Kong
        United Kingdom




                Belgium
                    Spain



                 Sweden




             Kazakhstan
                    Japan




                 Mexico




           Liechtenstein




                Pakistan
             Switzerland


                Norway


              Singapore

         Czech Republic
                  Poland


               Thailand

           New Zealand




        Slovak Republic
                  France




                  Turkey
               Germany



                      Italy




                 Finland




                  Ireland




                Hungary




                     Chile
               Lithuania
                     India




                 Austria




                   Korea


              Indonesia
               Australia




            South Africa




                Bulgaria




                Slovenia




                   Latvia
                   China




               Romania




                Malaysia
Notes: The graph shows the target of mutual agreement procedures following transfer price corrections in the 137 member countries of the OECD inclusive
framework. Countries reporting zero mutual agreement procedures are left out of the chart. Tax havens are marked in red using the definition from Tørsløv
et al. (2018). Source: OECD MAP statistics
Appendix figures
        Figure A1: Tax differentials in transfer price corrections versus in the full population

                                       Tax differential across mutual agreement procedures




                                Tax differential
                                TP cases:-4.1

                                                                    Tax differential all subsidiaries: -1.2




Notes: This figure shows the cumulative distribution of the tax differentials across all Danish transfer pricing cases and across all Danish vis-a-vis foreign
firm linkages. The tax differential is defined as the Danish corporate tax rate less the counterpart country tax rate. Tax rates are from KPMG (2018). The
blue line shows the distribution of tax differentials in all transfer price corrections in 2008, 2014 and 2015. The red line shows the tax differential between
between Denmark and all foreign countries weighted according to total (inward and outward) FDI income in 2015. Source: Danish Inland Revenue, Tørsløv
et al. (2018), KPMG (2018), Eurostat table "bop fdi6 inc" and authors' computations (see text)
        Figure A2: Tax differentials in transfer price corrections versus in the full population

                                        Tax differential across mutual agreement procedures

                                 Mutual agreement procedures (closed): -4.5




                                Tax differential
                                TP cases:-4.1

                                                                     Tax differential all subsidiaries: -2.3




Notes: This figure shows the cumulative distribution of the tax differentials across all closed (completed and non-zero) mutual agreement procedures 2008-
2015 (green line). This distribution is contrasted to the distribution of danish transfer pricing cases (blue line) and across all Danish vis-a-vis foreign firm
linkages (red line). The tax differential is defined as the Danish corporate tax rate less the counterpart country tax rate. Tax rates are from KPMG (2018).
The blue line shows the distribution of tax differentials in all transfer price corrections in 2008, 2014 and 2015. The red line shows the tax differential
between all Danish multinational entities (subsidiaries and parents) and their foreign related parties. Source: Danish Inland Revenue, Tørsløv et al. (2018),
KPMG (2018), and authors' computations (see text)
                   Figure A3: New mutual agreement procedures globally following BEPS

                        Increase in mutual agreement cases started from 2016 to 2018
        100

         90

         80

         70
                                             Share of procedures with tax haven as target: 13%
         60
                                             Share of procedures with high-tax country as target: 87%
         50

         40

         30

         20

         10

           0




                         Turkey
                        Norway
                       Romania




                      Indonesia




                           Malta
                      Denmark




                   Luxembourg




                       Portugal




                          Brazil
                           Spain




                        Sweden




                       Pakistan
                    Kazakhstan
                    Netherlands
                  United States




                        Mexico
                        Finland

                         Ireland
                    Switzerland




                  New Zealand

                         Poland
                         France

                      Germany

                            Italy




                     Singapore




                        Greece
               United Kingdom




                       Belgium
                           India




                        Austria




                          Korea


                       Malaysia




                          Russia


                        Tunisia
Notes: The graph shows the target of mutual agreement procedures following transfer price corrections in the 137 member countries of the OECD inclusive
framework. Countries reporting zero mutual agreement procedures are left out of the chart. Tax havens are marked in red using the definition from Tørsløv
et al. (2018). Source: OECD MAP statistics
