                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           OFF TO A GOOD START:
            THE NBER AND THE MEASUREMENT OF NATIONAL INCOME

                                       Hugh Rockoff

                                     Working Paper 26895
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26895


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020




Many thanks are due to Katharine Abraham who discussed a previous draft when it was presented
at the 2020 annual meeting of the American Economic Association in a session celebrating the
100th anniversary of the Bureau, and to Claudia Goldin for many helpful comments. The
remaining errors are mine. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Hugh Rockoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Off to a Good Start: The NBER and the Measurement of National Income
Hugh Rockoff
NBER Working Paper No. 26895
March 2020
JEL No. B0,N12

                                         ABSTRACT

The creation of the National Bureau of Economic Research was a response to the bitter
controversies over the distribution of income that roiled the United States during the Progressive
Era. Thanks to Malcolm Rorty, a business economist, and Nahum I. Stone, an independent
socialist economist, a "Committee on the Distribution of Income" was created; what might be
considered the first name of the Bureau. Funding was secured, the Bureau was chartered in 1920,
and Wesley Mitchell was appointed the director of research. The Bureau's first publication,
Income in the United States, its Amount and Distribution was widely hailed as a major
contribution. Further estimates of national income and its distribution for the 1920s were made by
Willford King and Lillian Epstein. The Great Depression led to legislation requiring federal
government estimates. Simon Kuznets was seconded from the Bureau to the Commerce
Department where he led the team that produced the first federal estimates and established the
unit for producing updates. The early investigators at the Bureau proved to be masters of
combining sources of data to produce credible estimates. The result was estimates that still
underlie our understanding of the growth and fluctuations of the American Economy.


Hugh Rockoff
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and NBER
rockoff@econ.rutgers.edu
                                  1. A Time like our Own1

The official birthday of the National Bureau of Economic Research falls in
January 1920. The push to start the Bureau had begun several years
earlier but the final creation was delayed by World War I. It was a time very
much like our own. The economy had righted itself after the devastating
financial panic of 1907 when unemployment as a share of the civilian
private nonfarm labor force soared to 11.8% (Historical Statistics, Millennial
Edition, series Ba476). But then unemployment had jumped again to 13.4%
after the financial crisis produced by the outbreak of World War I.
Inevitably, the business cycle was on the public mind when an application
for funding for the Bureau was made to the Rockefeller foundation. It was,
moreover, a period in which controversy over the distribution of income had
risen to a fever pitch. Progressives blamed the growth of Big Business for
an increase in inequality. Robber Barons such as oil man John D.
Rockefeller and steel man Andrew Carnegie, Progressives claimed, were
stealing the fruits of the second industrial revolution. Many people also
blamed a wave of immigrants from Eastern and Southern Europe for
depressing wages.
       In 1915 two books on the distribution of the national income were
published that would lead directly to the formation of the Bureau.2 First,
Macmillan published Income, an Examination of the Returns for Services


1 Many thanks are due to Katharine Abraham who discussed a previous draft when it was presented at
the 2020 annual meeting of the American Economic Association in a session celebrating the 100th
anniversary of the Bureau, and to Claudia Goldin for many helpful comments. The remaining errors are
mine.

2 Here I will be using the term national income as a generic to cover all measures of the size of the

economy such as gross national product, gross domestic product, net national product, and so on, except
as shown in the tables. In the National Income and Product Accounts national income is defined as net
national product less the statistical discrepancy.

                                                   2
Rendered and from Property Owned in the United States by Scott Nearing,
a passionate socialist. After examining wages, dividends, interest, and so
on in many different industries, Nearing concluded that far too much of the
national income was going to the owners of property and far too little to
those who worked to produce it. Here was the proof that inequality had
been rising as a result of the depredations of what came to be called the
Robber Barons. The intent was similar to Piketty (2014).
       A month after Nearing's book was published Macmillan brought out a
different sort of book on the same subject by Willford I. King: The Wealth
and Income of the People of the United States. King, unlike Nearing, was
part of the economic establishment; a professor of statistics at the
University of Wisconsin and a student of Richard T. Ely, a founder and the
first Secretary of the American Economic Association. King's book, unlike
Nearing's, made use of techniques and presented its findings in ways that
would be familiar to economists today. For example, King used and thus
drew the profession's attention to the Lorenz curve which had been
developed a few years earlier by another University of Wisconsin Ph.D.,
Max O. Lorenz. King also attempted to put his estimates of the returns to
factors of production and the distribution of wealth and income into
historical and international perspective. King found that the share of income
going to labor (Nearing's focus) had declined in the two decades before
1910, King suggested that the probable causes of the decline of labor's
share were the decline in the amount of free land and "the great influx from
abroad of labor of a low degree of efficiency" (King 1915, 163). King also
found that real wages had fallen between 1900 and 1910. 3

3Recent estimates, however, show an increase in the real wages of unskilled labor and of production
workers between 1900 and 1910 (wwww.mearuingworth.com).

                                                   3
         King (1915, 231) found, moreover, that there had been a "marked
concentration of income in the hands of the very rich" between 1896 and
1910. To explain it he engaged in some rabble-rousing that Nearing would
have approved.


         "But the greatest force in the last three decades making for income
         concentration has been the successful organization of monster
         corporations. The promoters and manipulators of these concerns
         have received, as their share of the spoils, permanent income claims,
         in the shape of securities, large enough to make Croesus appear like
         a pauper" (King 1915, 218).

As with Nearing the parallel between King (2015) and Piketty (2014) is
clear.
         King's book was well received by economists, but Nearing's was not.
One of the critical reviews of Nearing's book, surprisingly, was by Nahum I.
Stone in the Intercollegiate Socialist (1916). Stone approved of Nearing's
politics, and of his attempt to measure labor's share of national income, but
thought that Nearing's statistics missed the mark. Stone showed that
Nearing had omitted several important sources of service income such as
work done by agricultural laborers. Whereas Nearing put labor's share at
near 50% of national income, Stone put it at nearer 70%.
         Stone thought that getting this number right was important, but that
the real gains to labor would not come from attempting to make this
number higher by confiscating and redistributing property income because
a large share of property income was invested, and this was important for
the maintenance and continued growth of the economy. Simon Kuznets
(1950), incidentally, would later analyze savings by income class in detail.
The real gains from socialism, Stone thought, would come from eliminating
                                         4
wasteful competition: traveling salesman, multiple stores selling the same
things in the same neighborhood, and so on.
          Malcolm Rorty, a conservative business economist who had met
Stone read this review and was impressed by Stone's commitment to the
facts. Here was a socialist he could work with. He invited Stone to lunch,
and together they proposed what became the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


                   2. The Committee on the Distribution of Income4

Rorty and Stone agreed that an organization that produced
accurate, nonpartisan, statistics would advance public discussion of
inequality and other issues. To be sure, the idea for such an
organization was in the air. The short-lived Bureau of Economic
Research was started in 1899, directed by John R. Commons and
financed by George H. Shibley, a wealthy New York lawyer. Edwin F.
Gay, a Harvard professor and the first Dean of the Harvard Business
School, had approached the Rockefeller Foundation with a proposal for a
research organization. And Irving Fisher (1919) advocated something along
these lines in his 1918 Presidential address to the American Economic
Association.
          It was also a time of ferment in economics. What would eventually be
known as the Institutional School was challenging the neoclassical
mainstream. The institutional school emphasized the importance of
understanding institutions such as the legal system that shape economic


4   This section is based mainly on Fabricant (1984) and Rutherford (2011).


                                                      5
activity. And it emphasized that markets had to be analyzed with empirical
data because they did not necessarily conform to simple theoretical
models. There is no official list of members of the Institutional School. But
Commons is usually identified as an institutional economist as is Wesley
Mitchell the first director of the Bureau and many of the early researchers.
Indeed, the Bureau can be viewed to some extent as a product of the
Institutional Movement.
      Rorty proved to be an exceptional organizer and fundraiser. He
enlisted a number of top economists to form "The Committee on the
Distribution of Income" which held its first meeting in June 1917. Indeed, It
could be said that this was the first name of the Bureau. The Committee's
charge was to estimate accurately labor's share in national income.
Nearing and King had tried, but the Bureau, it was hoped could produce a
study of such thoroughness that its conclusions would be accepted across
the political spectrum.
      Formation of the Bureau was delayed by World War I. Afterwards
Rorty was able to line up funding and the Bureau was chartered in 1920.
Initial funding was provided by the Commonwealth Fund, but they then
shifted to other projects. In 1921 the Carnegie Corporation made a three-
year grant (part to be matched by funds from other sources) and beginning
in 1923 ten years of support was obtained from the Laura Spellman
Rockefeller Memorial (again with requirements that part be matched). Over
the course of the 1920s, however, many other sources of funding were
tapped. The last grant directly to the Bureau from the Memorial was in 1928
for $25,000 per year for five years. But in 1928 that amounted to only 15
percent of the Bureau's budget.


                                       6
             3. The Bureau's First Estimates of National Income

Wesley Clair Mitchell was appointed the first director of the Bureau; at once
an obvious and inspired choice. He was already well known and admired
for the care he had taken in assembling data for his classic studies of the
greenback during the Civil War (1903) and of the business cycle (1913).
Mitchell assembled a team that included King, Frederick R. Macaulay, and
Oswald W. Knauth and set to work on the Bureau's first project: a detailed
study of the amount and distribution of the national income. The result,
Income in the United States, Its Amount and Distribution, 1909­1919, was
published in two volumes (Mitchell, et al. 1921). Nearly 600 pages in all, it
far surpassed anything that had come before in terms of the amount of data
utilized and the care taken in thoroughly double-checking the component
estimates.
      The study made a clever use of the circular flow. King was tasked
with estimating national income from the payments-for-final-products side,
and Knauth with estimating it from the payments-for-productive-services
side. The two estimates turned out to be reassuringly close, at least in the
Bureau's estimation. Here was something that a team employed by a
foundation could do, that would be difficult for a professor toiling alone in a
library; a clear example of the value of a foundation dedicated to economic
research.
      Inequality, the issue that had motivated formation of the Bureau, was
discussed in the penultimate chapter of the summary volume. This chapter
discussed estimates of the distribution of income by factor of production (a
la Nearing), estimates of the proportion the population earning less than
$2,000 per year (which is about $33,000 per year in 2018 dollars inflating


                                       7
with the consumer price index, Williamson 2019), and estimates by
Frederic Macaulay of the personal distribution of income in 1918 based on
the newly available income tax returns. 5 The data revealed substantial
inequality: the share of income going to the top 1 percent was 14 percent,
and the share going to the top 10 percent was 35 percent. The World
Inequality Database (at https://wid.world/, accessed in September 2018),
put these figures for 1918 at similar levels of 16 percent and 40 percent.
The chapter on inequality in that first volume, true to the principles that
were adopted from the start and that have been adhered to by the Bureau
ever since, does not end with rabble-rousing or policy recommendations.
Instead, it ends with a chart and an explanation of a 1918 Lorenz curve.
       The reviews were uniformly positive, but not uncritical. Arthur Bowley
(1923) writing in the Quarterly Journal of Economics, for example, began
by declaring that the volumes were a "landmark in the progress of
statistical research, and that all future investigators in the field of National
Income will take them as their guide and chart." But he did have some
complaints. The main one concerned the treatment of the distribution of
income in the summary volume, the subject that he thought would be of
most interest to the public. Bowley (1923, 511) thought that the estimates
were so uncertain that they should have been excluded altogether or at
most buried "in volume ii, under Mr. Macaulay's mathematics."
          Macaulay and Knauth moved on, but work on national income
continued throughout the 1920s under King's direction. These estimates of
a total called the "Realized Income of the People of the Continental United
States" were published in 1930 for the years 1909 through 1928 (King and


5   The modern income tax was first levied in 1913.

                                                      8
Epstein1930). This volume also addressed the touchy subject of the
distribution of income. First it presented estimates of the share of national
income going to wages as opposed to salaries, pensions and so on, taking
us back to Nearing's concerns. This share was found to be volatile and
higher after the war than before, but no long-term trends were identified
(King and Epstein 1930, 79-86).
      King and Epstein then examined the distribution of income based
mainly on the information generated by the federal income tax. Rather than
presenting Lorenz Curves and Gini coefficients, or the even the shares of
income going to top percentiles, King and Epstein opted to focus on the
shares of the population earning more or less than several benchmark
levels of income. The top group included those earning more than
$150,000 in 1913 dollars; about $3.9 million today using the Consumer
Price Index to inflate (Williamson2019). In general, King and Epstein did
not find worrying trends in the distribution of income. In a counterfactual
thought experiment they concluded (1930, 178) that even a massive
redistribution would not help those earning less than $5,000 very much. His
final conclusion (1930, 180) was that "there is practically no tendency
towards the putting of more income into the hands of the extremely opulent
sections of the community." The times had changed, and perhaps also
King's disgust with "Monster Corporations" had cooled.
      This book was not widely reviewed in the economic journals. It was,
after all, a continuation of the 1921 study. In the most detailed review that I
have found Paul Brissenden (1932), a noted labor economist at Columbia,
hammered away at King and Epstein's treatment of inequality and
concluded that a far less sanguine picture of the trends in inequality should
be drawn from their data. But when he reflected on the overall quality of the

                                       9
work he concluded that it was "undoubtedly, the most important
contribution ever made to the study of income."



                                    4. Enter Simon Kuznets

When I asked Google "who invented Gross Domestic Product (GDP)?" the
answer was "Simon Kuznets in 1934." 6 This is, at the very best, misleading.
Estimates of national income have been made for centuries. The British
economist (as he would now be identified) William Petty is said to have
made the first estimates in the seventeenth century. In the United States,
George Tucker, a southerner, and Ezra Seaman, a northerner, made
important estimates before the Civil War. Their estimates were based on
data from the U.S. Census and have been praised by modern students of
national income accounting (Gallman 1961). Tucker and Seaman were
concerned, especially in the revisions of their books made after the 1850
census (Seaman 1853, Tucker 1855), with the relative strength of the Free
States and the Slave States. Moving from the 1850s to the 1940s we find
Simon Kuznets similarly using estimates national income to analyze the
war making potential of the United States.
        Nor was national income ignored by the discipline's leading theorists.
The first sentence of Adam Smith's the Wealth of Nations, the starting point
of modern economics one could argue, is a description of the flow of goods
and services to consumers (Smith, Adam 1976 [1776] I.i.10).

        "The annual labour of every nation is the fund which originally
        supplies it with all the necessaries and conveniencies of life which it
6 On October 24, 2019. While GDP has become the statistic of choice for policymakers and journalists,

Kuznets preferred, as I will explain below, gross national product (GNP) or better still net national product
(NNP).


                                                     10
          annually consumes, and which consist always either in the immediate
          produce of that labour, or in what is purchased with that produce from
          other nations."
Well more than a century later, Arthur Cecil Pigou (1912), following his
mentor Alfred Marshall, gave a starring role to what he called the National
Dividend in his classic Wealth and Welfare. But for all that, Kuznets's
contributions were indeed critical to the development of national income
accounting.
          Kuznets was born in Pinsk in what is now in Belarus.7 His father was
a banker. Subsequently the family moved to Kharkov in the Ukraine where
Kuznets began his education. He came to the United States in 1922 with
his younger brother Solomon, who also became a well-known economist,
to join his father who had immigrated earlier. Kuznets studied economics at
Columbia and earned his Ph.D. there under Wesley Mitchell. His
dissertation, completed in 1926 and published by Adelphi, was Cyclical
Fluctuations; Retail and Wholesale Trade, United States, 1919-1925.
Kuznets means blacksmith in Russian, and his father had used the
anglicized last name of Smith. Kuznets's dissertation was written by Simon
Smith Kuznets, but the Smith was dropped in subsequent publications.
          Kuznets was appointed to the Bureau staff in 1927 where initially he
worked on the business cycle (Rutherford 2011, 238). The emphasis on the
business cycle at the Bureau in the 1920s made sense. The business cycle
was Mitchell's primary academic interest and the United States had
suffered financial panics in 1907 and 1914, and a severe cyclical
contraction in 1920-21.



7   This paragraph is based on Weyl (2011) and personal communications from Claudia Goldin.

                                                   11
     Mitchell and Gay, however, had become concerned about the quality
of King's estimates and decided to remove him from the Bureau, but acting
on this decision had to be delayed because King was ill (Rutherford 2011,
286). In 1932 Kuznets was asked to survey the Bureau's work on national
income with the idea that Mitchell would then supervise future work on
national income with Kuznets under him.
     I have not learned the main concerns of Mitchell and Gay. But Morris
Copeland, a student of Mitchell, who would join the Bureau in 1945, wrote
two papers for the Journal of Political Economy (1932a, 1932b) that while
respectful toward King and Epstein's work were also critical of some of their
decisions. Copeland thought that while their estimates had been done with
great care and revealed the correct trend, they underestimated the volatility
of national income. Copeland then presented revised estimates. The trends
were nearly the same. Over the years when both series are available,
1910-1928, King and Epstein's estimate of national income in current
dollars rose 5.81 percent per year while Copeland's revised series 5.75
percent per year.
     The year-to-year changes which are shown in Figure 1 also seem
quite close. The major difference is in the 1920-21 recession. King and
Epstein's estimate falls 15.46 percent from 1920 to 1921, while Copeland's
revised estimate falls 17.80 percent. In retrospect this may not appear to be
a great difference. Both series document a major contraction. But with the
Great Depression beginning the need to measure the extent of downturns
accurately had become compelling. King and Epstein's last estimate, a
preliminary estimate, was for 1928, so we don't know what they would have
come up with for the Depression. But Copeland's series fell 8.4 percent


                                     12
between 1929 and a preliminary figure for 1930 showing that a major
contraction was underway.
      The economic catastrophe from 1929 to 1932 produced a June 1932
Senate resolution, introduced by Senator Robert La Follette Jr., the
Wisconsin Progressive, calling on the Department of Commerce to make
estimates of national income from 1929-1931 (Dorfman 1959, p. 669).The
point, clearly, was to justify sweeping governmental initiatives. The
Department of Commerce turned to the Bureau for help and Kuznets, was
seconded to the Department of Commerce to lead the team that would
produce the estimates.
      On his arrival Kuznets encountered and quickly recruited Robert R.
Nathan, who had been his student at University of Pennsylvania, for the
team he was assembling. The report was submitted to the Senate in
January 1934 (U.S. Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce 1934). It
showed that national income had halved between 1929 and 1932. The
depth of the Depression was obvious by that time, but the report was still
an important call to action. President Roosevelt cited the initial figures
when proposing his recovery program, and later cited the updated figures
when he sent a supplemental budget to Congress in 1938 (Coyle 2014,
12­13).
      Roosevelt also made use of the national income estimates on the
campaign trail. In a speech at Pittsburgh's Forbes Field in October 1936
Roosevelt ­ after a several baseball analogies, this was, after all, the home
of the Pittsburg Pirates ­ made the empirical case for the New Deal. He
might have chosen one of the older statistics: industrial production,
employment, and so on. But instead he used the new national income


                                       13
statistics, explaining in his usual masterful fashion what they were and what
they showed (Roosevelt, October 2, 1936, 2).
       "By national income I mean the total of all income of all the
       125,000,000 people in this country, the total of all the pay envelopes,
       all the farm sales, all the profits of all the businesses, of all the
       individuals and corporations in America,
              During the four lean years before this administration took office
       that national income had declined from $81,000,000 a year to
       $38,000,000 a year ­ in short, you and I, all of us together, were
       making $43,000,000 less in 1932 than we made in 1929."

After detailing the actions taken by his administration Roosevelt returned to
national income accounts to prove they had worked.
       "The national income was thirty eight billions in 1932. In 1935 it was
       fifty-three billions and this year it will be well over sixty billions." 8

Roosevelt had shown the way. From then on politicians would be using
national income statistics to highlight their successes and their opponent's
failures.
       After getting things started at the Commerce Department, Kuznets
returned to the Bureau. Nathan, his protégé, also left the Commerce
Department but only for a short time. He soon returned to as chief of the
National Income Section of the Division of Income Research (Durr 2013,
19-20). Subsequently the Divisions' estimates were updated regularly and
reported in the Survey of Current Business in articles written by Nathan.
     Shortly after Pearl Harbor, Nathan was appointed chair of the Planning
Committee of the newly created War Production Board, the agency
charged with assuring that a sufficient supply of munitions would be



8Somewhere along the way some zeros were omitted; the correct numbers were, of course, billions. But
aside from that the numbers were accurate based on the estimates then available.

                                                 14
produced. Kuznets readily agreed to work for his protégé as the
Committee's chief economist.
      Before Pearl Harbor many liberal economists, including Nathan and
Kuznets, were worried that the military was not expanding rapidly enough.
Pearl Harbor, however, unleashed a flood of orders from the military.
Nathan and Kuznets now worried that the spending plans of the military
were too big. Excessive competition among contractors might slow
production; there would be tanks without treads, aircraft without
instruments, and factories without machines. And they worried that civilian
consumption might have to be reduced to an unacceptable extent. In
August 1942 Kuznets forwarded to Nathan a study which concluded that
military spending of $47 billion in 1943 and $80 billion in 1943 were the
limits of what was "feasible." The military was unhappy with these limits
because they thought adopting them would delay the invasion of Europe
and the end war. Thus was born the "feasibility dispute."
      Eventually, a compromise was reached and the military services were
forced to make some cuts in their immediate spending plans and to
lengthen their time table for the invasion of Europe. The effects that would
have followed if the military's spending plans had been carried out in full
are hard to estimate. Counterfactual history is always difficult, and it is
especially hard in this case because of the limited historical experience with
rapid mobilization. But two careful students of the feasibility dispute have
credited the economists with a crucial contribution to the ultimate success
of the munitions program (Edelstein 2001, Lacey 2011). The subtitle of




                                       15
Lacey's book makes the case as far as most economists are concerned:
Keep from All Thoughtful Men: How U.S. Economists Won World War II.9



                          5. The Influence of Simon Kuznets

As we have seen, Kuznets did not invent national income accounting. But
he did have an enormous influence on the way estimates of national
income are made and used. Here I identify six sources of this influence,
based first of all on Fogel, et al (2013).
        (1) Kuznets was a leader in standardizing the definitions of the
components of national income. He did so In part by exploring the
philosophical underpinnings of the accounts.
        He argued forcefully that the welfare of consumers should be, at least
in peacetime, the ultimate determinant of how national income is
measured. This meant, first of all, focusing on the flow of goods and
services to consumers. This, of course, was not new. The Wealth of
Nations, as I noted above, began with a description of the flow of goods
and services to consumers. But Kuznet's determination to follow this
lodestar helped him unravel many knotty problems in national income
accounting.
        Kuznets's focus on consumer welfare, for example, explains why he
favored Gross National Product (GNP) over GDP. Think of a country with a
large sovereign wealth fund. GNP would exceed GDP by a substantial
margin and GNP would provide a better measure of the flow of goods and
services to consumers, and therefore a better measure of the welfare of the


9The first part of Lacey's title was from a memo written by General Brehon B. Somervell, head of Army
supply service, describing the memo written by Nathan based on Kuznets's study.

                                                  16
population. In fact, Kuznets preferred to work with NNP rather than GNP
because deducting the depreciation of capital would bring us still closer to
the flow of goods and services to consumers. But, of course, good scholar
that he was, he would use GDP when that was all that was available
(Kuznets 1956, 11). 10
       It was, as we know, GDP that became standard. Partly this was
because it was easier to compute and so more countries could produce the
statistic. And It is also true, as Coyle (2014, 20) explains, that the rise of
Keynesian economics played an important role. Domestic production one
might assume was more closely tied to employment, the key concern in the
wake of the Depression, than the flow of goods and services to consumers.
So GDP would be a better guide than other income measures for
policymakers intent on managing the business cycle and maintaining full
employment.
       While Kuznets began with the goods and services consumed and
their market prices he recognized that many decisions had to be made
before final totals could be calculated; decisions that raised important
philosophical questions, especially if those totals were to be used in
examining long-term trends in economic welfare. These concerns were
present from the beginning of Kuznets's work on national income, indeed
from the beginning of the Bureau's work on national income. The initial
report on national income by the Commerce Department, much of it
probably written by Kuznets, contains careful discussions of the many
limitations of the national income statistics. At the end of this discussion the
report summarizes with the following often quoted conclusion about the

10In a JSTOR search this was the first time that Kuznets used the term gross domestic product. The term
had been used previously mainly in British journals.

                                                  17
relationship between national income and national welfare (U.S. Bureau of
Foreign Domestic Commerce 1934, 7).

      "The welfare of a nation can, therefore, scarcely be inferred from a
      measurement of national income as defined above."

      The following are some examples of adjustments to the basic
spending totals that Kuznets thought were potentially justified, depending
on the purposes of the user of the estimates, even if the data was not then
available to act on them.
      (a) There was the long recognized problem of production in the
home. This was especially a problem when using estimates of national
income to examine long-term trends because of the shift of production from
the home to market. In his 1941 book that presented estimates of national
income for 1919-1938 Kuznets prepared a conjectural estimate of the value
of services carried out by housewives in 1929. This estimate was 23 billion
dollars "somewhat more than one-fourth of total national income in 1929"
(Kuznets 1941, 433). As a share of national income this was actually less
than a similar estimate reported in the Bureau's first study of national
income which put the non-monetized production of women working in the
home at slightly less than one-third of measured national income in 1919
(Mitchell, et al 1921, vol. 1, 58-64).
      But if the problem of non-monetized production in the home was
understood, and at least partial estimates could be made, even if subject to
a wide margin of error, shouldn't they be included in the total? Kuznets did
not take a hard and fast line. Rather, he thought that some investigators,
depending on their purposes, might want to include non-monetized
production in the home. This might be the case, for example, when

                                         18
estimating regional incomes (Kuznets 1940, 300), comparing income in
pre-industrial economies with income in industrial economies (Kuznets
1949, 211), or exploring the size distribution of income using the family as
the unit of analysis (Kuznets 1976, 85). But Kuznets (1941, vol. 2, 431)
concluded that for most purposes exclusion was best.

     "The conditions under which they [non-monetized home production]
     are carried on and the factors that affect the amount of income from
     them are so vastly different from those that bear upon activities
     whose products usually appear on the market place that it seems
     best to exclude them."

     (b) Goods that were purchased by individuals as instruments of
production, Kuznets thought, ideally should be deducted, from Net National
Product (NNP). Kuznets's example was the additional cost of an expensive
as opposed to a utilitarian automobile. The extra expense might be
consumption for an economics professor, but a cost of production for a real
estate agent. In the latter case the extra expense should be deducted.
      (c) Personal costs of production needed to offset "the strains and
pressures of modern life," ideally, should also be deducted if one was
seeking a measure of national welfare.
      (d) Kuznets also thought about how the distribution of income might
impact the measurement of national income. Again ideally, he thought that
the amounts consumed by individuals should be

      "...combined by an acceptable system of weights, based on some
      cogent theory of equivalence of individuals, not by the market prices
      that reflect monopolistic distortions and inequalities in distribution of
      income by size" Kuznets (1947, 23).
      (e) The most controversial of Kuznets's efforts to apply a consistent
philosophical framework to his estimates of national income spawned a

                                       19
debate that he ultimately lost. Kuznets thought that in peacetime most
military spending should be excluded from national income. Why? For
Kuznets military spending was an intermediate good not a final good like
wheat or haircuts that directly produced utility for the consumer. The cost of
the scarecrow that keeps the crows from the wheat is already included in
the price of the wheat. The military which scares away our enemies and
prevents them from attacking our fields of wheat is similarly an intermediate
good. 11 In World War II, however, Kuznets (1945, 17) thought that

          "for the transient period of a major war we might recognize two
          purposes coequal in primacy: provision of goods to consumers and
          for war use."
Kuznets went on to make detailed estimates of NNP and GNP on this
wartime basis. Kuznets's peacetime concept of NNP (1961, 487) increased
by 20 or 21 percent between 1939 and 1941, depending on the concept of
NNP, but then fell by 7 or 8 percent between 1941 and 1943. His wartime
version of NNP (1945, 54), on the other hand, rose somewhere between 24
and 28 percent from1939 to 1941, depending on the assumptions made
about efficiency in the munitions industries, and then rose a further 16 to 36
percent between 1941 and 1943.
          After the war Kuznets wanted to return to his peacetime definition of
national product that excluded consumption of war goods. But the
Commerce Department decided to include current consumption of military
goods. There were, probably, several reasons. In part, including military
spending made sense because the role of the military in peacetime had
changed. In his study of productivity for the Bureau John Kendrick (1961,


11   This is, of course, my analogy (originally intended for my undergraduate students) and not Kuznets's.

                                                      20
25), for example, utilized a version of Kuznets's national product estimates
that included military spending on the grounds that national security is "at
all times" a prime objective. We hadn't returned to the economy of the
1920s when it was assumed that the military would have little to do. Rather,
we had moved from a shooting war to a cold war. Another important factor,
as noted above, was the rise of Keynesian economics. After the war it was
generally accepted by economists that increases in government spending
on the military directly, and through their multiplier effects, increase total
spending and employment. Therefore, including military spending in GDP
would help policymakers calibrate their macroeconomic policies.
      It is interesting in this context to consider Robert Higgs's (1992)
argument that military spending should be excluded even during a war.
Higgs's goal, I believe, was to demonstrate that "wartime socialism" (my
term) had not improved the general welfare. The contrast between Kuznets
and Higgs illustrates Kuznets's point that the ultimate measure of national
income chosen will depend on the purposes for which the calculation is
being made. There is no single right measure of national income.
      (2) Kuznets built on the tradition established by Mitchell and his
collaborators in the Bureau's first study of national income of explaining the
sources of his data and the margins of error in complete detail. No reader
could be in doubt as to the amount of work that went into constructing the
estimates or the likelihood that they could do better. This approach, along
with the discussions of the philosophical underpinnings of the estimates
produced enormously persuasive documents.
      (3) Kuznets was also remarkably creative when it came to finding
sources of data and enormously effective in demonstrating to his students
and colleagues how to do it. Nathan (1994, 3) recalled what it was like to

                                        21
work under Kuznets's direction to produce the first Department of
Commerce estimates.

      "We had to do our own quickie surveys. We found a survey here, a
      master's thesis there, or a Ph.D. dissertation somewhere else. Bit by
      bit we assembled bases for estimates from scattered studies and
      reports to develop reasonable estimates."

One of the surveys undertaken by the Commerce Department for those first
official estimates became the basis for an important book by Milton
Friedman and Kuznets (1945): Income from Independent Professional
Practice, which also served as Friedman's Ph.D. dissertation.
      (4) Kuznets also contributed to the development of national income
accounting by showing the value of carefully constructed national accounts
for addressing a wide range of important questions. In World War II for
example, as I noted above, he argued forcefully that the military's spending
plans were infeasible. That argument was effective because he was able to
bring the national income estimates to bear.
      After the war Kuznets focused first on the distribution of income, the
concern that had motivated establishment of the Bureau. In 1950 the
Bureau published "Shares of Upper Income Groups in Income and
Savings." Economists had long argued that one of the key benefits of
inequality was that it increased savings because the rich saved more than
the poor. But Kuznets wanted to know, as he always did, how good the
quantitative data was and what did it show. In this paper he showed that
the affluent did provide a large and stable share of total savings. The top
5% of households measured by their share of income accounted for about
two-thirds of the nation's saving (Kuznets 1950, 52) and their savings rate



                                      22
varied less over the business cycle than the savings rate of the less
affluent.
      Kuznets's work on the distribution of income led eventually to his
famous presidential address to the American Economic Association,
"Economic Growth and Income Inequality" (1955). It was in this address
that he described what became famous as the "Kuznets Curve"; the
"inverted U" relationship between economic development and income
inequality. Kuznets concluded, tentatively, that inequality rose in the early
stages of economic development, but that there was some evidence that it
fell in later stages. Whatever one may think of the long-run relevance of the
curve, the address still stands as a model of careful handling of empirical
data in an attempt to answer an important question.
      After the war Kuznets also intensified his research on economic
development, work for which he ultimately became the second American to
win the Nobel Prize in economics (1971).Again, Kuznets's work
demonstrated the worth of carefully compiled estimates of national income.
      (5) Kuznets was a major institution builder and educator. The
Bureau's Conference on Research on Income and Wealth which played a
major role in developing and standardizing the methodology of national
income accounting was his idea. Founded in 1935 its first publications dealt
with the measurement of income and its distribution by size. The
Conference has produced over seventy books examining issues in
economic measurement, Fogel et al (2013, 110-112).
       (6) Finally, there was an aspect of Kuznets's legacy that is hard to
quantify -- an unfortunate admission in a paper about the Bureau -- but
nevertheless important: he was an inspiring teacher and mentor. One can
point, of course, to some of his outstanding students such as, Nobel Prize

                                      23
winners Milton Friedman and Robert Fogel. But exactly how he inspired his
students is unclear. Robert Nathan (1994, 1) remembered his classes with
Kuznets this way.

      "I learned to always sit in the front row because I had trouble hearing
      his lectures - he mumbled, and he chewed his words. One had to
      listen carefully to put it all together. But he was an excellent teacher,
      and his brilliance revealed itself from the first day of his classes. I
      thoroughly enjoyed my two graduate years with him."

Moses Abramovitz (2001, 98) remembered the audience's reaction at the
celebration of Kuznets's 80th birthday at Harvard to a story about Kuznets's
continued desire to discuss Abramovitz's research long after they both had
left the Bureau.

      "To my surprise and pleasure, as I went through my story, I sensed
      an empathetic reaction from the audience. Others had feelings like
      my own. Love mixed with awe."



                             6. The Test of Time

How well have the efforts made at the Bureau to measure national income
stood up? Did later researchers find conceptual or methodological errors or
new sources of data that required substantial revisions? Many criticisms of
the conceptual basis of the national income accounts have been leveled
over the years. I alluded to some of them above when discussing Kuznets
as the philosopher of national income. But it is worth recalling them here by
way of illustrating that criticisms of the conceptual basis of their estimates
were always taken seriously by the economists at the Bureau, even if they
were not always able to deal with them to everyone's satisfaction.

                                       24
       (1) For example, it has often been pointed out that non-monetized
production within the household is excluded from GDP and other measures
of national income. This was recognized, as I noted above, in the Bureau's
first book, Income in the United States by Mitchell and his collaborators and
in Kuznets's subsequent work. (2) John W. Kendrick (1961) relied on
Kuznets's estimates for his famous and still important study of total factor
productivity. However, as I noted above, he rejected Kuznets's exclusion of
a good part of military spending from the peacetime totals. (3) Friedman
and Schwartz (1982) used Kuznets's estimates of NNP in their studies of
the demand for money reported Monetary Trends in the United States and
the United Kingdom. But they were skeptical of Kuznets's deflator for World
War II and for 1971 to 1974. They thought that price controls had produced
quality deterioration, black markets, and other forms of evasion which
meant that the measured rate of inflation understated the true rate of
inflation. They then devised a technique for generating what they regarded
as more accurate measures of wartime inflation, using nominal income as
an interpolator for the price level. 12
       (4) Recently, one of the frequent complaints voiced by critics of the
national income estimates is that the estimates do not adequately stress
rising inequality and therefore give a misleading picture of how well the
economy is doing, and how well it is providing for the average citizen. We
have returned in other words to the concerns that motivated formation of
the Bureau. The response of the Commerce Department will be to release
estimates of income by distributional class alongside its estimates of total


12Mills and Rockoff (1987) also attempted to improve on the measured deflator for WWII, and came up
with somewhat different estimates. But, of course, all such estimates are subject to a wide margin of
error.

                                                  25
income (Leonhardt 2019). The goal of the advocates of this change in the
Commerce Department's policies, of course, is to reinforce calls for
redistribution. The Bureau, as we have seen, was concerned from the
beginning with the distribution of income. There were chapters on the
distribution of income in its first study, as announced in the full title: Income
in the United States, its Amount and Distribution, 1909-1919. King and
Epstein discussed the distribution of income when they extended the
Bureau's estimates through the 1920s. And as I noted above, Kuznets
published a number of important studies of the distribution of income and
its impact on the economy which culminated in his famous presidential
address to the American Economic Association (1955).
      These complaints aside, how well have the early estimates produced
by the Bureau and the Commerce Department with the Bureau's help stood
up? Five series are plotted in Figure 2 which covers 1913 to 1929. The
upper three are estimates of real GNP; the lower two are estimates of real
NNP. As you can see, the estimates of real GNP by Nathan S. Balke and
Robert J. Gordon (1989) and Christina Romer (1989) are very similar to
Kuznets (1961) in the 1920s when all three are available. The estimates of
real net product by King and Epstein (1930) and Kuznets (1961) are also
very similar when both are available. Later writers, of course, did not start
from scratch. They built on the foundations laid at the Bureau; an important
endorsement of the Bureau's work. It is clear, moreover, that later writers
did not find errors that would change our picture of the macro-economic
history of the 1920s.
      The motivation for the creation of Commerce Department estimates
was to document the severity of the Great Contraction and reinforce
Progressive calls for action to address the crisis. So let's compare those

                                       26
estimates with later estimates. Tables 1 (nominal) and 2 (1929 prices)
show the levels of various estimates in 1929 and 1932 and the percentage
changes between 1929 and 1932, 1937 and 1938, and 1929 and 1939. 13
These dates correspond to the main turning points in the Depression.
There was a severe contraction from 1929 to 1933, a rapid but incomplete
recovery, a short but severe contraction in 1937 and 1938 (the "recession
within the depression"), leaving an economy that had not fully recovered by
the end of the decade. I have included most of the estimates of national
income that have been used frequently by economic historians so that the
reader can peruse the tables and make the comparisons that are of most
interest to them.
        Rows 1 and 2 of Table 1 show the original estimates made at the
Commerce Department under Kuznets's direction. They document a
tremendous contraction of nominal income between 1929 and 1932 as no
doubt Senator Lafollette and other Progressives thought they would. There
are differences with subsequent estimates, reflecting in part conceptual
differences, but in general they are in the same ball park. The original
estimates are quite close, for example, to the estimates of national income
included in the year 2000 edition of the Historical Statistics of the United
States. Evidently, nothing had come to the attention of the compilers that
would justify inclusion of far different estimates.
        The Commerce Department did not publish estimates of real national
income in their summary tables. They simply showed the Bureau of Labor
Statistic's indexes of wholesale prices and the cost of living alongside the
estimates of nominal income so that readers could make their own

13Most of the series bottom in 1933, but here I show 1932 values to facilitate comparison of the first
Commerce Department estimates with estimates made later.

                                                    27
comparisons. As a simple expedient, I used an average of the two indices
to deflate the estimates of nominal income. It might possible to produce a
better estimate by combining the sub-sector estimates expressed in 1929
prices that were included in the report. But for my purposes this makeshift
should do. The results are shown in rows 1 and 2 of Table 2. Evidently, the
Commerce Department estimates of real national income are similar to
later estimates. The first Commerce Department estimates of National
Income Produced, deflated with my makeshift price index, falls 44.8
percent (Table 2 row 1), and National Income Paid Out falls 29.3 percent
(Table 2 row 2). The most recent Bureau of Economic Analysis estimate of
NNP (Table 2 row 9) 33.4 percent between 1929 and 1932.
      Rows 3-17 of Table 2 show many of the subsequent estimates of real
national income made by Bureau researchers and by the U.S. Bureau of
Economic Analysis. The numbers differ from one set of estimates to
another because of differences in the concept of national income, and also
because differences in the sources of data exploited, but the broad-brush
picture of the Depression painted by each is similar. The decreases
between 1929 and 1932 in real NNP range from -54.1 percent (Table 2 row
3) in Kuznets (1937) to -33.4 percent in the most recent National Income
and Product Account estimates (Table 2 row 9). The Kendrick and Kuznets
estimates are generally similar; they differ only by the amount of national
defense spending, but this was a minor factor during the 1930s.
      Each series documents an devastating collapse between 1929 and
1932, then a recovery interrupted by the 1937-1938 recession, so that by
the end of the decade real income was only a few percent above the level
in 1929. The population of the United States rose a bit more than 7 percent
between 1929 and 1939. Therefore, even the modern chained indexes of

                                      28
real national income which show the most growth imply an increase in
income per capita of only 2 or 3 percent between 1929 and 1939: a lost
decade. Scholars have had time to ponder the early estimates, to find new
sources of data, and to refine the methodology for producing estimates of
national income. But the picture of the Depression developed by Kuznets
and by the team Kuznets helped to create at the Commerce Department is
very similar to recent efforts.
      Figure 3 takes a longer view and shows five measures of real NNP
from 1929 through 1955. The modern chained index declines a bit less
during the Great Contraction than the earlier fixed-weight estimates. The
explanation may be that as incomes fell people spent a larger fraction of
their remaining income on lower-priced necessities and a smaller share on
higher priced luxuries; more on bread and less on jewelry. The effect of this
change in spending patterns would have moderated the extent of the
decline in the prices were chained. Clearly, however, all of these series tell
similar stories for the Depression decade as might be expected from
Tables 1 and 2.
      However, the estimates diverge during the war and follow somewhat
different patterns through the first part of the 1950s. I have plotted
Kuznets's Variant III, a "peacetime" estimate in Kuznets's lexicon, which
declines during the war because current military spending (but not
additions to the stock of munitions) are excluded. As noted above, Kuznets
did prepare alternative estimates for the war years that included all military
spending because he thought that military spending had become a prime
objective coequal with the supplying of goods and services to consumers.
      The Friedman and Schwartz measure, also shown in Figure 3,
includes military spending during the war, and so rises more than Kuznets's

                                       29
peacetime-concept estimates. But it rises less than the other measures of
NNP because Friedman and Schwartz adjust the price level upward for
black markets and other forms of evasion of price controls.
       The modern chained index grows more rapidly during the war and
afterwards. It was probably working as intended, responding quickly to
changes in the way the people spend their income. Sectors experiencing
rapid technological change were the recipient of more spending and yet
experienced lower inflation. Continually giving these sectors more weight
produced lower measured inflation and a higher rate of growth of real
income.
       All in all, the early estimates of national income made by researchers
at the Bureau or at the Commerce Department with the help of the Bureau
have stood the test of time. Later investigators have made adjustments to
these early estimates. But recent estimates are usually in the same
ballpark, indeed, one is tempted to write that often they are in the same
infield.


                               7. Conclusion

The Bureau was a product of the bitter controversies over the distribution of
income that roiled the United States at the turn of the nineteenth century.
Indeed, the Bureau began life as "the Committee on the Distribution of
Income." Progressives claimed that the distribution of income was
increasingly distorted by the predation of the Robber Barons; while others
blamed the end of the frontier or immigration for adverse trends or denied
that such trends existed. But what were the facts? Scott Nearing and
Willford King had produced estimates of national income and its distribution


                                      30
and addressed the causes for the trends they found. One is reminded of
Piketty (2014). But how could the public be sure that these were unbiased
estimates? Two economists, Malcolm Rorty and Nahum Stone, won
financial support for an organization with the mission of producing reliable
estimates and, hopefully, sufficient resources to accomplish the task.
     The Bureau was chartered in 1920 and Wesley Mitchell, an economist
already well known for his number based studies of the greenback and the
business cycle was appointed the first director. The Bureau's first study
Income in the United States, Its Amount and Distribution was published in
1921. Written by a team directed by Mitchell that included Oswald Knauth,
Frederick Macaulay and King, and nearly 600 pages in two volumes, won
widespread praise for the care, thoroughness and sophistication that were
deployed in determining the level and distribution of income. True to what
became the guiding philosophy of the Bureau, this volume made no policy
recommendations. The Bureau's estimates of national Income were
extended through the 1920s by King and Epstein.
      The Great Contraction, 1929-1933 produced renewed calls for
reliable economic data. Progressives wanted rigorously constructed and
therefore persuasive estimates produced by the Federal Government that
they thought would help underline the severity of the contraction. Simon
Kuznets was seconded from the Bureau to the Department of Commerce
where he led a team that produced the first federal estimates of national
income and established the administrative organization for producing
regular updates. Kuznets did not invent GDP, as often claimed, but he had
enormous influence as a philosopher of national income accounting and as
a skilled practitioner and teacher. Subsequently, some scholars have


                                      31
      criticized aspects of the early estimates, but the picture those estimates
      painted of the Great Depression has held up well.
               In short, the Bureau's efforts to produce accurate measures of
      national income and to disseminate them with detailed explanations of the
      underlying philosophy and methods was a response to intense political
      controversies at the turn of the 19th century. The result was an important
      and enduring legacy.




                Table 1. Changes in National Income during the Great Depression
                              (Billions of Dollars at Current Prices)

    Variable                   Source        1929    1932   Change     Change      Change
                                                            1929-32    1937-38     1929-39
                                                            %          %           %
    National Income       U.S. Bureau of
1   Produced              Foreign Domestic
                                             83.0    39.4     -74.6        NA        NA
                          Commerce 1934,
                          10
    National Income       U.S. Bureau of
2   Paid Out              Foreign Domestic
                                             81.1    48.9     -50.7        NA        NA
                          Commerce 1934,
                          10
                          Historical
                          Statistics 2000,
3   National Income                          86.8    43.9     -68.2        -9.3      -17.5
                          Series Ca6

                          U.S. Bureau of
4   National Income       Economic           94.2    51.3     -60.8        -8.3      -13.3
                          Analysis, 2020

5   NNP                   Kuznets 1937, 8    83.4    39.6     -74.4        NA        NA

                          Kuznets 1961,
6   NNP Variant I                            87.2    42.9     -70.9        -7.4      -20.3
                          486
                          Kuznets 1961,
7   NNP Variant II
                          486                93.7    47.3     -68.4        -8.3      -19.9

                                              32
                            Kuznets 1961,
8    NNP Variant III                                90.3     44.8        -70.1         -8.8         -20.2
                            486
                            U.S. Bureau of
9    NNP                    Economic                94.9     51.5        -61.1         -7.3         -12.6
                            Analysis, 2020

10 GNP                      Kuznets 1937, 8         93.6     47.2        -68.5          NA            NA

   GNP,                     Kuznets 1961,
11                                                  98.4     51.5        -64.7         -6.0         -17.6
   Variant I                486
   GNP,                     Kuznets 1961,
12                                                 104.9     55.9        -62.9         -6.9         -17.5
   Variant II               486
   GNP,                     Kuznets 1961,
13                                                 101.5     53.4        -64.2         -7.1         -17.6
   Variant III              486
                            U.S. Bureau of
     GNP                    Economic               103.9     58.5        -57.4         -6.7         -12.9
14
                            Analysis, 2020
                            U.S. Bureau of
15   GDP                    Economic               104.6     59.5        -56.3         -6.3         -11.2
                            Analysis, 2020

Notes: (1) Percent changes are the difference in natural logarithms multiplied by 100. The result is usually
close to the difference in the two values divided by their average and multiplied by 100.
(2) The term "National Income" is used here in most cases as a generic to cover NNP, GNP, GDP and the
like. In row 3, however, it refers to the aggregate designated as National Income in the National Income
and Product Accounts.




                                                     33
                  Table 2. Changes in National Income during the Great Depression
                                 (Billions of Dollars at 1929 Prices)

     Variable               Source            1929       1932    %          %         %
                                                                 Change     Change    Change
                                                                 1929-32    1937-38   1929-39
                      U.S. Bureau of
     National         Foreign Domestic
1    Income           Commerce 1934, 10       83.0       53.1      -44.8       NA       NA
     Produced

                      U.S. Bureau of
     National         Foreign Domestic
2    Income           Commerce 1934, 10       81.1       60.5      -29.3       NA       NA
     Paid Out


3    NNP              Kuznets 1937, 8         83.4       48.6      -54.1       NA       NA

     NNP
4    variant I        Kuznets 1961, 487       86.9       56.0      -43.9      -6.8      0.1

     NNP
5                     Kuznets 1961, 487       93.4       60.8      -42.9      -7.9      -0.2
     variant II
     NNP
6    variant III      Kuznets 1961, 487       90.3       60.3      -40.2      -8.2      2.2

     NNP ­
7                     Kendrick 1961, 291
     National                                 91.1       61.0      -40.1      -8.0      2.5
     Security
     Version
     NNP              Friedman and
8                     Schwartz 1982, 124-     90.3       60.3      -40.4      -8.2      2.1
                      125
     NNP,             U.S. Bureau of
9    Chained          Economic Analysis,      94.9       68.0      -33.4      -3.9      10.2
     Prices           2020
                      Kuznets 1937, 8
     GNP
10                                            93.6       58.3      -47.4       NA       NA



                                                34
       GNP           Kuznets 1961, 487
 11    variant I
                                               98.0         66.4        -38.9       -6.0
                                                                                                0.2

       GNP           Kuznets 1961, 487
 12    variant II                              101.5        71.2        -38.4       -6.9        0.1

       GNP           Kuznets 1961, 487
 13    variant III                             101.4        70.7        -36.1       -7.2        2.2

       GNP ­         Kendrick 1961, 290
 14    National
       Security                                102.1        71.2        -36.0       -7.1        2.3
       Version

       GNP           U.S. Bureau of
 15    Chained       Economic Analysis,        105.3        78.4        -29.5       -3.3        9.4
       Prices        2020
       GDP           Historical Statistics
                                               103.7        77.2        -29.6       -3.6        9.4
 16                  2000, Series Ca6

       GDP,          U.S. Bureau of
 17    Chained       Economic Analysis,        104.6        78.0        -29.3       -3.4        9.7
       Prices        2020

Notes: (1) Percent changes are the difference in natural logarithms multiplied by 100.
(2) The data from Historical Statistics was in 1996 dollars and the data from the National Income and
Product Accounts was in 2012 prices. Each observation was multiplied by the ratio of the 1929 value
in current prices to the 1929 value in 1996 or 2012 prices to facilitate comparisons with the other
series.




                                                  35
Figure 1. Two Estimates of Changes in National Income 1911-1930




                                36
Figure 2. Estimates of NNP and GNP in Constant Dollars, 1913-1929




                                37
Figure 3. Five Estimates of Real NNP in Constant Dollars, 1929-1955




                                 38
                             REFERENCES



Abramovitz, Moses. 2001. Days Gone By: A Memoir for my Family.
Available at
https://stanford.app.box.com/s/140o1aphjb5puybv7c03rklc2a0fnh13.

Balke, Nathan S., and Robert J. Gordon. 1989. "The Estimation of
Prewar Gross National Product: Methodology and New Evidence." Journal
of Political Economy 97, no. 1 (1989): 38-92.

Bowley, Arthur L. 1923. Income in the United States. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 37(3): 510-517.

Brissenden, Paul F. 1932. "Review, the National Income and its
Purchasing Power." Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, vol. 35: 54­60.

Copeland, Morris A. 1932a. "Some Problems in the Theory of National
Income." Journal of Political Economy 40, no. 1: 1-51.

_____. 1932b. "How Large Is Our National Income?" Journal of Political
Economy 40, no. 6: 771-95.

Coyle, Diane. 2014. GDP: A Brief but Affectionate History, Revised and
Expanded Edition. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Dorfman, Joseph. 1959. The Economic Mind in American Civilization:
1606­1933, 5 vols. New York: Viking Press.

Durr, Kenneth D. 2013. The Best Made Plans: Robert R. Nathan and 20th
Century Liberalism. Rockville, MD: Montrose Press.

Edelstein, Michael. 2001. "The Size of the U.S. Armed Forces during
World War II: Feasibility and War Planning." In Research in Economic
History, Vol. 20, 47-97. Emerald Group Publishing Limited.




                                    39
Fabricant, Solomon. 1961. "Toward a Firmer Basis of Economic Policy."
In Towards a Firmer Basis of Economic Policy, edited by Solomon
Fabricant, 1-16. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Fisher, Irving. 1919. "Economists in Public Service: Annual Address of the
President." American Economic Review 9(1): 5­21.

Fogel, Robert William, Enid M. Fogel, Mark Guglielmo, and Nathaniel
Grotte. 2013. Political Arithmetic: Simon Kuznets and the Empirical
Tradition in Economics. University of Chicago Press.

Friedman, Milton, and Simon Kuznets. 1945. Income from Independent
Professional Practice. New York, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz. 1963. A Monetary History of
the United States, 1867-1960. Studies in Business Cycles; No. 12.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

__________. 1970. Monetary Statistics of the United States: Estimates,
Sources, Methods. Studies in Business Cycles; No. 20. New York: National
Bureau of Economic Research.

__________. 1982. Monetary Trends in the United States and the United
Kingdom, Their Relation to Income, Prices, and Interest Rates, 1867-1975.
A National Bureau of Economic Research Monograph. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.

Gallman, Robert E. 1961. "Estimates of American National Product Made
before the Civil War." Economic Development and Cultural Change 9(3):
397­412.

Higgs, Robert. 1992. "Wartime Prosperity? A Reassessment of the U.S.
Economy in the 1940s." Journal of Economic History 52(1): 41­60.

Kendrick, John W. 1961. Productivity Trends in the United States.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

King, Willford I. 1915. The Wealth and Income of the People of the United
States. New York: Macmillan.

                                    40
__________ and Lillian Epstein. 1930. The National Income and Its
Purchasing Power. General Series (National Bureau of Economic
Research); No. 15. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kuznets, Simon Smith. 1926. Cyclical Fluctuations; Retail and Wholesale
Trade, United States, 1919-1925. New York: Adelphi.

Kuznets, Simon. 1937. National Income and Capital Formation, 1919-
1935, a Preliminary Report. New York: National Bureau of Economic
Research.

_________. 1940. "National and Regional Measures of Income." Southern
Economic Journal 6, no. 3: 291-313.

_________ assisted by Lillian Epstein and Elizabeth Jenks. 1941. National
Income and Its Composition, 1919-1938. Two volumes. New York: National
Bureau of Economic Research.

_________. 1945. National Product in Wartime. New York: National Bureau
of Economic Research.

_________. 1947. "Measurement: Measurement of Economic Growth." The
Journal of Economic History 7: 10-34.

_________. 1949. "National Income and Industrial Structure."
Econometrica 17: 205-41.

_________. 1950. "Shares of upper income groups in income and
savings." New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, Occasional
paper 35.

_________. 1955. "Economic Growth and Income Inequality." The
American Economic Review 45, no. 1: 1-28.

_________. 1956. "Quantitative Aspects of the Economic Growth of
Nations: I. Levels and Variability of Rates of Growth." Economic
Development and Cultural Change 5, no. 1: 1-94.

_________. 1961. Capital in the American Economy; Its Formation and
Financing. Princeton University Press.

                                    41
_________. 1976. "Demographic Aspects of the Size Distribution of
Income: An Exploratory Essay." Economic Development and Cultural
Change 25, no. 1: 1-94.

_________, Lillian Epstein, and Elizabeth Jenks. 1946 National Product
since 1869. General Series (National Bureau of Economic Research) ; No.
46. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lacey, Jim. 2011. Keep from All Thoughtful Men: How U.S. Economists
Won World War II. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press.

Leonhardt, David. 2019. "Why You Shouldn't Believe Those G.D.P.
Numbers." The New York Times, Dec. 15.

Mills, Geofrey and Hugh Rockoff. 1987. "Compliance with Price Controls
in the United States and the United Kingdom During World War II," Journal
of Economic History 47, March, 197-213.

Mitchell, Wesley C. 1903. A History of the Greenbacks, with Special
Reference to the Economic Consequences of Their Issue: 1862-65. The
University of Chicago Press.

__________. 1913. Business Cycles. Berkeley: University of California
Press.

__________, Willford I. King, Frederick R. Macaulay, and Oswald W.
Knauth, 1921. Income in the United States, its amount and distribution,
1909-1919. General series National Bureau of Economic Research; no. 1-
2. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research incorporated.

Nathan, Robert R. 1994. "GNP and Military Mobilization." Journal of
Evolutionary Economics, v. 4, issue. 1: 1-16.

Nearing, Scott. 1915. Income; an Examination of the Returns for Services
Rendered and from Property Owned in the United States. New York:
Macmillan.


Pigou, Arthur. C. 1912. Wealth and Welfare. London: Macmillan, 1912.

                                    42
Piketty, Thomas. 2014. Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Cambridge
and London: Cambridge Massachusetts: Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press.

Rockoff, Hugh. 2019. "On the Controversies behind the Origins of the
Federal Economic Statistics," Journal of Economic Perspectives, volume
33, Number 1, winter: 147-164.

Romer, Christina D. 1989. "The Prewar Business Cycle Reconsidered:
New Estimates of Gross National Product, 1869-1908." Journal of Political
Economy 97, no. 1 (1989): 1-37.

Roosevelt, Franklin D. 1936. "Roosevelt's Defense of His Use of Billions
for Recovery" New York Times, Oct. 2, p. 2.

Rutherford, Malcolm. 2011. The Institutionalist Movement in American
Economics, 1918-1947: Science and Social Control. Cambridge.

Seaman, Ezra C. 1853. Essays on the Progress of Nations, in Civilization,
Productive Industry, Wealth and Population. C. Scribner.

Smith, Adam. (1976 [1776]) An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the
Wealth of Nations. R.H. Campbell and A.S. Skinner (Eds.), Oxford:
Clarendon Press. Reprinted, Indianapolis: Liberty Classics.

Stone, Nahum I. 1916. "Review, Income by Scott Nearing." The
Intercollegiate Socialist, vol. 4, no. 3, February-March: 30­35.

Tucker, George. 1855. Progress of the United States in Population and
Wealth in Fifty Years: as Exhibited by the Decennial Census from 1790 to
1840, with an Appendix, Containing an Abstract of the Census of 1850.
Press of Hunt's Merchants' Magazine.

U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2020. "Table 1.7.5. Relation of Gross
Domestic Product, Gross National Product, Net National Product, National
Income, and Personal Income." (accessed September 19, 2012).




                                    43
U.S. Bureau of Foreign Domestic Commerce. 1934. National Income,
1929-1932. Letter from the Acting Secretary of Commerce Transmitting in
Response to Senate Resolution No. 220 (72nd Cong.) a Report on National
Income, 1929-32. U. S. Govt. Print Off.

Weyl, E. Glen. 2011. "Introduction, Simon Kuznets: Cautious Empiricist of
the Eastern European Jewish Diaspora." In Jewish Economies:
Development and Migration in America and Beyond: Comparative
Perspectives on Jewish Migration, by Simon Kuznets, edited by Stephanie
Lo and E. Glen Weyl, vol. 2, 1-58.

Williamson, Samuel H. 2019. "Seven Ways to Compute the Relative
Value of a U.S. Dollar Amount, 1790 to present," MeasuringWorth, April
2019. URL: www.measuringworth.com/uscompare/.




                                    44
