                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE DYNAMIC EFFICIENCY IN RESOURCE ALLOCATION:
             EVIDENCE FROM VEHICLE LICENSE LOTTERIES IN BEIJING

                                         Youming Liu
                                          Shanjun Li
                                         Caixia Shen

                                      Working Paper 26904
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26904


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020




The authors thank Yonghong An, Panle Jia Barwick and especially Marc Rysman for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Youming Liu, Shanjun Li, and Caixia Shen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Dynamic Efficiency in Resource Allocation: Evidence from Vehicle License Lotteries
in Beijing
Youming Liu, Shanjun Li, and Caixia Shen
NBER Working Paper No. 26904
March 2020
JEL No. L51,L62,R21

                                           ABSTRACT

The efficiency of resource allocation is often analyzed in static frameworks with a focus on the
cross-sectional heterogeneity in the willingness to pay among users. When the resource is
durable in nature, the temporal heterogeneity could be important in assessing the efficiency
properties of different allocation mechanisms. This paper uses a dynamic model to empirically
quantify the efficiency outcome of using lotteries to allocate scarce resources among forward-
looking consumers. In the context of the lottery policy for vehicle licenses in Beijing, our
analysis shows that lotteries significantly affect intertemporal decisions in that households
participate in lotteries at least four years earlier on average than they would be in a counterfactual
environment of no quantity constraint. The welfare loss due to temporal heterogeneity and
resulting changes in participation decisions accounts for over half of the total welfare loss from
the lottery policy. The analysis highlights the importance of taking dynamic efficiency into
account in designing resource allocation mechanisms.

Youming Liu                                       Caixia Shen
Cornell University                                Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
yl3458@cornell.edu                                Department of Economics
                                                  Shanghai
Shanjun Li                                        China
Cornell University                                shencaixia@gmail.com
405 Warren Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
SL2448@cornell.edu
1     Introduction
Government agencies and institutions often use lotteries to allocate scarce resources. Examples
include, but are not limited to, subsidized housing, hunting permits, charter school and community
college admissions, and medical interventions such as vaccines and organs for transplants. The
right to use the resources obtained through lotteries in these settings is generally non-transferable.
As a result, lotteries could lead to welfare loss because the resources may not be allocated to the
users who value them the most. The literature has largely focused on the inefficiency of using
lotteries for resource allocation arising from the cross-sectional heterogeneity in the willingness
to pay (WTP) across users in a static framework (Borenstein and Zimmerman, 1988; Glaeser and
Luttmer, 2003; Hazlett and Muñoz, 2009; Davis and Kilian, 2011; Li, 2017).
     This paper investigates intertemporal decisions as an additional and potentially more important
source of inefficiency from lotteries. Due to the quantity constraint, a lottery system delays access
to the resource in question, and the delay could be substantial when the quantity constraint (or cap)
is tight relative to the underlying demand. In anticipation of the delay, agents who need the resource
only in the future may enter the lottery pool before they need the resource. The participation of
these agents in the market without an immediate need of the resource reduces the probability of
winning for all agents in the lottery pool. The incentive to preemptively enter the lottery pool is
stronger when the (expected) odds of winning are lower, further exacerbating the waiting period
for those who have an immediate need for the resource. Misallocation of this kind is temporal in
nature. We define the welfare loss from this channel as dynamic inefficiency in resource allocation.
     Dynamic inefficiency could arise in many institutional settings in which a random allocation
mechanism is used to allocated scarce resources. The US government uses a lottery policy to
allocate H-1B working visa among foreign nationals. Kato and Sparber (2013) argue that the
reduction of H-1B visa quota in 2003 led to a decline in the quality of job applicants because it
discouraged high-ability international students from pursuing education in the US. Rent control
provides another prominent example. Several US cities address housing affordability among low-
income households with lotteries that allocate the limited number of rent-regulated apartments
to those in need. Misallocation arises when the available units go to those with relatively low
willingness to pay (Glaeser, 1996). Because housing decisions are inherently dynamic, the rent
control policy has the potential to create dynamic inefficiency by affecting household temporal
decisions (Basu and Emerson, 2000; Diamond et al., 2019). Recent expansion of the rent control
regulation has reignited the debate over the efficiency of this type of policy.1 However, there is a
lack of empirical analysis on the importance of dynamic inefficiency in these settings.

1 Californiaand New York State passed rent laws to expand the rent regulation to the entire states in the face of
 rising housing costs. See https://www.nytimes.com/2019/06/12/nyregion/rent-regulation-laws-new-york.html, and
 https://www.nytimes.com/2019/09/11/business/economy/california-rent-control.html.


                                                       1
     Using a model of dynamic demand, we quantify the extent of dynamic inefficiency in the con-
text of a vehicle license lottery policy in Beijing. In 2011, the Beijing municipal government
introduced a vehicle quota system to curb the dramatic increase in vehicle ownership and to com-
bat worsening traffic congestion and air pollution. The policy puts a cap on newly issued vehicle
licenses and uses a non-transferable lottery system to allocate the limited number of licenses. A
salient feature of the lottery system is the rapidly expanding lottery pool, and, in turn, dramatically
shrinking winning odds. In January of 2011, around 180,000 households applied to participate in
the lottery. This number increased to 1.34 million by the end of 2012, and, to over 12 million by
the end of 2017. The enormous expansion of the lottery pool resulted in a significant plunge of the
winning odds: from 9.4 percent in January 2011 to about 1 percent by the end of 2012, and, further,
to 0.1 percent by the end of 2017 as shown in Figure 1.
     In contrast to the rapid growth of the number of lottery participation, vehicle sales increased at a
much slower pace in the periods before the policy and in cities that have not implemented a vehicle
quota system. Sales in Beijing were about 0.8 million in 2010, the year before the lottery policy,
and grew steadily at a rate of about 2 percent in each month. Vehicle sales in Tianjin, a neighboring
city of Beijing, showed a slight decrease from 2010 to 2011, and moderate growth from 2011 to
2012 as shown in Figure 2.2 This contrast suggests that the policy may have induced households to
enter the lottery pool far earlier than when they would have bought a vehicle in the absence of such
a policy. The induced change in timing decisions could have significant welfare implications.
     To quantify the welfare impact, in particular, the potential dynamic inefficiency from the lot-
teries, we develop and estimate a structural model of dynamic demand for both license plates and
vehicles. A dynamic model is necessary to capture consumer forward-looking behavior and in-
tertemporal substitution for the following two reasons. First, in contrast to the US market, the
vehicle market in China has been experiencing rapid product turnover and price changes as an
emerging market (Li et al., 2015). In addition, while vehicles are durable, household character-
istics, such as income, change over time. As a result, the purchase timing is an important choice
margin for agents. A dynamic demand model better suits such a context (Gowrisankaran and Rys-
man, 2012). Second, vehicle licenses are also durable goods. Under the lottery policy, households
need to decide when to enter the lottery pool based on both their anticipated future needs and
the winning odder. A dynamic model is capable of better capturing these decisions on when to
participate in the process.
     Our model builds on the empirical methodology of Gowrisankaran and Rysman (2012) (hence-
forth GR), who develop a dynamic framework nested with a BLP-style demand to capture prod-
uct differentiation, endogeneity of prices, persistent consumer heterogeneity, and repeat purchases
over time. In contrast to the GR framework, our model assumes households make decisions in two

2 In   2-14, Tianjin started to implement a quota policy involving a hybrid system of auction and lottery.


                                                              2
stages. Households first decide whether to enter the lottery, and then, conditional on winning, they
decide when to make a purchase and which vehicle model to choose. The utility received from
lottery participation in the first stage is the expected value of purchasing a vehicle conditional on
winning. The heterogeneous preference toward owning a vehicle in the second stage affects the
utility of lottery participation. Households that are likely to receive a higher utility from buying a
vehicle are more likely to participate in the lottery. In addition, the model allows household income
and the need to have a vehicle (due to both observed and idiosyncratic reasons) to change over time,
leading to temporal heterogeneity among households.
    To address time-varying demand shocks that could confound the lottery policy, we leverage the
common trend assumption implicitly employed in the difference-in-differences (DID) framework
as in Li (2017) and use that to construct additional moment conditions in estimation. Specifically,
we use Tianjin, a neighboring city with a large population, as the control group. Both Tianjin and
Beijing are among the four directly administered municipalities in China. However, Tianjin did
not have a vehicle quota system during the sample period. Through both graphical and regression
analysis, we show that the vehicle markets in the two cities exhibited similar trends before the
policy. The advantages of using the common-trend assumption to aid identification of the structural
model are twofold: First, the common-trend assumption does not rely on the maintained exogeneity
assumption that unobserved product attributes are uncorrelated with observed product attributes;
Second, it helps regulate the unobservable demand shocks in Beijing after the policy, which turns
out to be crucial in estimating the counterfactual vehicle sales.
    Our analysis shows that the lottery policy alters the intertemporal decisions of vehicle purchase.
Households enter the lottery pool at least four years earlier on average than they would have pur-
chased a vehicle in the absence of a lottery policy. Moreover, lottery-winning households purchase
vehicles six months earlier on average than they would have if the lottery policy were not in placed.3
These timing decisions, especially the entrance of non-urgent buyers into the lottery pool, give rises
to the dynamic inefficiency. The total welfare loss from the lottery policy relative to the first-best
allocation has two components. The first component is due to static misallocation characterized by
the difference between the first best and the counterfactual scenario where licenses are randomly
allocated with equal probability among households that would purchase a vehicle in each period in
the absence of the quantity constraint. This counterfactual scenario does not allow households to
adjust their timing decisions and therefor exclude dynamic considerations. The second component
is dynamic inefficiency characterized by the difference between the above counterfactual scenario
and the lottery policy. This component is driven by the changes in time decisions induced by the
lottery policy. Our analysis shows that the welfare loss from dynamic inefficiency amounted to 58

3 The policy requires lottery winners to purchase a vehicle within six months. Those who fail to comply with this rule
 are not allowed to re-enter the lottery within three years.


                                                          3
Billion RMB, accounting for 52 percent of total welfare loss from the lottery policy during 2011
and 2012.4
     This study contributes to the literature in the following three dimensions. First, it adds to the
literature to understand the efficiency consequences of various mechanisms for resource alloca-
tion. Researchers have argued that lotteries represent a fair mechanism for allocating resources,
especially when objects are indivisible (Aubert, 1959; Eckhoff, 1989; Fienberg, 1971; Hofstee,
1990).5 In addition, Boyce (1994) argues that lotteries can prevent the rent-seeking behavior and
speculation, and therefore, can preserve more economic rents for all participants than they would
have received under alternative allocation mechanisms such as auctions, queues or merits-based
decision making procedures.6 Several empirical papers examine the welfare loss from resource
misallocation through lotteries. Glaeser and Luttmer (2003) and Davis and Kilian (2011) docu-
mented significant misallocation under lotteries through price controls in the housing market in
New York City and the US residential market for natural gas, respectively. Closely related to our
study is Li (2017), who quantifies and compares the welfare consequences of lotteries and auctions
in a static framework by taking into account both allocative efficiency and automobile externalities
post-allocation. In the same context of vehicle license allocations, Xiao et al. (2017) analyzes the
welfare effect of the auction mechanism in Shanghai while Huang and Wen (2019) focuses on the
auction-lottery hybrid mechanisms used in other four Chinese cities. These empirical studies have
all focused on the cross-sectional heterogeneity among users, and the resulting static misalloca-
tion. By contrast, our paper identifies an additional source of misallocation from inter-temporal
considerations, and shows that dynamic inefficiencies could be much larger.
     Second, our paper fits into the growing literature that uses dynamic models to empirically exam-
ine the welfare impacts of resources allocation and environmental regulations. Examples include
(but not limited to) the study of water resource allocation (Timmins, 2002; Donna and Espín-
Sánchez, 2016), the common-pool problem in fisheries (Huang and Smith, 2014), and regulation of
air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions regulations in the cement industry (Ryan, 2012; Fowlie
et al., 2015). Our study adapts an empirically tractable structural model of demand estimation used
in Schiraldi (2011), Gowrisankaran and Rysman (2012) and Lee (2013) to analyze the misalloca-
tion and dynamic efficiency properties of lotteries.
     Third, this study adds to the literature on the automobile market in China as well as on regu-
lations to address negative externalities (e.g., traffic congestion and air pollution) from automobile

4 The  exchange rate was about 6.5 USD/CNY between 2011 and 2012.
5 Kahneman    et al. (1986) uses the survey experiment to show that consumer sometimes value "fairness" as a more
  important consideration in certain situations. For example, in their research context, which addresses the allocation
  of convert tickets, agents prefer queues to lotteries or auctions.
6 Hazlett and Michaels (1993) empirically estimate rent-seeking costs in cellular telephone license lotteries conducted

  by the US Federal Communications Commission that required participants to pay an entry fee to a consulting firm to
  submit an application.


                                                          4
usage. To our knowledge, this paper provides the first analysis to apply a dynamic framework to
study automobile demand in China. The rapid growth of China's automobile industry offers a fer-
tile ground for exploring interesting questions about market power (Deng and Ma, 2010), pricing
decisions and collusion (Hu et al., 2014) , price evolution over time (Li et al., 2015), local protec-
tionism in the automobile market (Barwick et al., 2017), and quality upgrading (Bai et al., 2019).
The rapid increase in vehicle ownership in China over last two decades has significantly contributed
to two pressing urban challenges in China: air pollution and traffic congestion. To combat these
challenges, central and local governments have adopted a series of policies aimed at reducing ve-
hicle ownership and usage. Currently seven cities in China employ a vehicle quota system with
different allocation mechanisms such as lotteries, auctions, or a combination of the two as shown
in Appendix Table 1. In light of the limited understanding of the effectiveness and efficiency of
these policies, this study presents the first analysis on the dynamic inefficiency of the lottery policy.
     The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents a stylized theoretical model
to illustrate how dynamic inefficiency arises in resource allocation. Section 3 describes the back-
ground of the vehicle lottery policy in Beijing and introduce the data pattern and reduced-form
evidence. Section 4 presents a structural model of lottery participation and demand for vehicles.
It also outlines the identification and the estimation strategies. Section 5 presents the estimation
results. Section 6 presents counterfactual simulations and welfare analyses. Section 7 concludes.


2    Dynamic Inefficiency - A Theoretical Illustration
In this section we illustrate the dynamic inefficiency in resource allocation through a stylized the-
oretical model. The model considers a market with consumers of unit measure. Consumers are
separated by two types according to the utility received from the resource, uh for the high type h
and ul for the low type l . For both types, the utility received from the outside option is normalized
to zero. We assume that the utility received by the low type is not only lower than the utility re-
ceived by the high type, but also lower than the utility received from the outside option. That is,
the low type should not receive the resource under an efficient allocation mechanism. Formally, the
assumption is:

Assumption 1. uh > 0 > ul .

    Suppose that the resource is allocated via lottery, and that the total amount of resource to be
allocated in each period is capped at q. Each agent faces a two-period decision problem with her
type changing over time. At the beginning of each period, the agent can privately observe the
realization of her own type, and then she decides whether or not to participate in the lottery. We
denote rt as the probability that an agent becomes the high type at period t and the probability of

                                                   5
this is a common knowledge to all consumers in the market. To avoid trivial results, we impose the
following assumption to ensure that the total resources to be allocated are always less than the total
number of high-type consumers in the first period,

Assumption 2. q < r1 < 1, t.

   We focus on the symmetric equilibrium where consumers of the same type adopt the same
(mixed) strategy of participating in the lottery at each period. An agent's strategy is a probability
function tx that maps the agent's type x and the agent's expectation on the probability of winning.
Denote te as the expected probability of winning of period t , and t as the realized probability of
winning. The equilibrium is defined as the following:

Definition 1 (Market Equilibrium). A market equilibrium is a tuple (tx , s  e ,  ),where t , s  {1, 2}
                                                                                t
and x  {l , h} such that
(Optimality) For every t , tx is the best response for consumer of type x given s  e , s  {1, 2}, and

(Rational expectation) For s  {1, 2}, s    e= .
                                                s

      To ease exposition, we assume that all consumers become the high type in the second period,
i.e., r2 = 1. In this case, an agent's payoff from participating in the second period is always positive.
Therefore all consumers will choose to participate in that period. An agent of type x  {h, l } who
enters the lottery in the first period will receive a utility from the resource if winning, or an expected
payoff in the next period if not. The total discounted payoff of the agent at period t = 1, denoted as
V1x , is:

                                 V1x = 1
                                       e                    e
                                         (ux +  uh ) + (1 - 1   e
                                                              ) 2 uh .                                 (1)
                                                                                            x ) is:
    If the consumer does not enter the lottery in the first period, the payoff (denoted as W1

                                               x    e
                                              W1 =  2 uh .                                             (2)

    As uh is positive, entering in the lottery in the first period is a weakly dominating strategy for the
high type, and strictly dominating when the expected probability of winning 1       e is strictly positive.

The probability of winning in the first period is at least q - the winning odds when all consumers
participate in the lottery. By the rational expectation condition, the high type will always choose to
enter the lottery in the first period.
    For the consumers of low type, they face the following trade-off in the first period. On the one
hand, those who enter the lottery in the first period may suffer a loss when winning because they
will receive a negative utility from the resource. On the other hand, by entering the lottery, they can
increase the chance of getting the resource in the second period when they become high type, and

                                                    6
receive a positive utility from the resource. The low type consumers will choose to enter the lottery
in the first period if the latter effect dominates. However, lotteries become less efficient when the
low type consumers enter in the first period, because that will reduce the probability of winning for
the high type consumers, and the resource may be misallocated to these low type consumers. The
following proposition shows that under certain conditions, the low type consumers participate in
the lottery during the first period with a positive probability in equilibrium.
                                                       1-q
Proposition 1. Under assumptions 1-2 and uh  - (1-       2q) ul , there exits an unique equilibrium
where the low type consumers participate the lottery in the first period with a positive probability.

Proof. Because all the high types enter the lottery in the first period, the total number of participants
in the first period is greater than the amount of resources to be allocated by assumption 2. The total
number of consumers who do not receive the resource at the beginning of the second period is 1 - q.
Given that all consumers become the high type and that they will enter the lottery in the second
                                                             q
period, the winning probability for the second period is 1-    q.
    For the low type, the payoff difference between the two choices in the first period is

                                  V1l - W1
                                         l   e
                                           = 1             e
                                               (ul +  (1 - 2 )uh ).

Because the low types will enter the lottery in the first period as long as

                                             V1l - W1
                                                    l
                                                      0

by rational expectation condition, 1e > 0 and  e = q , we derive the required condition for u and
                                              2   1-q                                        h
ul that ensures above equation to hold:

                                                    1-q
                                         uh  -            ul .                                       (3)
                                                 (1 - 2q)



    The condition of equation 3 is easier to hold when the number of resources to be allocated q is
smaller: when the low type agents expect a lower probability of winning, they will be more likely
to enter the lottery in the first period because they are less likely to be penalized by entering (i.e.,
winning the resource when the utility received from the resource is negative).
    The lottery policy results in efficiency loss for two reasons: First, some high type consumers
face delays in receiving the resources due to the quantity constraint. Second, the resource might be
misallocated to the low types in the first period. This second channel emerges due to the change in
participation timing of the the low types. We define the welfare loss from this channel as dynamic
inefficiency. We formalize the definition of dynamic inefficiency as follows:

                                                   7
Definition 2 (Dynamic Inefficiency). The dynamic inefficiency is the difference between the wel-
fare from allocating the resource to the high-type consumers only and that from allocating the
resource to all lottery participants.

   The dynamic inefficiency in the second period is zero because all consumers become the high
type in that period. Thus, we focus the discussion on the first period. Under the condition in
equation 3, all consumers will participate in the lottery in the first period, leading to the winning
probability of q. Thus, the ex-ante welfare received in the first period is:

                         CSDynamic Misallocation = r1 q(uh +  uh ) + (1 - r1 )q(ul +  uh ).

In the efficient equilibrium where the resource is allocated to the high types only, the ex-ante
welfare is:
                               CSEfficient Allocation = q(uh +  uh ).

The welfare loss from dynamic inefficiency is q(1 - r1 )(uh - ul ). While the theoretical model
assumes two types of consumers to ease exposition, our empirical analysis allows for much richer
consumer heterogeneity in WTP for the resource.


3        Policy Background and Data
In this section, we first describe the vehicle lottery policy in Beijing. We then present the data and
stylized facts.


3.1        Policy Background
As many large urban centers in fast-growing economies, Beijing has been facing severe traffic
congestion and air pollution, routinely ranked as one of most polluted and congested cities in the
world. According to Beijing Transportation Annual reports, average speeds during peak period
declined from 36.4 km/h to 23.1 km/h in the morning (7:00-9:00) and from 32.3 km/h averaged
23.1 km/h to 20.9 km/h in the afternoon (17:00-19:00) during From 2005 to 2011. The average
daily concentration of PM2.5 was 78.8 ug/m3 and 96.1 ug/m3 in 2009 and 2010, compared to the
WHO recommended level of 10 ug/m3 .7 The hourly PM2.5 frequently reached over 250 ug/m3 , a
hazardous level considered by the US EPA.
    Traffic congestion and air pollutions are direct consequences of the dramatic increase in vehicle
ownership and usage in Beijing.8 Along with the rapid growth in household income, annual sales of
7 In   China, public access to daily pollution measures was almost absent prior to 2013 (Barwick et al., 2019).
8 According    to Beijing Environmental Protection Bureau, exhaust emission from motor vehicles is the largest source of


                                                            8
new passenger vehicles in Beijing increased from 2.6 million units in 2005 to 4.8 million in 2010.9
To combat traffic congestion and air pollution, on December 23rd, 2010, the Beijing municipal
government unexpectedly announced the vehicle lottery policy that caps the monthly registration
of new vehicles. The policy started in January 2011. Licenses are allocated through a publicly held
lottery administered by the Beijing Municipal Commission of Transport. The lottery was originally
held on 26th of each month, with approximately 20,000 licenses allocated to selected applicants
from the lottery pool. Since then, modifications have been made, including reducing the cap, and
changing the lottery from monthly to bimonthly.
    Licenses from winning lotteries are not transferable, effectively preventing the reallocation of
the resource in the market.10 Lottery policy is also accompanied with a strict traffic control regula-
tion. Out-of-state vehicles are not permitted to drive into the fifth ring road (within which the vast
majority of business and population are located) during the weekday rush hours of 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m., and 5:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. In addition, out-of-state vehicles need a special permit, valid
for seven days only, to drive in Beijing.
    Lottery participation has no monetary costs but does entail opportunity costs. To be an eligible
applicant, the applicant must be a legal driver (with a valid driver's license) and be a resident of
Beijing or a non-resident who has been paying income tax for at least five years in Beijing. Eligible
applicants must sign into a government website, and fill out the application form online. A screen-
ing process then verifies the applicants' qualifications. People who have met these requirement and
completed these steps are then allowed to submit an application to entering the lottery pool.
    Salient features of the lottery policy in Beijing are the growing and excessive participation,
and the increasingly low winning odds. These features are common among all cities that have
implemented vehicle license lotteries.11 Appendix Table 1 summarizes allocation mechanisms and
winning odds across seven cities. In all cities that have incorporated lotteries into their allocation
policy mechanisms, the winning odds had fallen below one percent by the end of 2017.




  PM2.5 , accounting for 22 percent in the entire city and about one third in the urban core. Data from 2012 show that
  the second largest source of PM2.5 is coal burning (17 percent) followed by dust from construction site (16 percent).
9 The household vehicle ownership rate is 0.58 in Beijing, comparing to 0.46 in New York city and 1.16 in the U.S.

  from 2010 U.S. Census.
10 A license is allowed to transfer to a new vehicle from a scrapped old one if legal owners of both vehicles are same.

   Anecdotal evidence suggests that vehicle lottery winners may rent their licenses to others through a black market,
   the practice is unlikely to be widespread. The legal owner (the winner of the lottery) is liable for paying the annual
   registration fee, traffic fines and emission inspections. Moreover, the owner is also liable for any damages and injuries
   that occur as the result of accidents.
11 By the end of 2017, seven major cities in China had started vehicle quota system with two cities (Beijing and

   Guiyang) using lotteries to allocate vehicle licenses. Shanghai uses auctions. Tianjin, Guangzhou, Hangzhou, and
   Shenzhen have adopted a hybrid system that uses both lotteries and auctions.


                                                             9
3.2     Data
Our empirical analysis focuses on the lottery policy in Beijing and we include a nearby city, Tian-
jin in the analysis to aid identification. Tianjin is about 150km from Beijing. Beijing is the second
largest city in China by population and Tianjin is the sixth largest.12 In terms of average house-
hold income, Beijing experienced a slightly smaller increase in average income (42%) than Tianjin
(49%) over the five-year study period. The inflation was 13.7% during the period. Characteristics
of both cities are shown in Appendix Table 1.
     We rely on four main data sets together with a variety of axillary data for our analysis. These
data sets include information on 1) monthly new vehicle sales, 2) vehicle characteristics, 3) house-
hold survey data on vehicle ownership, and 4) household income distributions in Beijing and Tian-
jin.
     The new vehicle sales data contain monthly sales by model (vintage-nameplate) in each city
from 2008 to 2012. There are 21,228 observations with 1,769 distinct models.13 Figure 2 plots
monthly sales (in log) in each city. An important feature from the plot is that sales in the two
cities track each other closely before 2011. The sales increase in December 2011 appeared to be
stronger in Beijing than in Tianjin. This is likely due to the anticipation effect of the lottery policy
announcement on December 23, 2010, just nine days before taking effect on January 1, 2011. The
announcement led many households to rushed to buy a car within that last week of December. To
examine whether the announcement effect may distort our results, we conduct robustness checks
without the observations of last two months in 2010 and first month in 2011.
     The data on vehicle characteristics data contain information on manufacturer suggested list
price (MSRP), vehicle size, engine displacement, and vehicle segment.14 Table 1 reports the sum-
mary statistics at the model-year-month level and segment-year-month level. The price is about
RMB 300,000 for each model. The average price is higher than average annual household income
in both cities suggesting that taking into account future income levels represents an important as-
pects of the process of deciding to buy a car. Vehicle prices are computed based on MSRPs and the
sales tax in our analysis. The standard 10% sales tax was reduced to 5% in 2009, and 7.5% in 2010
for vehicles with engine displacement of no more than 1.6 liters. We utilize both the variation in the
sales tax rates across time, and the engine displacement sizes in identifying the price coefficient.
     MSRPs are set by manufacturers and are generally constant across locations and within a model
12 Beijing  and Tianjin are two of China's four directly administered cities. In the governance hierarchy, this desig-
   nation places these cities at the same level of administrative subdivision as provinces, and right below the central
   government.
13 The data source is R.L. Polk & Company (since acquired by IHS Markit), which provides market consulting services

   for a variety of industries including the automobile industry across the globe.
14 Engine displacement is the total volume of all the cylinders in an engine. It is positively correlated with engine

   power output. Vehicle segment is the classification of vehicle models according to their prices, sizes, weight and
   displacements. For sedans, the segments are mini, small, medium, upper medium, large, and luxury .


                                                         10
year. The actual transaction prices may also include dealers' promotions, which are not observable
to researchers. Using MSRPs as price may under estimate the competition level among retailers.
At the same time, the use of a minimum retail price maintenance (RPM), which prevents retailers
from selling at a price below a set minimum, was common in China during the study period. Our
analysis uses MSRPs with the implicit assumption that the allocation mechanisms in Beijing do not
affect firms' nor dealers' pricing strategies. The widespread use of minimum RPM prices means
that, our results are not likely to be driven by the difference between MSRPs and actual retail prices.
     To better understand the dynamic feature of the market, we present selected vehicle character-
istics in Appendix Figure 1. The plot displays three important features. First, over the years show,
average price declined-from more than 340,000 in 2008 to less than 290,000 in 2012. Second, the
product offering increased over this time frame, with 260 models available in 2008 ,and more than
380 models available in 2012. Third, while vehicles grew larger, fuel economy also improved.
In addition, Bai et al. (2019) document a remarkable quality upgrading in China's auto industry
during the past decade. These patterns suggest that the vehicle market was undergoing significant
changes. Forward-looking consumers thus may choose to delay their purchases to take advantage
of more choices and lower prices adjusted for quality.
     Income is the most important determinant in vehicle purchase decisions. However, income data
at the household level in China is not publicly available. Instead, we obtain income distribution
in each city in each year as follows: First, we obtain the average income by income quartiles in
each city in each year from the statistical yearbooks. Second, we use the Chinese Household In-
come Survey (2002), together with the aggregated income distribution information, to construct the
household income.15 We adjust the income in the household survey proportionally and separately
for each quantiles so that the interpolated income distribution in a given year is consistent with the
annual income statistics from the yearbooks.
     We also obtain an additional household survey data that contains information about car owner-
ship and household demographics. The survey was conducted by the National Information Center.
The data include 1,332 observations in Beijing and 913 observation in Tianjin with rich informa-
tion on household-owned vehicles, including brand, model, registration date, whether or not was
the first time purchase, and replaced car purchase year. There are 759 observations from Beijing
and 509 observations from Tianjin in our analysis, and these observations are vehicles buyers who
purchased a vehicle between 2008 to 2012. Leveraging the survey data, we are able to generate
household shares by four income groups among buyers of new vehicles in each city in each year.
Appendix Table 2a presents the shares of different income groups among all households. The table
shows that high-income groups account for a disproportionally large share of vehicle buyers. Be-
cause the household data allow us to distinguish the first-time buyers from the replacement buyers,

15 This   is a nationally representative survey from the University of Michigan. It has 14,971 observations.


                                                            11
we examine income characteristics of households that fall into these two distinct categories. Ap-
pendix Table 2b shows a significant difference of income composition between the first-time buyers
and replacement buyers, a distinction that is crucial to identify consumer preference parameters.


3.3     Evidence from Reduced-form Regressions
We first provide some reduced-form evidence on the impact of the lottery policy based on monthly
vehicle sales by model in Beijing and Tianjin from 2008 to 2012. Denote m as a market where
Beijing is indexed by m = 1, j as a vehicle model (nameplate), and t as year-month.

                 ln(Sm jt ) = 1 ln( p jt ) + 1 d1t + 2 d1t × ln( p jt ) +  j + t + ms + emt j ,                 (4)

where Sm jt is the market share of model j in market m at time t . p jt is consumer price (MSPR plus
sales tax) that varies over time but stays constant across cities. d1t is the treatment dummy, which
is one for the policy periods for Beijing and zeros otherwise. The coefficient of interest, 1 captures
the sales impact of the lottery policy in Beijing. We also interact the treatment with vehicle price,
d1t × ln( p jt ) and let the coefficient 2 capture the heterogeneous impacts on vehicle sales. The
regression controls for vehicle model fixed effects  j , time fixed effects t , and city-segment fixed
effects ms .
    Table 2 presents estimation results for four specifications. The base group is Tianjin, and the
base year is 2008. The first specification uses the data from the period (2008-2010) before the
policy had begun to examine the common trend assumption between the two cities.16 The equation
we estimate is very similar to equation 4 except that we replace those interactive terms with city-
year fixed effects, and use the data from pre-policy periods only. The coefficient estimates on
city-year interactions are economically small and insignificant, suggesting that the two cities share
similar time trends before the policy. The first column in specification 1 uses OLS, while the second
column uses instruments for the price variable by the 2SLS. The instruments are based on the sales
tax relief policy that was implemented in 2009 and 2010 by the Chinese government. The policy
provided purchase tax relief for vehicles according to the engine size, resulting in a discount of
50% in 2009 and 25% in 2010 for displacements lower than 1.6L. The identification assumption
is that the discount policy affects only the prices, and the instrument constructed from the policy
is uncorrelated with unobserved product attributes. The assumption should hold as the tax relief is
based on the engine size which is controlled by vehicle model fixed effects in the regression. The
estimates of the price coefficient reduce from -5.23 in OLS to -7.85 in 2SLS, consistent with the
finding in the demand literature that unobserved product attributes tend to bias the price coefficient

16 Li
    (2017) shows the validity of common trend assumption across four cities including Beijing, Tianjin, Shanghai and
  Nanjing.


                                                        12
toward zero.
    The next three specifications estimate the sales impact of the program using 2SLS. The second
specification shows that the lottery policy has reduced sales in Beijing by 61.2% in 2011, and by
49.6% in 2012. This implies that if the lottery policy had not been implemented the number of
vehicles sold in Beijing would have reached about 800,000 in 2011, and about one million in 2012,
while the observed sales were 327,000 and 505,000 in these two years. By contrast, the number
of lottery participants grew from 180,000 in the first month of 2011 to over 820,000 by December
2011, and reached more than 1.34 million in December 2012.
    The comparison between the unmet demand and the observed size of the lottery pool implies
that the large increase in the number of lottery participants cannot be explained solely by the in-
crease in underlying vehicle demand. Rather, the policy has led potential buyers to participate in
the lottery pool earlier than when they need a vehicle, and these participants account for about one
million out of the 1.34 million lottery participants in December 2012. The changes in the intertem-
poral decisions of these participants could not only lead to welfare loss among themselves but also
excerbate welfare loss by reducing the probability of winning for those who would have bought
a vehicle in the current period. The structural estimation below aims to quantify these welfare
impacts.
    The third specification includes interaction terms between the treatment dummy and the price
variable. The coefficient estimates on those interactions are statistically significant. The estimates
suggest that the policy has less of an impact on sales of high-end vehicles than those of low-end
vehicles. High-income households are more likely to participate in the lottery, and they are also
more likely to purchase the expensive vehicles. Taking this heterogeneity into account suggests that
vehicle sales would have reached approximately 750,000 in 2011 and 1.2 million in 2012 had the
lottery policy not been in place. These sales figures remain below the number of lottery participants
in both years.
    Although the policy was announced unexpectedly on December 23, 2010, nine days before
the policy started, many households rushed to buy a vehicle within that time, leading to a spike
in vehicle sales in December 2010 even after controlling for seasonality. The fourth specification
drops the observations from the last two months before and one month after the lottery policy. The
estimates are very close to those from specification three.


4    Model and Estimation
In this section, we first lay out our structural model of dynamic demand for licenses and vehicles
and then discuss our estimation strategy.
    The market has a finite number of licenses to be allocated and a finite number of vehicle models


                                                 13
available in each period. Vehicle characteristics and availability change over time. Licenses are
identical and are allocated via lottery. One license is needed in order to purchase one vehicle.
Vehicle owners can use the existing license to buy a new vehicle only after scraping the used
vehicle. Licenses are not transferable and can only be used by the lottery winner. Households
discount future utilities at rate  , and receive utility from at most one car in a period. We only
focus on the sales of new vehicles and vehicle resales are not considered in our model.17
    Our model separates households' decision into two stages and assumes that households face an
infinite-horizon dynamic decision problem in each stage. That is, a household first chooses whether
or not to enter the lottery. If the household wins the lottery, it then chooses a specific vehicle model
to purchase. Formally, let J denote the set of available vehicle models. The two-stage decision
problem is stated as follows:
    Stage I (Lottery Participation): A non-owner decides whether or not to enter the lottery. Before
winning the lottery, he faces the same decision problem in every period. After winning, the non-
owner becomes an eligible vehicle buyer.
    Stage II (Vehicle Buying): The eligible vehicle buyer either chooses a vehicle model, j  J , to
buy, or chooses an outside option (i.e., not purchasing). An existing vehicle owner enters the second
stage directly, because she can regain the license by scrapping a vehicle already in possession.
    Several rationales underpin the two-stage model. First, the model allows potential lottery par-
ticipants and potential vehicle buyers to represent different groups of households. Potential lottery
participants are non-owners, while potential vehicle buyers consist of lottery winners and existing
vehicle owners who would need to scrap their existing vehicles.
    Second, the two-stage model permits changes in the size and composition of potential lottery
participants and vehicle buyers. This is because non-owners in each period endogenously partici-
pate in the lottery. After winning, they leave the lottery pool, and become eligible vehicle buyers.
Failing to control for this selection will bias the estimates of households' preference and, thus, their
willingness to pay for the license and vehicles.
    Finally, the two-stage model reflects the fact that, in reality, households in the first stage value
the license based on their anticipation of future utilities received from vehicles. The vehicle they
will purchase after winning is either not currently available or not in the same quality level as the
contemporaneous models. Ignoring this will lead to misspecified future utilities that enter into the
willingness to pay for license.




17 This   assumption implies that a household will receive zero scrap value from replacing the old vehicle.


                                                            14
4.1    Demand Model
In this subsection, we specify the lottery participation and vehicle purchase decisions of one house-
hold. We discuss aggregating across heterogeneous households in the next subsection.
    The household starts as a non-owner. At the beginning of each period, the household chooses
whether to enter the lottery. The lottery winners are drawn with equal probability from the lottery
pool at the end of each period, so that a winner is eligible to purchase a vehicle from the next
period.

Flow Utility Specification

To formalize payoffs, we first specify the set of choices sets, and we designate the relevant state
variables. In each period t , the household in the first stage chooses between two options (i.e,
whether to participate in the lottery). In the second stage, the household's set of choices includes the
new vehicle models that are available in period t and an outside option. The set of available models
is denoted as Jt . The state variables are payoff-relevant variables of the lottery mechanism. Those
variables include the current and expected future probability of winning and opportunity costs of
participating. We denote this set of variables as . The state variables should also include payoff-
relevant variables of vehicle market and household's characteristics, the set of which is denoted
as S. Market-level variables include the number of models, current product attributes, and any
other market characteristics that may influence future model attributes. Household's characteristics
include its income level and households-specific demand for having a vehicle.
    The flow utility of the household's decision problem in the first stage depends on the state
variables in  and expected future utility received from purchasing a vehicle ( i.e., state variables
in S). Denote the utility received from participating in the lottery as vi1t , and denote the utility
received if not participating as vi0t . These are specified as the following:


                                             0
                                  vi1t =  eVit (Sit ,  ) + t + i1 ,                                 (5)
                                  vi0t = i0 ,                                                       (6)

    where  e is the anticipated probability of winning. Vit 0 is the expected utility received from

the second stage conditional on current state variables in Sit , and  is the set of parameters in the
utility function. This term represents the license value in the first stage, which is determined by
the future utilities households expect to receive from purchasing a vehicle. We further discuss the
specification of this term below after we have introduced the household's dynamic optimization
problem. t represents the opportunity costs of participating in the lottery. Both i0 and i1 are


                                                  15
idiosyncratic errors that are mutually independent. They are also independent across time and
households with the Type I extreme value distribution with unit variance.
    In the second stage, the household that is eligible for purchasing chooses whether or not to buy
a vehicle. If a vehicle is purchased, a household receives a flow utility denoted as ui jt for that period
and all the following periods, and an one-shot disutility from paying for the vehicle price p jt in the
period of purchase. If the household decides not to purchase a vehicle, the household receives a
utility of uikt , where the subscript k denotes the model currently owned (k  s<t Js ) or the outside
option (k = 0) for non-owners.
    Let X jt and  j denote observed and unobserved vehicle attributes, respectively. The flow utility
that a household receives from purchasing a vehicle j  Jt is:

                                         ui jt = u
                                                 ¯i jt + it + i jt ,                                  (7)

    u¯ is a deterministic component of the utility. It is a function of vehicle characteristics, household
demographics and a vector of parameters associated with consumer tastes. As a departure from
BLP-style models in the literature, we specify two idiosyncratic shocks that are additive to the
utility function and unobservable to econometricians: it is serially correlated but independent
across households, while i jt is i.i.d. across both time and households. We assume i jt to follow
the type I extreme value distribution with unit variance.
    The persistent demand shock, it , captures the utility from vehicle ownership itself and is invari-
ant across contemporaneous vehicle models. It represents the changing vehicle need of a household,
and captures important dynamic considerations of the household in the lottery participation stage.
That is, a household might self-select into the lottery pool because it expects that it is large in the
future. We specify the deterministic utility as:

                                          ¯i jt = X jt iX +  jt ,
                                          u                                                           (8)

where iX is the individual taste of vehicle characteristics and it is a function of unobserved house-
hold demographics captured by i , which is assumed to follow a standard normal distribution. iX
is defined as:

                                           iX = ¯ X +  X i .

    The household that chooses to not purchase a vehicle at time t receives uikt = u         ¯ikt + I(k =
0)it + i0t ,where u  ¯ikt represents the flow utility from the model currently in possession. I(k = 0) is
the indicator function and equal to 1 if k = 0, and i0t is the idiosyncratic error which is also i.i.d.
across time periods and households, and following the type I extreme value distribution. If k = 0,
                 ¯ikt = 0 or otherwise, the current flow utility u
the flow utility u                                               ¯ikt is determined by the characteristics

                                                    16
of model k which was purchased in the past periods. That is, uikt is defined as in equation 8 using
                  ^ is the period when model k was purchased.
Xkt = Xkt^, where t

Dynamic Optimization

Consider now the consumer dynamic optimization decision in both stages. At time t , the household
in the first stage faces a decision of whether to enter the lottery or wait until next period. In choosing
to participate the lottery, the household incurs an opportunity cost of participating, and it also
receives an expected utility from the lottery. The expected utility is a weighted sum of two utilities:
(i) an utility from the second stage weighted by the probability of winning; (ii) a continuation payoff
that is equal to the utility received if not participating, multiplied by the probability of not winning.
The optimal decision, conditional on current states, is given by the following value function (by
compressing the time index t and denoting X as the next-period value of the state variable X ):


                                   eVi0 (Si ,  ) + (1 -  e ) E [EW (Si , i )|Si , i ] +  + i1
        EW (Si , i ) = E max                                                                              .    (9)
                                                   E [EW (Si , i )|Si , i ] + i0

    In the second stage, a first-time buyer makes an optimal decision given his tastes, current income
level, persistent demand shocks, available model choices, and vehicle characteristics. An existing
vehicle owner can make a replacement decision based on the same set of information except that
the outside option is the current vehicle model in possession. Formally, the life time utility of a
household i that owns a vehicle k  s<t Js or the outside option k = 0 is defined by the following
value function:


                                    u¯ik + I(k = 0)it +  E[EV (u ¯ik , Si )|u ¯ik , Si ] + i0 ,
     EV (u
         ¯ik , Si ) = E max                       P
                                                                                                              (10)
                               max j Jt ui j - i ln( p j ) +  E[EV (u  ¯i j , Si )|u¯i j , Si ] + i j ,

     where p j is the tax-inclusive price of product j and iP denotes the individual disutility for
price. Si is the information set of a consumer that affect utility or value of waiting. Specifically,
it includes current individual characteristics such as the vehicle need, it and incomes, and market
characteristics such as vehicle attributes, prices and model availability. We define a household's
                                                  P is defined as:
disutility for price to be a function of income. it

                                      P    P   P
                                      it =¯0 +¯1 lnyit +  P iP ,                                              (11)

   where yit denotes the income level, iP has a standard normal distribution and  P is the standard



                                                       17
deviation. We do not use the same term of price preference as in BLP and Petrin (2002) 18 because
the median vehicle price in China is higher than the average annual income of most households.
The above specification leads to an intuitive pattern that more expensive products have less elastic
demand (Li, 2017).
    To reduce the computation burden from the large numbers of state variables in equations 9 and
10, we further simplify the state space by defining two inclusive values (by compressing the time
index t ):



                    i =  eVi0 (Si ,  ) + (1 -  e ) E EW (Si , i )|Si , i +  .                               (12)

                                                    P
                    i = ln               ¯i j + i - it
                                     exp(u                                ¯i j , Si )|u
                                                       ln( p j ) +  E[EV (u           ¯i j , Si ])      .   (13)
                                    jJt


     The inclusive value it represents the expected utility received from entering the lottery. The
logit inclusive value,it , is the maximum expected utility a household will receive from buying one
of the Jt vehicles. To replace state space with these two inclusive variables, we follow GR, Schiraldi
(2011) and Lee (2013) to assume that it , it and it are sufficient statistics for determining the
probability distribution of future individual preferences and market characteristics conditional on
Sit and it .

Assumption 3. Households perceive that the pair of inclusive values (it , it ) can be summarized
by a first-order Markov process:

                                 G(it +1 , it +1 |Sit , it ) = Gi (it +1 , it +1 |it , it ).

    This assumption helps to simply the dynamic decision problem in the first stage, because both
state variables in Sit and it in this stage can be replaced by the inclusive values it and it . That is,
instead of following the evolution of expected winning probability, participation costs, and vehicle
market characteristics, assumption 3 allows researchers to keep track of the market state it and
lottery state, it only. Based on assumption 3 and equation 12, we can rewrite households' expected
value function 9 as follows:

                    EW (it , it ) = ln exp(it ) + exp  E [EW (it +1 , it +1 )|it , it ]                 .   (14)

    In the second stage, only the information set Sit is pay-off relevant, but there is an additional
state variable it that is relevant to the dynamic decision at this stage. To reduce the number of state
variables in this set, we make another assumption as follows:
18 BLP   and Petrin (2002) use ln(yi - p j ) and interpret it as the utility from the composite good.


                                                             18
Assumption 4. Households in each market perceive that inclusive value it and it can be summa-
rized by a first-order Markov process:

                               F (it +1 , it +1 |Sit ) = Fi (it +1 , it +1 |it , it ).

    Similar to assumption 3, assumption 4 helps to reduce the number of state variables relevant
to the dynamic decision in the second stage. Although it is hard to specific a proper supply model
consistent with the assumption, GR notes that this assumption can be considered approximating
boundedly rational households that use only a subset of the data available to them in forming their
expectation. Based on assumption 4 and equation 13, we can write the consumer's expected value
function as:

    EVi (u                                                    ¯i j , it +1 , it +1 )|u
         ¯i j , it , it ) = ln exp(it ) + exp ui jt +  E EVi (u                      ¯i j , it , it   .   (15)

Value of License

We now turn to the specification of function Vit 0 that represents the value of a license. A winning

license is valid for T periods (in practice6 months) after winning. That is, if a winner fails to
purchase any vehicle within that period, the license will expire from the T + 1 period after winning.
We further assume that a winner leaves the market if he/she let the license expire. Based on these
assumptions, we write Vit 0 as a finite sum of expected utilities of optimized vehicle purchasing

decisions, which is:

                                                        T
                                 0
                               Vit        max  ·   s E [at +s t +s |it , it ] ,                           (16)
                                       at +1 ···at +T
                                                        s=1

    where at +s is a binary variable representing the choice of purchasing at period t + s. Parameter
 reflects how the household perceives the anticipated present-discounted utilities received from
optimized decisions in the second stage. Unlike the discount factor  , which represents the level
of patience and is always between zero and one,  can be greater than one because it measures the
level of impatience over when to enter the lottery. Specifically, the household is impatient if  > 1
because the option value of buying a vehicle is inflated by the parameter in the utility received from
entering the lottery. In other words, the larger  is, the more likely households are to enter the
lottery even when they expect to receive a little from purchasing vehicles if winning a license. In
that case, the lottery mechanism changes the intertemporal decisions and misallocates the licenses.
    The license value also depends on households' expectation on the realization of future market
state, it +s . As implied by the theory model in Section 2, households expecting to receive a larger
utility from vehicle ownership in the future is likely to enter the lottery early for the purpose of
maximizing the probability of winning at the time when it +s becomes substantially large.

                                                            19
4.2    Aggregation and Equilibrium
We first discuss the aggregation of household choices under two scenarios - with and without the
lottery policy. We then discuss the probability of a consumer entering the lottery and the aggregated
lottery participation rate. Finally, we define the equilibrium of the market.
    In each period t , the conditional probability that consumer i owning vehicle k  s<t Js  {0}
purchases model j  Jt is

                                    P ln( p ) +  E [EV (u
                        exp(ui jt - it                   ¯i jt , it +1 , it +1 )|u
                                                                                 ¯i jt , it , it ])
                 jk                        j
                sit =                                                                               .   (17)
                                             exp(EV (u
                                                     ¯ikt , it , it ))
    In the pre-policy periods, because the purchases are not constrained by the lottery policy, the
                                                                                                  jk
aggregation of vehicle demand follows BLP closely. That is, we integrate the choice probability sit
over the distribution of consumer preferences i and vehicle demand i for each j  s<t Js  {0},
and then sum over all existing vehicle models. Let Rtk be the share of households owning model k
(or non-owners if k = 0), the market share of product j at time t is:

                                                                    jk
                                     ¯t j =
                                     s                      Rtk         k
                                                                  sit dPv dPk
                                                                              ,                         (18)
                                              ks<t Js {0}

where P  k and Pk are the density function of  and  integrating over households owning model k
                
or non-owners (k = 0) at each period t , respectively.
    In terms of aggregation under the lottery policy, we first aggregate individual lottery participa-
tion choices. The probability that a household i enters the lottery is:

                                                   exp(it )
                          lit =                                                     .                   (19)
                                  exp(it ) + exp( E [EW (it +1 , it +1 )|it , it ])
    Because only the non-owners are required to enter the lottery before purchasing, the potential
lottery participants at the initial period of the lottery policy are all non-owners by the end of 2010.
The potential participants in the following periods are non-owners who have not won a license in
the past periods. Let Rt0 denote the ratio of potential lottery participants to the market size. The
aggregate participation rate is obtained by integrating over preferences of non-owners and their
vehicle need i :

                                               l¯t = Rt0   lit dP0
                                                                   dP0
                                                                       .                                (20)

   At each period t under the lottery policy, the market share of product j consists of two parts:
purchases from the lottery winners, and replacement purchases from existing owners. The owners
have valid license plate and can scrap their existing vehicles in order to purchase a new vehicle.
Their choice probabilities are defined as in equation 17. For a lottery winner of period  , her


                                                           20
probability of buying a product j in period t is

                                          P
                 j0           exp(ui jt - it ln( p j ) +  E [EV (u¯i jt , it +1 it +1 )|u
                                                                                        ¯i jt , it , it ])
               sit ( ) =                                        T -t + k
                                                                                                           ,   (21)
                              exp(it ) + exp(maxat +1 ···at +k k=1  E [at +k t +k |it , it ])
where T is the total length of validation periods of the license plate. Notice that the difference
between equation 17 and equation 21 is the denominator. Because a lottery winner is required to
apply the license plate to a vehicle within T period, and he leaves the market when the license plate
expires, his continuation payoff in each period, if he does not purchase a vehicle, is a finite sum
of expected utilities of vehicles maximized over choices of purchasing. Let R  ~t denote the share of
lottery winners in period s who have not purchased a vehicle till period t . The aggregate demand
of product j at time t is:

                                 t
                     j                   ~t     j0     0   0                        j     jk  k   k
                   ¯t
                   s     =               R    sit ( )dP  dP  +                   Rt     sit dPv dP  ,          (22)
                              =t -T +1                                 ks<t Js
                                     First -time Purchases                Replacement Purchases

   The persistent demand shock, it , is assumed to be binary valued, with the lower bound nor-
malized to zero. The upper bound of it is parametrized by h. In each period, a low-type household
becomes a high-type household with the probability denoted as Pi . The high-type household will
remain a the high-type for the rest of periods. The transition probability from the low- to high-type
household varies by the household income level, and it is defined as:

                                                         exp(c0 + c1,g )
                                              Pig =                        ,                                   (23)
                                                       1 + exp(c0 + c1,g )
    where g is the index for the income group to which household i belongs.19
    The definition of equilibrium for the vehicle market follows GR and Schiraldi (2011). The sup-
ply side assumes that vehicle characteristics evolve exogenously, and new models become available
according to some exogenous processes. The inclusive values, it and it , evolve according to the
following AR(1) processes:

                                          it +1 = i0 + i1 it + i2 it + it ,                                    (24)


                                         it +1 = i0 + i1 it + i2 it + it .                                     (25)

where it and it are independent and normally distributed.

19 Wesimulate household income by assuming the household stays in the same income group for all periods. This
 assumption helps to simplify the dynamics of the model, as the transition probability is fixed and known to each
 household and the transition process of it is stationary.


                                                             21
    We define the equilibrium of lottery participation by imposing the rational expectation assump-
tion: households have a common belief on the probability of winning in each period, and the
expectation is consistent with the realized winning probability, (i.e., te = t ). For the supply of
licenses, we assume the number of licenses issued follows an exogenous process.


4.3     Estimation and Computation
We first present an overview of our computation strategy and then provide a discussion on the
intuitions underpinning identification. The objective of estimation is to recover the parameters of
vehicle demand vc       ¯ X,¯0P, ¯1P , X ,  P and parameter in the value of license  .



Computation

As in BLP, our estimation needs to control for unobserved characteristics  jt and t . The proce-
dure of recovering these unobservables follows GR and Lee (2013) closely. The former combines
methodologies of Rust (1987), Berry (1994), and BLP; and the latter introduces an estimation
strategy that links different stages of the model, and estimates both stages simultaneously. We also
integrate over unobserved state variables with serial correlation by simulation.
    To recover the unobservable, we begin by guessing the initial value of mean utilities u ¯ jt , initial
value of participation opportunity cost t . We then initialize the logit-inclusive value it and in-
clusive value it for each period t using equation 13 and 12 respectively, and setting continuation
payoffs to zeros. We repeat the steps listed in Figure 3 until the convergence of these two variables.
We follow slightly a different algorithm to recover unobservables in the pre-policy periods from
that in the policy periods. During the pre-policy periods, we update mean utilities of vehicle mod-
els, via the contraction mapping method of BLP, using the values that equalize the predicted market
shares (equation 18) to observed market shares. For each iteration of the contraction mapping, the
optimal purchase decisions are solved to determine the probability of a purchase conditional on
vehicle need it . The integration over it involves solving an integral over all possible histories of
unobservables. To address the high dimensionality of the integration, we follow the methodology
in Pakes (1986) and Keane and Wolpin (1997) using Monte Carlo simulations to approximate the
integrals.20
    During the policy periods, we update mean utilities of vehicle models by following the same
contraction mapping method as in the pre-policy periods, except that we calculate predicted market
shares base on equation 22, in which the first-time purchases need to participate in the lottery sys-
tem to obtain a license before purchasing. The share of eligible first-time buyers during the policy
20 Wefirst draw a sequence of realizations of it for each households according to the transition process defined in
 equation 23 . We then compute the individual probability of purchase for each history of it , and take the average
 over the simulations.


                                                       22
periods is computed by the lottery participation rate (equation 20) and the observed probability of
winning. We also use the contraction mapping algorithm to update the opportunity cost t to equate
the predicted lottery participation rate to observed participation rate.
    Because the dataset contains monthly vehicle sales of 1,769 distinct models (vintage-nameplate)
in each city from 2008 to 2012, we would need to find mean utilities of over 42,000 products. To
reduce the computational burden, we categorize vehicles into six segments. We set the sales of
each segment to be the total sales of vehicles in that group, use averaged value for the continuous
characteristics (e.g. price, engine displacement), and use the mode for the discrete characteristics
(e.g., seats, doors). Hereinafter, the index j denotes a vehicle segment.

Moment Conditions

We estimate the dynamic model using simulated generalized method of moments (GMM) based on
four sets of moment conditions. We bring market/city index m into our discussion as we leverage
data in two cities for estimation. Following Li (2017), the first set of moment conditions is formed
based on the common trend assumption underlying the DID framework. That is, the unobserved
demand shocks in Beijing and Tianjin would follow the same trend in the absence of the policy.
The pre-policy analysis in Section 3.3 shows that that vehicles sales in Beijing and Tianjin track
each other very closely before the policy, suggesting that the trend would likely have continued to
be similar without the policy. To form moment conditions based on this assumption, we decompose
the time varying unobserved demand shocks,  jmt , as follows:

                                jmt =  j,yr + dt + d jm + m yrt + emt j ,                         (26)

    where  j,yr is unobserved product characteristics that do not vary within a year and across
markets. The time (month) and city-segment fixed effects, dt and d jm , capture time-invariant and
city-specific preferences for different vehicle segments. The parameter interacts with yrt , m , cap-
tures city-specific time trends. emt j is the residual of  jt after controlling for these fixed effects
and time trends. Because Beijing implemented the lottery in 2011 and 2012, and Tianjin did not,
this assumption implies that the lottery policy is exogenous to the time-varying demand-shocks.
Denoting dmt as city-year dummy variables, the first moment condition is:

                                          E emt j |dmt = 0.                                       (27)

    Although we do not explicitly model the supply side of vehicle market, we allow firms to en-
dogenously set vehicle prices. That is, firms are assumed to observe all product attributes (including
 jmt ) before setting the prices of their products. This leads to price endogeneity since prices would
be correlated with unobservable product attributes  jmt . To address the price endogenity, we con-

                                                  23
struct a moment condition that is based on a tax policy to encourage the purchase of vehicles of
small displacement. The Chinese government provided purchase tax relief for vehicles with dis-
placement of lower than 1.6L by 50% in 2009, and by 25% in 2010. The second set of moment
conditions based on this policy is:

                                                      .6
                                          E emt j |Z 1
                                                     jt  = 0,                                      (28)

    where Z 1.6
            jt is equal to the number of vehicle models with displacement less than 1.6L in seg-
ment j and t  {2009, 2010}. We defer more discussions on the identification assumptions of
implementing this instrument in the next subsection.
    The third set of moment conditions is constructed based on the aggregate information from the
household survey presented in the Appendix Table 2b. We match predicted shares of households
by income group by city among new vehicle buyers, first-time buyers and replacement buyers to
those in the table. We set four income groups and use the fourth group as the base group. The
moment conditions are:

                                              ¯mgt - smgt ] = 0,
                                          Et [s                                                    (29)

    where g is the index of income group and s    ¯mgt is the predicted share of households in income
group g among vehicle buyers.
    The fourth set of moment conditions is based on the opportunity costs of participating in the
lottery, t defined in equation (5). We assume t as a stochastic variable that follows an AR(1)
process. The error term of this process, t , is defined as:

                                        t = t - 0 - 1 t -1 .                                       (30)

    We assume that t is not correlated with the observed winning probability and vehicle charac-
teristics, which is included in Z in the fourth set of moment conditions below.

                                 E [t Zt ] = 0   and    E [t Zt ] = 0.                             (31)

Identification

Identifying the discount factor in a dynamic discrete choice model is notoriously difficult (Rust,
1994) and we assume the same discount factor in both stages,  = 0.90. There are key identification
issues. First, we need to control for unobserved product attributes (e.g., quality) in order to identify
the price coefficient  P . Second, we need to separately identify household cross-sectional hetero-
geneity on vehicle preference, captured by random coefficients  X , from household inter-temporal


                                                   24
heterogeneities, governed by the persistent vehicle demand shock it and income coefficients, us-
ing only market-level data. Finally, we need to identify the parameter  that governs households'
perceived value of a license V 0 (defined in equation 16).
     The price coefficient P consists of three parameters as defined in equation 11.       P captures
                                                                                          ¯1
the degree of preference heterogeneity on price due to variation in income. We identify this pa-
rameter using the set of micro-moments defined in equation 29. Each moment matches predicted
to observed shares of purchases by households belonging to a same income group. Table 2a il-
lustrates that high income-groups accounts for disproportionally larger shares among all vehicle
buyers, implying a positive estimate for this parameter. The additional preference heterogeneity
on price is captured by a random coefficient in it  P that follows a normal distribution. We rely on

the time-series variation of price and temporal variation of market shares to identify the parameters
that govern the distribution of this random coefficient. Heuristically, the change in market share
of a vehicle model j associated with a change in its price over time identifies the mean     ¯0P . The

relative change in market shares of the other models in response to model j's price change identi-
fies the standard deviation  P . Because of the heterogeneity in price preference, a change in price
of model j leads to unequal proportion change in market shares of other models. The degree of
unequal change that is not explained by income heterogeneity will help us to identify the standard
deviation  P .
     As mentioned in the previous subsection, we address price endogenity using the price variation
from tax reliefs on vehicles of small engines in 2009 and 2010 as in equation 28. The identification
assumption is that the tax relief policy is an exogenous shock that affects consumer choices only
through vehicle prices. Because the tax relief is based on the engine size which is controlled
by vehicle model fixed effects as in equation 26, the instrument constructed based on this policy
Z1 .6
  jt should be uncorrelated with the econometric error term em jt . The reduced-form regression in
Section 3.3 (Specification 1 ) using the same policy as an exogenous shock to price shows that the
2SLS estimate is larger in magnitude than the OLS estimate for the price coefficient.
     Two parameters are associated to the distribution of persistent demand shock  : the upper
bound of its support and a transition probability. The upper bound, h, is identified from the differ-
ence in income composition between the first-time and replacement buyers. The demand shock it
is invariant across contemporaneous models and only enters into non-owners' utilities if a vehicle
is purchased; whereas for owners, it always enters into their utilities regardless of their choices.
Thus, it can only affect non-owners' choice margin of purchasing a vehicle in response to changes
in their incomes. If h is large, non-owners of the high type will be more likely to purchase a ve-
hicle even when their income is low, while the probability of replacement purchase depends on
households incomes only. Therefore, when it is large, the proportion of lower income households
among first-time buyers should be higher than that among replacement buyers. On the contrary,


                                                 25
when it is small, the first-time and replacement buyers are similar in their income levels.
    The transition probability of the persistent shock P is identified via time-series variation in
vehicle sales. If the probability that a household becoming a high-type is large - as would be the
case if a great proportion of households became urgent buyers in the early periods - a rapid growth
of vehicle sales should be observed in the early period, rather than in later periods. A relative
smooth growth in sales would indicats that the probability that households make a transition to the
high type is moderately small.
    Finally, the identification of  in equation 16 comes from the variation in lottery participation
rates. Variation in lottery participation is affected by changes in license values defined in equation
16. It is determined by the anticipated market states, captured by the inclusive values, within the
next T periods. The degree to which the lottery participation rate changes as the market states
change over time identifies the level of impatience of households in deciding when to enter the
lottery.


5     Estimation Results
We first present the parameters estimates from the structural model and robustness checks. We then
discuss the implication of the results.


5.1    Parameter Estimates from the Dynamic Demand
Table 3 reports the results for the structural model. The first panel of the table corresponds to
parameters in vc , which appear in the consumer-specific utility function in equation 7. We do
not report the parameters of mean utilities because they are not needed for policy simulations and
welfare analysis. The second panel reports parameter estimates for  , which is the parameter of
license plate valuation defined in equation 16. The last panel presents the upper bound of the
support of the persistent demand shock. The same panel also reports the estimated probability that
the persistent demand shock transits from low to high as defined in equation 23.
    We present the structural parameters in five specifications based on different assumptions and
estimation strategy. In the first specification, we estimate coefficients using all the moment condi-
tions described in the previous section, and setting income coefficients cg in equation 23 to zeros.
In the second specification we exclude the micro moments constructed through the shares of in-
come groups among buyers. Specification 3 drops the observations in November and December
of 2010 and January of 2011 to remove the anticipation effect. Specification 4 assumes away the
persistent demand shock it . Specification 5 relaxes the assumption that coefficients cg in equa-
tion 23 are zeros. Hence, the transition probability of the persistent demand shock is allowed to


                                                 26
vary across different income levels. We take specification 1 as our baseline model upon which the
counterfactual simulations are based. Other specifications serve as robustness checks.
    In the baseline model, the coefficient estimate on ln( price) is significantly negative, while the
coefficient estimate on interaction between this price variable and ln(income) and that on income
variable alone are both positive. This suggests that households dislike higher prices, whereas those
with a higher income are less price sensitive. In addition, the inclusion of ln(income) in the utility
function allows the difference between a new vehicle and the outside option to differ by income.
A positive coefficient on this variable implies that the likelihood of a consumer purchasing a new
vehicle increases with income.
    We include two random coefficients into our model, one on price and the other on the con-
stant term. The last two coefficient estimates in the first panel are standard deviations of random
coefficients for ln( price) and constant that capture households' heterogeneous preferences. Both
estimates are significant in specification 1. The estimated parameter on the constant term is large
in magnitude, which indicates more variation in the flow utility from a vehicle.
    In the second panel, the coefficient estimate for the parameter in the value of a license,  , in
specification 1 is 19.68, which is significantly greater than one. This indicates that households
are impatient when deciding to participate in the lottery. The estimate of this parameter implies
substantial dynamic inefficiency costs.
    In the last panel, the estimate for h is 3.08 and the estimated transition probability is around 5%.
Given that the average flow utility of vehicles is estimated to be around 1.5, the demand shock is
significantly large relative to the average utility received from a vehicle. Thus, our model captures
two groups of the first-time buyers. The first group consists of households that care more about
the product quality and less about the price; the second group consists of households that care less
about the product quality and more about price. The latter choose to buy because the persistent
demand shock is large (i.e., having a vehicle is important).
    Column 2 provides estimates from the dynamic model where the micro-moments on the shares
by income groups among buyers are excluded. A comparison with the baseline specification show
that the transition probability of the persistent shock it does not changed, and the estimate for h
changes slightly. This is consistent with the identification intuition that the upper bound of persis-
tent demand shock is identified by matching the micro-moments, while the transition probability is
mainly identified by the time-series variations of vehicle sales. Note that excluding those micro-
moments also changes estimates for  because the expected future utilities received from owning a
vehicle has changes due to the change in h.
    The estimation results from specification 3, in which we dropped observations of the last two
months before and one months after the policy began, are very similar to our baseline estimations.
Therefore, we find that the anticipation effect and the announcement effect have a less significant


                                                  27
impact on the main conclusions, which are drawn from the estimation results.
    Column 4 shows the estimates from dynamic model in which the persistent shock is assumed
away. Without the heterogeneity driven by this demand shock, the specification renders a large
coefficient estimate for income. This is because part of the heterogeneity preference due to the
persistent demand shock is captured by the heterogeneity in incomes. The coefficient estimate for
 is also larger in this specification. All these changes indicate the crucial role of including the
persistent demand-shock term in our model.
    The last column provides transition probabilities of the persistent shock across different in-
come levels. We find this specification yields less appealing results than our baseline specification.
Except for the second income group, all transition probabilities are insignificant from zero. In addi-
tion, standard errors for the rest of the parameters are also increased in this specification. Therefore,
although it is more reasonable to let the transition probability of persistent shock vary across in-
come, this specification is not well identified and we choose specification 1 as our baseline model.


5.2    Price Elasticities
We calculate the dynamic price elasticities based on the first specification under scenarios of per-
manent and temporary price changes with the assumption that households know the nature of the
price change. For the temporary price change, we compute the expectation on it +1 , it +1 and it +1
using the baseline it , it and it in equations 24 and 25. For the permanent price change, we use
realized it , it and it . We also assume that the future states of vehicle characteristics, the lottery
policy, and value functions - evolve identically in both scenarios, conditional on it , it and it .
    We compare the sales impact of temporary and permanent price increase of one percent. Figure
4 shows the impact for six segments in May 2010.The sales changes are slightly larger for the tem-
porary price change than permanent one due to the intertemporal substitution from the temporary
price change. The difference is more salient for the mini segment, suggesting that when the vehi-
cles in the mini segment experience an one-percent temporary price increase, some buyers choose
to delay their purchase.
    The average own-price elasticity for the temporary price change is -9.8 across six segments,
which is higher than the estimates in the literature on the U.S. market, where elasticities range from
-3 to -8.4 (Berry et al., 1995; Goldberg, 1995; Petrin, 2002; Beresteanu and Li, 2011). This is
consistent with what we would expect given that 1) income levels in Beijing and Tianjin are half
those in the U.S. over the 1981-1993 data period used in Petrin (2002), and 2) vehicle prices in
China are now and were then much higher than the prices in the U.S. for the same brand. However,
our elasticity estimates are lower than the static model estimates in Li (2017) using the similar
data, which are -10.51 on average and range from -8.70 to -15.97. There are at least two reasons


                                                   28
for the difference. First, we estimate the model at the vehicle-segment level rather than at the
vehicle-model level. Our estimates do not capture within-segment substitution. Second, static
models could overestimate own-price elasticities for not accounting for consumer forward looking
behavior. The important features of China's auto industry during our data period is that price are
declining while quality and model availability are increasing. Consumers may find it optimal to
delay their purchases with a price increase, which reduces sales in the current period. A static
model would attribute intertemporal substitution to price sensitivity, and overestimate the own-
price elasticities.


5.3    Other Implications
To examine the sources of heterogeneity, we plot the evolution of the logit inclusive value, it .
Figure 5 depicts it from the first specification for six sets of consumers with random coefficients at
different percentiles of the distribution. Specifically, we set preferences on price and the constant
term at the (25th, 25th), (75th, 75th) and (25th, 75th) percentiles of their respective distributions,
in combination with the persistent demand shock,  , at the low or high level.
    For each set of consumers, the inclusive value is increasing over time, indicating that households
expect a higher utility from buying a vehicle in the future (e.g., due to declining prices and quality
upgrading). Therefore, consumers have incentives to delay their purchase. Without taking this into
account, a static model could overestimate consumer price sensitivity as discussed above.
    Holding  fixed, the inclusive value for the (25th, 25th) percentile group is far below than
that for the (75th,75th) and (25th, 75th) groups, while the value for the latter two groups are very
close. This suggests that the heterogeneity in household price sensitivity drives less variation in the
inclusive value than that in the flow utilities. That is, the heterogeneity in the constant term is more
important in affecting the variation in the inclusive value.
    Households in (25th, 25th) percentile groups with a higher demand shock (i.e., high it ) have
a higher inclusive value than those in (75th, 75th) and (25th, 75th) percentile groups before June
2011. That indicates that before June 2011, households with a higher demand shock were more
likely to purchase a vehicle than households that with a low demand shock regardless of their
preference for price and vehicle ownership (i.e., coefficients on price and the constant term). This
suggests that the demand shock plays an important role in our model: it captures exogenous factors
(e.g., a change in working location, or an increase in family size) that could be an important part of
vehicle purchase decisions.
    Figure 6 plots the the inclusive value, it over time. We set coefficients on price and the constant
term at the (25th, 25th) and (75th, 75th) percentiles of their respective distributions. The value in-
creases over time, albeit slowly, as the market improves and the license value increases. Compared


                                                  29
to it , it is less heterogeneous. The gap between the values for different groups shrink over time,
and converges to zero by the end of the sample period. The result is intuitive. The probability of
winning is low and decreases over time. As a result, the expected utility that households expect to
receive from participating the lottery decreases over time as well.
     We further investigate the assumptions on the transition of the state variables. We fit it and it
into a AR(1) process as in equation 24 and 25, respectively. Figures 7 and 8 depict the prediction
errors for a household in the 50th percentile for both random coefficients on price and the constant
term. Neither figure exhibits serial correlation or change in variance over time. One concern is
that the AR(1) process may not be a good approximation to the stochastic processes of it and
it . To verify that, we test whether the prediction error is close to a white noise by applying the
autocorrelations (ACF) and partial autocorrelations (PACF) tests to the prediction errors of it and
it , respectively. The results are plotted in figures 9 and 10. Both figures show the prediction errors
are close to a white noise, as the ACF and PACF across different lags are almost zero.
     Finally, we study the impact of lottery policy on vehicle sales. Table 4 presents the simulated
sales under the counterfactual environment of no lottery policy for the baseline specification and
two other alternative specifications. For the baseline specification, the counterfactual sales in Bei-
jing are 1.2 million in 2011 and 1.8 million in 2012. In these counterfactual scenarios, the first-time
buyers account for 73% of sales in 2011, and 59% of sales in 2012. Relative to observed sales of
326,769 and 504,990 under the policy, this suggests that lottery policy has reduced sales by 73%
(2011) and 72% (2012). Figure 11 plots the percentage of households making a purchase observed
in the data, and the counterfactual estimates in the absence of the lottery policy from January 2008
to December 2012 using the baseline specification. The estimated share of households making a
purchase matches closely to the data during the pre-policy period, suggesting a good model fit. The
alternative models predict similar simulated sales impacts. This is because the policy impacts are
mainly identified through the first set of moment conditions that utilize the common trend assump-
tion.


6     Simulations and Welfare

6.1    Counterfactual Simulations
We consider two counterfactual scenarios for Beijing based on the estimates from the baseline
specification. In the first scenario we assume that the lottery policy starts unexpectedly from the
first month of the sample period (January 2008). In the second scenario, we assume the lottery
policy is absent during the sample period. In the first scenario we simulate household decisions
on both lottery participation and vehicle purchases while in the second scenario we only simulate


                                                  30
household decisions on vehicle purchases.21 All consumers are assumed to be the non-owners from
the first period in both scenarios. Using the same inclusive values that capture the market state and
consumer preferences reconciled from the data, we simulate participation costs by using equation
30. We set the winning probability at 1.38% and assume the winning probability to be constant
over periods.22
     The simulation results show that our model is able to replicate the drastic increase in lottery
participation that far exceeds the increase in vehicle sales without the lottery policy. Table 5a
shows that on average around 50% of total households enter the lottery for getting a license in each
month, while in the absence of the lottery policy, the monthly average share of first-time vehicle
buyers is less than one percent from 2008 to 2011, and less than three percent in 2012.
     To examine the extent to which the lottery policy had induced households to enter the lottery
pool early, we compare the time of first lottery participation and that of the first purchase. Table
5b shows that if lottery had started in 2008, most households would have entered the lottery for the
first time within the first quarter of that year. Without the policy, however, most of the households
would not have chosen to purchase a vehicle within five years. Figure 12 plots a histogram showing
the duration of time prior to households' first entry into the lottery, and their first vehicle purchases.
On average, households move up their lottery participation by at least four years. The probability
of winning used in simulations (1.38%) indicates that a lottery participant is likely to wait six
years before winning a license. Because the expected waiting period is so long, forward-looking
households that plan to buy a vehicle within six years are likely to join the lottery pool much earlier
than when they actually intend to buy a vehicle.
     Figure 13 shows simulation results of lottery participation, vehicle ownership, and sales with
and without the lottery policy in place. The lottery policy reduces both vehicle sales significantly.
Had the lottery policy started from January 2008, about 85% of the total vehicle sales in the absence
of the lottery policy would be reduced in each month. By comparing the vehicle ownership rate
between the scenario where the lottery policy had started in 2008 and the scenario where the policy
were absent, the ownership rate with the lottery would not only be lower, but also grow in a much
lower rate.
     Figure 13 shows that if the lottery policy had not taken in place, the vehicle ownership rate
would not reach to 50% until 2012. However, lottery participation rate (the fraction of households
that entered the lottery) stays almost constant around 50% over the sample period. The difference
between these two shares shows that households participate in the lottery earlier than they would

21 Independent  of the estimation, we separately simulate the decisions of 2,000 households that do not own a vehicle
   at the beginning of the simulations. Each household is characterized by a vector of income and random draws of
   unobserved household attributes. For each consumer, we draw a vector of 200 idiosyncratic errors from the Type I
   extreme value distribution.
22 We fit the winning probability via an AR(1) process. The limit of the AR(1) process is 1.38 percent.



                                                         31
have purchased a vehicle without the policy. The magnitude of the difference determines the extent
of dynamic inefficiency.
    Figure 14 provides a 4 by 4 matrix of plots that shows the shares of lottery participation and
vehicle purchase under the two policy scenarios. Each plot corresponds to a combination of two
preference parameters on income and the constant term. Each parameter is categorized into four
groups: below 25%, 25%-50%, 50%-75%, and above 75%. Across the plots, the coefficient on
price increases from top to bottom, and the constant term increases from left to right. Two are two
important patterns from the plots. First, there is significant differences across the plots in terms
of the relationship between lottery participant and vehicle purchase shares. Second, the preference
heterogeneity on the constant term (i.e., preference on vehicle ownership) plays a more important
role in the difference of the two shares. For the group of households with a weaker preference for
vehicle ownership (the constant term less than the 25 percentile), their ownership rate is almost
zero without the lottery policy but their lottery participation rate is still around 50%. In contrast,
households with a stronger preference for vehicle ownership (the constant term above 75 percentile)
have a higher ownership rate without the policy. The ownership rate among this group would catch
up with the lottery participation rate within two years from the beginning. This indicates that
the dynamic inefficiency is more significant among the households with a weaker preference for
vehicle ownership.
    Figure 15 demonstrates the accelerated purchase timing that households exhibit under the lot-
tery policy for the lottery winners. It shows the histogram of the difference between the timing of
purchasing without the policy and that with the policy, where a positive difference indicates the pur-
chase is moved forward. The distribution shifts to the right with the average being approximately
six months and the median being four months. This indicates that on average, lottery winners
would move up their purchases by six months. More than half of the lottery winners would buy
a vehicle more than four months earlier than they would have without the policy. In contrast to
the early participation, early purchasing is a less significant issue. This is due to the rational ex-
pectation assumption. Households foresee when they would have purchased a vehicle without the
lottery policy, and the length of time that they are likely to wait before winning a lottery. They then
optimize the timing to enter the lottery by matching the time that they win a license to the time
they actually intend to buy a vehicle. The simulation result indicates that households can generally
match the two times closely.


6.2    Welfare Analysis
We use the estimates from the dynamic demand model to examine how the lottery policy affects
consumer welfare and the underlying channels. We focus on two types of efficiency impact: static


                                                  32
misallocation and dynamic misallocation.23 We simulate household decisions on lottery participa-
tion and vehicle purchase in 2011 and 2012 under the following three allocation scenarios:
    (i) First-best allocation. Licenses are allocated to the households with the highest valuations
and are hence efficiently allocated. In theory, the first-best scenario could be achieved through
an auction system. Therefore, one can use welfare analysis in this scenario to compare welfare
differences between the lottery system and a theoretically efficient auction systems.24
    (ii) Second-best allocation. Licenses are allocated with a uniform probability among house-
holds that would purchase a vehicle in a given period (e.g., consumer surplus from vehicle purchase
being larger than the outside option) in the absence of the lottery policy. Allocation could be inef-
ficient in that licenses might not be allocated to households with the highest valuations. The source
of misallocation is the cross-sectional heterogeneous preferences. The welfare difference between
the first scenario and the second scenario is static misallocation.
    (iii) Allocation under the lottery policy. As shown in the previous sections, lotteries will not
only allocate licenses to households with lower valuation, but also induce households to move their
participation forward, exacerbating the static misallocation. We define the additional welfare loss
from changes in intertemporal decisions as dynamic inefficiency. As lottery winners are required to
purchase a vehicle within a finite period before the license expires and those without doing so are
allowed to re-enter the lottery within three years. This policy in turn drives lottery winners to move
their purchases forward. To separate the dynamic inefficiency generated by advanced purchasing
from the total welfare loss, we simulate purchasing decisions subject to the expiration rule and
those without the rule. The difference in welfare outcomes from these two simulations provides the
welfare loss from early purchase itself.
    We identify an early participant by comparing the time that a household enters the lottery under
the lottery policy and the time that the same household would choose to buy a vehicle under the
counterfactual scenario of no policy. Similarly, an early purchase is identified through the differ-
ence in time that a household purchases a vehicle under the two scenarios (with and without the
lottery policy). Table 6 reports the summary statistics of early participation and early purchases.
Around 70% of 2011 participants and 44% of 2012 participants were early participants. They
moved their participation forward by at least 12 months on average.25 The lottery policy is likely

23 Different  from Li (2017), we do not consider the external costs associated with vehicle usage post allocation.
24 In  practice, the auction design in Shanghai is unlikely to be efficient. The auction is carried out in two stages where
   bidders are allowed to modified their bids in the second stage within a narrow band around the lowest accepted bid at
   that point. The bidding constraints could limit price competition and degrade efficiency as documented in Holt et al.
   (2013) using lab experiment. Huang and Wen (2019) study the properties of the auction-lottery hybrid system being
   used in four other cities in China and shows that the system preserves the majority of the efficiency of a theoretically
   efficient auction system while improving equity.
25 We are unable to simulate household purchase decisions in absence of the lottery policy after 2012 due to the data

   limit. But we observe almost 50% of households were still non-owners by the end of 2012 and many of them had
   previously entered the lottery. For those households, the number of months they have moved forward their decision


                                                           33
to allocate some licenses to early participants rather than to those who would purchase a vehicle
in that period even without the policy. Early purchases were around 43% of total sales in 2011,
and 25% of total sales in 2012. On average, households moved their purchases forward by at least
three months in 2011, and by one month in 2012. The limited difference in purchasing time among
lottery winners is due to the rational expectation assumption where consumers time their lottery
participation decision based on the winning probability and the time when they need a vehicle.
This suggests that the welfare loss from early purchase is likely to be a small part of dynamic
efficiency.
    We calculate the (expected) consumer surplus for consumers who are predicted to purchase a
vehicle in each scenario:
                                                 P ln( p ) +  E [EV (u
                                    ¯i jt + it - it
                                    u                                 ¯i jt , Si )|u
                                                                                   ¯i jt , Si ] + i jt
                                                        jt
              CS =    E max                                  P
                                                                                                       ,        (32)
                     i, j,t   jJt                           it / p jt

where i jt is the idiosyncratic error term conditional on buying model j. We decompose welfare
losses into inefficiencies generated by static misallocation and dynamic misallocation. We further
decompose dynamic misallocation into that from early participation and that from early purchase.
    Table 7 presents the welfare estimates under the three scenarios in 2011 and 2012. By allocating
the license plate efficiently in the first scenario, total consumer surplus would have been RMB 218
billion and the surplus per buyer would have been RMB 163,000. About 75% (RMB 163 billion ) of
the total surplus under the first-best scenario would have been realized in the second-best allocation,
while only 47% (RMB 103 billion) was realized under the lottery policy. These results highlight
the substantial efficiency cost of implementing the lottery policy. The lottery policy generates
consumer welfare loss of RMB 114 billion during 2011 and 2012. Around 48% of the total welfare
loss could be attributed to static misallocation. Over half of the welfare loss (52%) is due to
dynamic inefficiency of the lottery policy. With dynamic inefficiency, the welfare loss from early
purchase was only RMB 1.2 billion and therefore, the majority of dynamic inefficiency stems from
from early participation into the lottery.


7    Conclusion
Using lotteries to allocate scarce resources could lead to misallocation and welfare loss due to
the inability of lotteries to allocate the resources to consumers with the highest willingness to
pay. When the resources are durable in nature and consumers are forward looking, lotteries could
 to participate in the lottery can be measured as the difference between the time of their participation and the end
 of 2012 (rather than the true future time). Hence, this is a conservative estimate. In the counterfactual analysis in
 Section 6.1 where started the policy from 2008 instead of 2011, however, we obtain a less conservative estimate
 which shows that households moved their market participation forward by at least four years.


                                                         34
induce consumers move forward their participation decision, leading to a large pool of participants
and reducing the chance of allocating the resource to those with a high WTP. The changes in
participation timing represent another channel of welfare loss and leads to dynamic inefficiency.
    To the best of our knowledge, this paper provides the first empirical analysis on the misallo-
cation and welfare consequences from lotteries in a dynamic model. In the context of lotteries for
vehicle license in Beijing, our analysis suggests that consumers on average participate in lotteries
four years earlier than they would purchase a vehicle in the absence of such a policy. The early
participation led to the dramatic increase in the lottery pool size and reduces the chance of vehicle
purchase for those with a high WTP for a vehicle, leading to significant welfare loss. The dynamic
inefficiency accounts for over half of the total welfare loss from the lottery policy.
    Although a Pigouvian tax such as congestion pricing that directly targets the externality-generating
activities is likely to be more efficient than a blunt policy instrument such as a purchase restriction,
several cities in China have adopted vehicle purchase restrictions and more cities may adopt this
policy to address severe urban traffic congestion and air pollution. The choice of allocation mech-
anisms could have important welfare consequences. The findings in our analysis highlight the
importance of taking into account consumer forward-looking behavior in the design of allocation
mechanisms for durable resources. Although our study focuses on vehicle license allocation, the
empirical framework could be employed in other settings for example to study rent control regula-
tions or H1B visa lotteries, and to compare lotteries with alternative allocation mechanisms.




                                                 35
References
Aubert, Vilhelm, "Chance in social affairs," Inquiry, 1959, 2 (1-4), 1­24.
Bai, Jie, Panle Barwick, Shengmao Cao, Shanjun Li et al., "Quid Pro Quo, Knowledge Spillover
  and Industrial Upgrading," Technical Report, Center for International Development at Harvard
  University 2019.
Barwick, Panle Jia, Shanjun Li, Liguo Lin, and Eric Zou, "From Fog to Smog: the Value of
  Pollution Information," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2019.
  , Shengmao Cao, and Shanjun Li, "Local protectionism, market structure, and social welfare:
  China's automobile market," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.
Basu, Kaushik and Patrick M Emerson, "The economics of tenancy rent control," The Economic
  Journal, 2000, 110 (466), 939­962.
Beresteanu, Arie and Shanjun Li, "Gasoline prices, government support, and the demand for
  hybrid vehicles in the United States," International Economic Review, 2011, 52 (1), 161­182.
Berry, Steven, "Estimating Discrete Choice Models of Product Differentiation," RAND Journal of
  Economics, 1994, 25, 242­262.
  , James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes, "Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium," Economet-
  rica, 1995, 63, 841­890.
Borenstein, Severin and Martin B Zimmerman, "Market incentives for safe commercial airline
  operation," The American Economic Review, 1988, pp. 913­935.
Boyce, John R, "Allocation of goods by lottery," Economic Inquiry, 1994, 32 (3), 457­476.
Davis, Lucas W and Lutz Kilian, "The allocative cost of price ceilings in the US residential
  market for natural gas," Journal of Political Economy, 2011, 119 (2), 212­241.
Deng, Haiyan and Alyson C Ma, "Market structure and pricing strategy of China's automobile
  industry," The Journal of Industrial Economics, 2010, 58 (4), 818­845.
Diamond, Rebecca, Tim McQuade, and Franklin Qian, "The effects of rent control expansion
  on tenants, landlords, and inequality: Evidence from San Francisco," American Economic Re-
  view, 2019, 109 (9), 3365­94.
Donna, Javier and José-Antonio Espín-Sánchez, "The Illiquidity of Water Markets," Working
  Paper, 2016.
Eckhoff, Torstein, "Lotteries in allocative situations," Information (International Social Science
  Council), 1989, 28 (1), 5­22.

                                                36
Fienberg, Stephen E, "Randomization and social affairs: the 1970 draft lottery," Science, 1971,
  171 (3968), 255­261.
Fowlie, Meredith, Mar Reguant, and Stephen P. Ryan, "Market-Based Emissions Regulation
  and Industry Dynamics," Journal of Political Economy, 2015, forthcoming.
Glaeser, Edward L, "The social costs of rent control revisited," Technical Report, National Bureau
  of Economic Research 1996.
  and Erzo FP Luttmer, "The misallocation of housing under rent control," American Economic
  Review, 2003, 93 (4), 1027­1046.
Goldberg, Pinelopi K., "Product Differentiation and Oligopoly in International Markets: The Case
 of the U.S. Automobile Industry," Econometrica, 1995, 63, 891­951.
Gowrisankaran, Gautam and Marc Rysman, "Dynamics of Consumer Demand for New Durable
 Goods," Journal of Political Economy, 2012, 120, 1173­1219.
Hazlett, Thomas W and Robert J Michaels, "The cost of rent-seeking: evidence from cellular
 telephone license lotteries," Southern Economic Journal, 1993, pp. 425­435.
   and Roberto E Muñoz, "A welfare analysis of spectrum allocation policies," The RAND Jour-
  nal of Economics, 2009, 40 (3), 424­454.
Hofstee, Willem KB, "Allocation by lot: a conceptual and empirical analysis," Information (Inter-
 national Social Science Council), 1990, 29 (4), 745­763.
Holt, Charles A, William M Shobe et al., "Investigation of the Effects of Emission Market De-
 sign on the Market-Based Compliance Mechanism of the California Cap on Greenhouse Gas
 Emissions," Technical Report, Center for Economic and Policy Studies 2013.
Hu, Wei-Min, Junji Xiao, and Xiaolan Zhou, "Collusion or competition? Interfirm relationships
 in the chinese auto industry," The Journal of Industrial Economics, 2014, 62 (1), 1­40.
Huang, Ling and Martin D Smith, "The dynamic efficiency costs of common-pool resource
 exploitation," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (12), 4071­4103.
Huang, Yangguang and Quan Wen, "Auction­Lottery Hybrid Mechanisms: Structural Model
 and Empirical Analysis," International Economic Review, 2019, 60 (1), 355­385.
Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L Knetsch, and Richard Thaler, "Fairness as a constraint on profit
 seeking: Entitlements in the market," The American economic review, 1986, pp. 728­741.
Kato, Takao and Chad Sparber, "Quotas and quality: The effect of H-1B visa restrictions on the
 pool of prospective undergraduate students from abroad," Review of Economics and Statistics,


                                               37
  2013, 95 (1), 109­126.
Keane, Michale and Kenneth Wolpin, "The Career Decisions of Young Men," Journal of Political
  Economy, 1997, 105, 473­522.
Lee, Robin, "Vertical Integration and Exclusivity in Platform and Two-Sided Markets," American
  Economic Review, 2013, 103, 2960­3000.
Li, Shanjun, "Better lucky than rich," Review of Economic Studies, 2017.
  , Junji Xiao, and Yimin Liu, "The price evolution in China's automobile market," Journal of
  Economics & Management Strategy, 2015, 24 (4), 786­810.
Oi, Walter Y, "The economic cost of the draft," The American Economic Review, 1967, 57 (2),
  39­62.
Pakes, Ariel, "Patents as Options: Some Estimates of the Value of Holding European Patent
  Stocks," Econometrica, 1986, 55, 911­922.
Petrin, Amil, "Quantifying the Benefits of New Products: The Case of the Minivan," Journal of
  Political Economy, 2002, 110, 705­729.
Rust, John, "Optimal Replacement of GMC Bus Engines: An Empirical Model of Harold
 Zurcher," Econometrica, 1987, 55, 999­1033.
  , "Structural Estimation in Markov Decision Processes," in R Engle and D McFadden, eds.,
  Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. 4, Amsterdam: North Holland, 1994, pp. 3081­3143.
Ryan, Stephen, "The Costs of Environmental Regulation in a Concentrated Industry," Economet-
  rica, 2012, 80, 1019­1062.
Schiraldi, Pasquale, "Autobmobile Replacement: A Dynamic Structural Approach," RAND Jour-
  nal of Economics, 2011, 42, 266­291.
Timmins, Christopher, "Measuring the Dynamic Efficiency Costs of Regulators' Preferences:
  Municipal Water Utilities in the Arid West," Econometrica, 2002, 70 (2), 603­629.
Xiao, Junji, Xiaolan Zhou, and Wei-Min Hu, "Welfare Analysis of the Vehicle Quota System in
  China," International Economic Review, 2017, 58 (2), 617­650.




                                              38
                  Figure 1: Lottery Winning Odds and Participant Pool Size 2011-2017




Notes: The y-axis on the left indicates the probability of winning a license and that on the right indicates the quota
(the licenses to be issued) and the number of lottery participants (in 100). The lottery was held once every month
from 2011 to 2013 and then changed to bimonthly from 2014. In 2011 and 2012 about 20,000 license plates are
distributed in each month and the annual cap was reduced over time to 150,000 in 2017.



                Figure 2: New Vehicle Monthly Sales (in logarithm) of Cities 2008-2012




                    Notes: The y-axis indicates monthly sales (in logarithm) of new vehicles.



                                                         39
                                   Figure 3: Estimation Algorithm

                                                                           Result


                                                                if minimized

                                                                      Compute GMM
           Initial  , it and it
                                        if not minimized             objective function

                                                                          yes

                                                                       Convergence?
                                                                        ^it - it < 
                                                                        
                                            no                               and
                                                                        ^it - it < 
                                                                        

                                            Pre-policy Periods
     Update evolution of it and it                                   Recover ^it and ^it




           Vehicle Purchase                                        Lottery Participation
       Solve consumer dynamic                                         Solve consumer
            optimal problem                                        dynamic optimal prob-
       (Iterating EV (u
                      ¯i jm , Sim ))           dP                lem (Iterating EW (Si , i ))
           BLP Contraction:              Policy Periods              BLP Contraction:
         Update market shares                                     Update participation rate
        Update mean utilities u jt                               Update participation cost vt
            Convergence?                                               Convergence?

Notes: Computation algorithm for the estimation of dynamic model of consumer demand. "BLP Contraction"
refers to the contraction mapping introduced in Berry et al. (1995).




                                                 40
                            Figure 4: Dynamic Price Elasticities for Segments




Notes: Price elasticities are calculated by the percentage changes of sales due to an unexpected price increase at
time t . Consumers at time t know that the nature of price changes. We set the time t to be May 2010, the middle
of our data sample.




                                                       41
                                                          Figure 5: Evolution of log inclusive value it
42




     Notes: The y-axis indicates the inclusive value it . The six sets of inclusive values plotted in the figure correspond to the six combinations of  , and the
     preferences on price and the constant term.  , the persistent demand shocks, can be at the lower or upper bounds. The preferences on price and the constant
     term are at (25th, 25th), (75the, 75th) and (25th, 75th) percentiles of their respective distributions.
                                                              Figure 6: Evolution of inclusive value it
43




     Note: The y-axis on the left indicates the inclusive value it . Values of two groups of households with price and constant coefficients at the (25þ, 25th) and
     (75th, 75th) percentiles of their respective distributions. The persistent demand shock,  , is at the upper bound. The y-axis on the right indicates the difference
     of the inclusive value it between the two groups.
                                                                   Figure 7: Prediction Errors of it
44




     Notes: The y-axis indicates the prediction errors of the log inclusive value it . The prediction error is calculated by the difference between it +1 and the period
     t prediction of this value using the realized it and fitted AR(1) model, for a consumer with draws in the 50 percentile for both random coefficients and it at
     the upper bound.
                                                                  Figure 8: Prediction Errors of it
45




     Notes: The y-axis indicates the prediction errors of the inclusive value it . The prediction error is calculated by the difference between it +1 and the period t
     prediction of this value using the realized it , it and fitted AR(1) model, for a consumer with draws in the 50 percentile for both random coefficients and it at
     the upper bound.
                                                     Figure 9: Autocorrelation Test of Prediction Error of it
46




     Notes: The y-axis in the top panel indicates the sample auto correlation of prediction error of it and the  y-axis of the bottom panel indicates sample partial
     correlation of prediction error of it . The confidence band is calculated by one unit of standard error, 1/ T , where T equals to 59 months.
                                                    Figure 10: Autocorrelation Test of Prediction Error of it
47




     Notes: The y-axis in the top panel indicates the sample auto correlation of prediction error of it and the  y-axis of the bottom panel indicates sample partial
     correlation of prediction error of it . The confidence band is calculated by one unit of standard error, 1/ T , where T equals to 23 months.
                                                      Figure 11: Sales Impact of the Lottery Policy
48




     Notes: The y-axis indicates fraction of households purchasing a vehicle. The grey band is the 90% point-wise confidence interval from bootstrapping.
                                                              Figure 12: Households Timing Decisions
49




     Notes: The x-axis indicates months before a household enters the lottery or start to own a vehicle.The y-axis indicates the fraction of total households that start
     to enter the lottery or own a vehicle in that month.
                                                           Figure 13: Counterfactual Simulation Results
50




     Notes: The y-axis on the left indicates the fraction of households being vehicle owners or lottery participants. The y-axis on the right indicates vehicle sales
     (in logarithm).
                                                        Figure 14: Counterfactual Results by Preferences
51




     Notes: The y-axis indicates the fraction of households being vehicle owners or lottery participants. From top to bottom, the price coefficient increases. From
     left to right, the constant term (preference for ownership) increases.
                                             Figure 15: Difference in Purchase Timing with and without the Policy
52




     Notes: The y-axis indicates the fraction of lottery winners. The x-axis indicates difference between two points in time: the time when a household starts to
     own a vehicle in absence of quantity constraint, and the time when a household would purchase a vehicle for the first time under the lottery policy. A positive
     difference indicates early purchases induced by the policy.
                                               Table 1: Summary Statistics

     Variable                     Mean       S.D.      Min      Max          Mean     S.D.       Min     Max
                                                    Model                                    Segement
     Price (in 1,000RMB)          311.29 277.83 36.49 1148.40                391.26 308.42 56.56              912.45
     Monthly sales in Beijing       126    241      0   3464                   7426    8355  103               62160
     Monthly sales in Tianjin         57   126      0   2295                   3381    3870    15              17435
     Vehicle size (m2)              8.01   1.01  4.20   10.97                   7.84    1.33 5.37                9.20
     Displacement (liter)           2.11   0.85  0.90    6.20                   2.35    1.09 1.04                4.32
     Mini dummy                     0.03   0.17  0.00    1.00                   0.17 0.3732  0.00                1.00
     Small dummy                    0.21   0.41  0.00    1.00                   0.17 0.3732  0.00                1.00
     Medium dummy                   0.35   0.48  0.00    1.00                   0.17 0.3732  0.00                1.00
     Upper Medium dummy             0.24   0.43  0.00    1.00                   0.17 0.3732  0.00                1.00
     Large dummy                    0.14   0.35  0.00    1.00                   0.17 0.3732  0.00                1.00
     Luxury dummy                   0.02   0.16  0.00    1.00                   0.17 0.3732  0.00                1.00
53




     Notes: The unit of observation on the left column is at the vehicle model-year-month level, and that on the right
     is at the segment-year-month level. Prices are in 1000s RMB at the 2012 price level and they include vehicle
     sales tax. The tax was at 10 percent in 2008, 2011 and 2012 but differed across vehicles with different engine
     size in 2009 and 2010 due to subsidies. There are 21,228 observations at the model-year-month level with 1,769
     models (vintage-nameplate), and 360 observations at the segment-year-month level.
                               Table 2: The Policy Impacts from Reduced-form Analysis

                                    Specification 1      Specification 2     Specification 3      Specification 4
             Variables              OLS        2SLS           2SLS                2SLS                 2SLS
             Ln(price)              -5.238 -7.815*         -11.350***             -6.786              -7.658*
                                   (4.005) (4.719)           (3.893)             (4.570)              (4.516)
          Beijing*2009              -0.033 -0.033
                                   (0.052) (0.052)
          Beijing*2010              0.021   0.021
                                   (0.068) (0.068)
          Beijing*2011                                      -0.946***          -3.475***             -3.541***
                                                              (0.090)            (0.251)               (0.268)
54




          Beijing*2012                                      -0.685***          -2.982***              -2.87***
                                                              (0.126)            (0.312)               (0.321)
     Beijing*2011*Ln(price)                                                     0.478***             0.502***
                                                                                 (0.047)               (0.050)
     Beijing*2012*Ln(price)                                                     0.440***             0.436***
                                                                                 (0.057)               (0.059)
                 N                       23616                42456               42456                40170
     Notes: The dependent variable is ln(market shares). All specifications include model fixed effects, city-
     segment fixed effects and year-month fixed effects. Specification 1 uses the data from 2008 to 2010. Speci-
     fications 2 and 3 are based on full data from 2008 to 2012. Specification 4 uses the same observations as in
     Specifications 2 and 3 except dropping the observations in Nov. and Dec. of 2010 and Jan. of 2011 for Beijing
     to remove the anticipation effect. Instruments for price are constructed using the sales tax relief policy based
     on the engine size. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the model level.
                                                        Table 3: Parameter Estimates from GMM

                                           Specification 1       Specification 2           Specification 3        Specification 4      Specification 5
                Variables                  Coef.     S.E.      Coef.       S.E.          Coef.       S.E.         Coef.     S.E.      Coef.      S.E.
     Utility of Vehicle (vc )
     Ln(Price) 0 P                         -13.45     0.50    -13.32        0.09        -13.20        0.13        -15.00     0.27    -13.60       2.65
     Ln(Price)× Ln(Income) 1  P             0.12      0.03     0.59         0.14         0.53         0.05         1.08      0.05     1.08        0.59
     Ln(Income)                             0.25      0.02     0.44         0.12         1.03         0.07         5.74      0.40     1.60        0.88
      for Ln(Price)                         0.24      0.11     0.51         0.14         0.50         0.02         0.02      0.01     0.16        0.09
      for constant                          4.14      0.23     3.69         0.10         3.95         0.12         1.37      0.17     1.56        0.07

     Value of License
                                            19.65     9.46     13.58        3.08         19.63        5.40        23.17      9.60     22.08       7.13
55




     Persistent Demand Shock it
     h                                      3.08      0.05      3.17        0.06         3.11         0.05           -         -      2.59        0.39
     P                                      0.05      0.01      0.05    9.70 × 10-4      0.04     3.33 × 10-3        -         -        -           -
     Pinc1                                    -         -         -           -            -            -            -         -      0.04        0.23
     Pinc2                                    -         -         -           -            -            -            -         -      0.12     4.3 × 10-3
     Pinc3                                    -         -         -           -            -            -            -         -      0.08        0.19
     Pinc4                                    -         -         -           -            -            -            -         -      0.08        0.67
     Notes: Specification 1 is the benchmark and the preferred model. Specifications 1 and 2 use the full sample from 2008 to 2012. Specification 2 does
     not include the income moments for replacement buyers. Specification 3 drops the observations in Nov. and Dec. of 2010 and Jan. of 2011 for Beijing
     to remove the anticipation effect. Specification 4 assumes away the persistent demand shock to vehicle demand. Specification 5 allows transition
     probability of the persistent demand shock to vary across different income levels. The four income groups are corresponding to the income groups
     reported in Appendix Table 2a where inc1 standards for the group of the lowest income level and inc4 stands for the group of the highest income level.
                    Table 4: Sales Impact of Lottery Policy in Beijing (in thousand)

                                                       Counterfactual Sales
     Year    Observed Sales        Variables        Benchmark Alternative 1            Alternative 2
                                                      1,220            1,136              1,081
                                 Total             (585; 1,855)     (615; 1,657)       (545; 1,617)
     2011          327
                                 First-time             888              835               789
                                 (% to Total)        (72.77%)         (73.48%)          (72.97%)
                                                      1,810            1,844              1,814
                                 Total             (848; 2,772)     (903; 2,784)       (832; 2,795)
     2012          505
                                 First-time            1,071            1,095             1,064
                                 (% to Total)        (59.17%)         (59.38%)          (58.69%)
     Notes: The benchmark model corresponds to the baseline specification in Table 3. Alternative 1
56




     corresponds to the model that drops the observations in Nov. and Dec. of 2010 and Jan. of 2011
     for Beijing to remove the anticipation effect. Alternative 2 corresponds to the model that allows
     transition probability of the persistent demand shock of demand to vary across different income
     levels. Total sales includes both first-time and replacement purchases. The 95% confidence
     intervals of total counterfactual sales are reported in the parenthesis.
                        Table 5a: Counterfactual Simulations from 2008 to 2012

                                        Scenario 1                 Scenario 2
                        Year     Total Lottery Partcipants     First-time Buyers
                       2008                50.58                       0.59
                       2009                51.58                       0.99
                       2010                49.77                       0.64
                       2011                49.88                       0.54
                       2012                49.07                       2.74


                               Table 5b: Counterfactual Simulations in 2008

                                          Scenario 1                    Scenario 2
                    Date        First-time Lottery Participants     First-time Buyers
                   2008Q1                    29.80                          0.75
                   2008Q2                    3.12                           5.85
                   2008Q3                    0.35                           0.58
                   2008Q4                    0.07                           0.47

 Notes: The first column in Table 5a indicates the total households that enter the lottery. The first column
in Table 5b indicates total households that enter the lottery for the first time. The second column in Table
5a and 5b indicate the total households that buy a car for the first time. All numbers are in percentages
and monthly averages. Scenario 1 represents the counterfactual environment that the lottery policy starts
from the beginning of the sample period; scenario 2 represents the counterfactual environment that the
lottery policy is absent from 2008 to 2012.




                                                     57
                       Table 6: Counterfactual Simulations

                                                      2011             2012
Early Participation
(% to total number of participation)                 69.79            44.21

Months Moved Forward to Participate
(Average over all early participants)                11.76            13.28

Advanced Purchases
(% to total purchases)                               43.09            24.81

Months Moved Forward to Purchase
(Average over all early purchases)                    3.72             1.41

Purchases Delayed
(% to total ownership without policy)                67.57            38.50

Notes: Early Participation refers to households entering the lottery pool before they
would purchase a vehicle in absence of the lottery policy. Early purchases refer to
the purchases made by households before when they would purchase a vehicle in
absence of the policy.




                                         58
                                   Table 7: Welfare Analysis

                                Per Participant (1000 RMB)            Total (Billion RMB)
Total Consumer Welfare
       First Best                           163.01                            218.18

      Second Best                           121.98                            163.26
(Percentage to First Best)                                 (74.83%)

         Lottery                            77.30                             103.46
(Percentage to First Best)                                 (47.42%)
Welfare Loss
  Total Misallocation                       85.71                             114.72

  Static Misallocation                      41.03                              54.92
(Percentage to total loss)                                 (47.87%)

   Early Participation                      43.76                              58.58
(Percentage to total loss)                                 (51.06%)

     Early Purchase                          0.91                              1.22
(Percentage to total loss)                                  (1.07%)

  Dynamic Inefficiency                      44.68                              59.80
(Percentage to total loss)                                 (52.13%)
Notes: The first-best refers to the scenario where licenses are allocated to households with the
highest valuation. The second-best refers to the scenario where licenses are allocated with a
uniform probability among households who would purchase a vehicle in the current period in
absence of the policy. Lottery refers to the current lottery policy where the decision horizon and
the purchase timing are affected.




                                               59
     Appendices

                                                      Appendix Figure 1: Selected Vehicle Characteristics
60




      Notes: Vehicle prices are computed based on the MSRP and sales tax. Average Sizes are computed by the product of vehicle length and width. Fuel efficiency
      is measure by liters of fuel per mile (LPM).
                           Table 1: Cities with Vehicle Quota Restrictions

Year       City      Annual Quota (2014 in          Implementation         Winning Probability
                     thousand)
1990    Singapore    Sustainable Levels for    Bi-monthly auction sys-                     -
                     road infrastructure de-   tem to highest bidders
                     velopment
1994    Shanghai              100              Monthly Auction to high-                    -
                                               est bidders
2011     Beijing              130              Lottery                     9.4 percent in January 2011;
                                                                           less than 0.1 percent by the end
                                                                           of 2017.
2011     Guiyang               50              Free lottery to enter the   11.1 percent in the first lottery;
                                               first ring zone             0.13 percent in December 2017.
2012   Guangzhou              108              Hybrid mechanism:           4.48 percent in May 2013;
                                               60,000 plates by lottery;   0.76 percent in December 2017.
                                               48,000 plates by auction.
2014     Tianjin               90              Hybrid mechanism:           3 percent in the first lottery
                                               50,000 plates by lottery;   less than 0.1 percent by the end
                                               40,000 plates by auction.   of2017.
2014    Hangzhou               80              Hybrid mechanism:           2.2 percent in the first lottery;
                                               16,000 plates by lottery;   0.85 percent in December 2017.
                                               64,000 plates by auction.
2015    Shenzhen              100              Hybrid mechanism:           0.77 percent in the first lottery;
                                               50,000 plates by lottery;   0.33 percent in December 2017.
                                               50,000 plates by auction.
Notes: Data and policy information are collected from Singapore Ministry of Transport, Beijing Municipal
Commission of Transportation, Shanghai Municipal Commission of Transportation and EMBARQ of World
Resources Institute.




                                                   61
                              Table 2a: The Share of Households by Income among Vehicle Buyers and All Households

                                                                    New Vehicle Buyers                          All Households
       City     Annnual Household Income (in Yuan)         2008     2009 2010 2011           2012    2008     2009 2010 2011            2012
      Beijing   <70K                                       12.64 12.81 15.28         9.78  6.54 65.47 51.62 44.87 38.32 33.41
      Beijing   70K to 170K                                43.68 66.56 59.26        58.70 52.34 31.60 45.19 50.88 55.83 58.05
      Beijing   170K to 300K                               26.44 12.50 16.67        26.09 28.97 2.61   2.70 3.67 4.81 7.07
      Beijing   >300K                                      17.24  8.13  8.80         5.43 12.15 0.33   0.49 0.57 1.04 1.48

      Tianjin   <70K                                       21.37 24.58 23.26 13.33 26.09 76.31 73.19 58.54 54.38 42.01
      Tianjin   70K to 170K                                56.41 57.54 55.04 63.81 63.04 22.64 25.44 39.72 42.97 54.72
      Tianjin   170K to 300K                               15.38 13.97 14.73 13.33  4.35 0.80   1.10 1.27 2.14 2.64
      Tianjin   >300K                                       6.84  3.91  6.98  9.52  6.52 0.24   0.27 0.47 0.51 0.63


                          Table 2b: The Share of Households by Income among First Time Buyers and Replacement Buyers
62




                                                                     First Time Buyers                        Replacement Buyers
       City     Annnual Household Income (in Yuan)         2008     2009 2010 2011           2012    2008     2009 2010 2011            2012
     Beijing    <70K                                      13.41 13.06 15.98 11.69  5.88 0.00 10.34 9.09 0.00 9.10
     Beijing    70K to 170K                               42.68 67.70 62.37 61.04 54.12 60.00 55.17 31.82 46.67 45.46
     Beijing    170K to 300K                              26.22 11.68 14.43 22.08 24.71 30.00 20.69 36.36 46.67 45.46
     Beijing    >300K                                     17.68  7.56  7.22  5.19 15.29 10.00 13.79 22.73 6.67 0.00

     Tianjin    <70K                                      21.70 22.56 21.05 13.48 31.58 18.18 46.67 40.00 12.50 0.00
     Tianjin    70K to 170K                               58.49 59.76 55.26 64.04 60.53 36.36 33.33 53.33 62.50 75.00
     Tianjin    170K to 300K                              14.15 14.63 16.67 14.61  5.26 27.27  6.67 0.00 6.25 0.00
     Tianjin    >300K                                      5.66  3.05  7.02  7.87  2.63 18.18 13.33 6.67 18.75 25.00

      Notes: New Vehicle Buyers include both first time buyers and replacement buyers. The income data for vehicle buyers comes from household
     survey data conducted by the National Information Center. The data on all households are from Annual Statistical Yearbook for each city by
     Bureau of Statistics.
                                                Table 3: City Characteristics in Beijing and Tianjin

     Year           City            No. of Households Average Household New Vehicle Sales                  National Vehicle % in nation
                                    (mil.)            Income (in Yuan)                                     Sales(mil.)
        2008           Beijing             605.99                  69,230                  419,703                 6.60              6.21
        2009           Beijing             636.29                  74,866                  610,076                10.33              5.91
        2010           Beijing             668.10                  81,404                  815,211                13.76              5.93
        2011           Beijing             687.86                  88,838                  346,207                14.47              2.39
        2012           Beijing             704.89                  98,466                  536,216                15.50              3.46
        2008           Tianjin             347.88                  56,131                  160,221                 6.76              2.37
        2009           Tianjin             356.92                  61,737                  223,774                10.33              2.17
        2010           Tianjin             366.20                  69,477                  276,716                13.76              2.01
        2011           Tianjin             383.35                  76,455                  278,336                14.47              1.92
        2012           Tianjin             399.92                  84,138                  292,442                15.50              1.89
     Notes: The sales data are from R.L. Polk & CO. and other variables are from various issues of Annual Social and Economic Development
63




     Report by each of the cities. The average income is nominal. New vehicle sales include passenger cars and ligth truck.
