                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                           BANKING CRISES WITHOUT PANICS

                                        Matthew Baron
                                         Emil Verner
                                         Wei Xiong

                                      Working Paper 26908
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26908


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020

The authors would like to thank Daniel Dieckelmann, Md Azharul Islam, and Jamil Rahman for
their extraordinary research assistance. Isha Agarwal, Isaac Green, William Shao, Sylvia Lu,
Felipe Silva, Bryan Tam, Yevhenii Usenko, and the librarians at the Harvard Business
School Historical Collections also provided valuable assistance. The authors would also like
to thank Jason Donaldson, Sam Hanson, Mikael Juselius, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Randy
Kroszner, Solomos Solomou, Moritz Schularick, Andrei Shleifer, Eugene White, and seminar
participants at the Bank for International Settlements, Boston Fed, Boston University,
Cambridge University, Columbia University, Cornell University, Danmarks Nationalbank,
EDHEC, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Federal Reserve Board, Georgetown University,
Harvard University, Imperial College London, London Business School, MIT, OCC, Oxford
University, Richmond Fed, Rutgers University, University of Bonn, University of British
Columbia, University of Maryland, University of Rochester, University of Toronto, Yale
University, Chicago Booth financial crises conference, fall 2018 NBER Corporate Finance
meeting, Becker-Friedman Institute junior finance/macro conference, 2018 AEA meeting, 2019
AFA meeting, Kentucky Finance Conference, Columbia SIPA / BPI financial regulation
conference, and the New York Fed/NYU Conference of Financial Intermediation for their
comments and feedback. We thank Mika Vaihekoski and Frans Buelens for sharing data. A
previous version of this paper was circulated with the title "Salient Crises, Quiet Crises." The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Matthew Baron, Emil Verner, and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Banking Crises without Panics
Matthew Baron, Emil Verner, and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 26908
March 2020
JEL No. G01,G21

                                         ABSTRACT

We examine historical banking crises through the lens of bank equity declines, which cover a
broad sample of episodes of banking distress both with and without banking panics. To do this,
we construct a new dataset on bank equity returns and narrative information on banking panics
for 46 countries over the period 1870-2016. We find that even in the absence of panics, large
bank equity declines are associated with substantial credit contractions and output gaps. While
panics can be an important amplification mechanism, our results indicate that panics are not
necessary for banking crises to have severe economic consequences. Furthermore, panics tend to
be preceded by large bank equity declines, suggesting that panics are the result, rather than the
cause, of earlier bank losses. We also use bank equity returns to uncover a number of forgotten
historical banking crises and to create a banking crisis chronology that distinguishes between
bank equity losses and panics.

Matthew Baron                                   Wei Xiong
Johnson Graduate School of Management           Princeton University
Cornell University                              Department of Economics
401J Sage Hall                                  Bendheim Center for Finance
Ithaca, NY 14853-6201                           Princeton, NJ 08450
baron@cornell.edu                               and NBER
                                                wxiong@princeton.edu
Emil Verner
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-635
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
everner@mit.edu
       The severe economic distress faced by the world economy following the 2008 financial
crisis has renewed interest in understanding the causes and consequences of banking crises.
Academics and policy makers often emphasize panics among bank creditors as a key driver of
banking crises. For example, Friedman and Schwartz (1963) argue that depositor panics played a
central role in the severity of the Great Depression, and Bernanke (2018) attributes the unusual
severity of the Great Recession primarily to the panics in funding and securitization markets after
the collapse of Lehman Brothers. As highlighted by the classic theory of Diamond and Dybvig
(1983), using short-term debt to finance long-term illiquid investments exposes even solvent banks
to self-fulfilling panics. As a reflection of the influence of the panic-based view of banking crises,
some have gone as far as essentially defining banking crises as banking panics (Schwartz 1987,
Gorton 2014).

       However, there remains a debate about whether panics are so essential to banking crises.
Another strand of research on banking crises argues that policy makers should be concerned
primarily by bank capital crunches driven by asset losses, rather than panics per se (e.g., Calomiris
and Mason 2003, Greenlaw et al. 2008, Admati and Hellwig 2014). This alternative view is
motivated by an extensive literature that emphasizes bank equity as a key state variable that
determines banks' capacity to intermediate funds from savers to firms and households, e.g.,
Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) and Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010). As large declines in bank equity
tend to impair banks' intermediation capacity, an important question is whether large bank losses
even without panics can also translate into severe recessions. If so, large bank equity losses should
be viewed as the central feature of banking crises.

       We address this debate by asking--are panics necessary for banking crises to have severe
economic consequences? Our conceptual definition of a banking crisis is an episode in which the
banking sector's ability to intermediate funds is severely impaired. By panics, we mean episodes
of severe and sudden withdrawals of funding by bank creditors from a significant part of the
banking system. If the answer to this question is no, then a bank capital crunch caused by large
loan losses or other impairment of the banking sector can lead to a sharp contraction in credit
supply that depresses macroeconomic output, even without a panic.

       We use bank equity returns to systemically examine this question, as large bank equity
declines capture a sample of episodes in which banks suffer large losses from the viewpoint of

                                                                                                    1
equity investors, and thus likely capture times of bank distress. Since equity holders are the first
to suffer losses from the occurrence of a banking crisis that damages banks' intermediation
capacity, we assume that conceptually a large bank equity decline is necessary for a banking crisis.
Large bank equity declines offer several advantages as measures of aggregate banking sector
distress relative to existing approaches to identifying historical banking crises (e.g., Reinhart and
Rogoff 2009, Laeven and Valencia 2013). First, large declines in bank equity cover a broad sample
of episodes of banking distress both with and without panics, as episodes without panics may be
otherwise hard to detect due to the "quiet" nature of some such episodes of bank distress. Second,
in contrast to the information insensitivity of credit-market instruments prior to panics, bank equity
returns tend to be gradual and cumulative and thus may capture early signs of banking crises for
real-time policy making. Third, the broad availability of bank equity returns across many countries
going far back in time makes bank equity returns particularly appealing for studies of historical
crises.

          We construct a new historical dataset of bank equity index returns for 46 advanced and
emerging economies going back to 1870, built in large part from hand-collected individual bank
stock price and dividend data from historical newspapers. We control for broader stock market
conditions by also constructing new indexes for nonfinancial stocks over the same sample. Our
dataset thus provides nearly 2,500 country-years of information on bank equities, nonfinancial
equities, and macroeconomic variables. We also collect new information on the occurrence of
events such as banking panics and widespread bank failures, backed by several hundred pages of
narrative documentation.

          As many other factors beyond banking crises may also cause large fluctuations in bank
equity returns, one cannot take for granted the empirical performance of bank equity declines in
identifying crises and predicting subsequent economic outcomes. We first confirm that bank equity
declines contain useful information about banking sector distress and the economy by testing at
the country level whether bank equity index returns have predictive content for future
macroeconomic dynamics, beyond the information contained in nonfinancial equities. We find that
bank equity declines predict large and persistent declines in future real GDP and bank credit to the
private sector. For example, a decline in bank equity of at least 30% predicts 3.4% lower real GDP
and 5.7 percentage points lower bank credit-to-GDP after three years. The relation between bank
equity returns and future output and credit growth is highly nonlinear: declines in bank equity
                                                                                                    2
predict future output and credit contraction, whereas increases in bank equity do not predict
stronger economic performance. In contrast, while nonfinancial equity declines also separately
predict lower GDP, they have no relation to subsequent bank credit-to-GDP.

       Large bank equity declines thus likely pick up episodes when output contracts in part due
to troubles in the banking sector. As further confirmation, we find that bank equity declines tend
to capture other characteristics associated with banking crises, such as widespread bank failures,
high rates of nonperforming loans, and government intervention into the banking sector. By using
bank equity declines as a convenient measure of banking distress, our analysis provides broad
evidence of the macroeconomic consequences of banking distress across time and countries,
complementing previous studies that use cross-sectional variation in specific episodes to offer
sharp identification of the macroeconomic consequences of banking distress (Peek and Rosengren
2000, Khwaja and Mian 2008, Amiti and Weinstein 2011, Puri, Rocholl, and Steffen 2011,
Chodorow-Reich 2014, and Huber 2018).

       To facilitate our analysis of panic and non-panic episodes, we define a "bank equity crash"
as a bank equity decline of over 30% in a year. We then separate these bank equity crashes into
panic versus non-panic episodes based on a systematic reading of the narrative evidence for each
of these episodes. We define panics as episodes of severe and sudden withdrawals of funding by
bank creditors from a significant part of the banking system, which could include withdrawals of
funding from either insolvent banks ("fundamental runs") or illiquid but fundamentally solvent
banks ("non-fundamental runs"). Our analysis finds that while panic bank equity crashes tend to
be followed by greater credit contractions and lower output growth, non-panic bank equity crashes
also predict substantial credit contractions and persistent output gaps. For example, even in the
absence of any creditor panic, a decline in bank equity of at least 30% predicts that after three
years, bank credit-to-GDP declines by 3.4% and real GDP declines by 2.9%. This finding suggests
that in a large historical sample, panics are not necessary for severe economic consequences, as
non-panic episodes can also lead to substantial credit contractions and output drops.

       While some of the non-panic bank equity crashes might be solely driven by equity market
noise, we show that many are, in fact, well-documented episodes in which the financial system
suffered major losses and was undercapitalized, yet strong regulatory forbearance, implicit
government guarantees, or outright government intervention prevented panics from emerging


                                                                                                3
among bank creditors. To stress their relevance, we highlight several prominent episodes of severe
non-panic banking distress, including Canada during the Great Depression, Spain in 1977-1982,
the U.S. in 1990-1992, Japan in 1990-1996 and 2001-2003, and several Eurozone countries today
­ examples which are all associated with prolonged recessions and credit crunches. Our analysis
thus motivates policy makers to broaden their policy interventions to cover not just panics on the
banking system but also bank capital crunches even in the absence of panics.

       One other important advantage of bank equity returns is that they allow for precise analysis
of the turning points of historical banking crises and the dynamics of how crises evolve, as
understood in real-time by equity investors. We thus zoom in on a sample of crises to examine the
timing of large bank equity declines relative to panics. Using monthly data covering over one
hundred crises, we find that large bank equity declines tend to precede panics and credit spread
spikes. On average, panics, as identified by narrative accounts, occur 7 months after the bank
equity index has already declined by 30%. Moreover, prior to the month of the panic, bank equity
has declined by an average of 36% from its previous peak. These results suggest that substantial
bank losses are already present at the early stages of these crisis episodes, rather than these losses
being due to the subsequent panics. Furthermore, while credit spreads are relatively insensitive to
these early losses, bank equity returns are more sensitive, which, while not surprising from a
conceptual perspective, nevertheless highlights bank equity declines as a useful crisis indicator for
policy making in real-time.

       Taken together, our findings paint a more complete picture of the roles played by bank
equity declines and panics during banking crises: large bank equity declines tend to be followed
by severe economic consequences even without panics; large bank equity declines precede the
occurrence of panics; and panics with large bank equity declines tend to have the most severe
credit contractions and output gaps. These findings highlight panics as an amplification
mechanism, albeit not a necessary condition for severe banking crises. Furthermore, these findings
reinforce the importance of timely recapitalization of bank capital during early phases of banking
distress, rather than having policy makers simply backstop liquidity, in order to prevent subsequent
panics from erupting and to minimize the adverse macroeconomic consequences.

       Finally, as a byproduct of our analysis, we provide a new chronology of banking crises that
highlights both crises with banking panics and crises with bank equity losses but without panics.


                                                                                                    4
Prior chronologies of historical banking crises, e.g., Bordo et al. (2001), Caprio and Klingebiel
(2003), Demirgüç-Kunt and Detragiache (2005), Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), Schularick and
Taylor (2012), and Laeven and Valencia (2013), tend to be subjective in how they designate
banking crisis episodes (Romer and Romer, 2017). As a result, these various banking crisis
chronologies disagree with one another. We use information from bank equity returns, along with
newly collected information on panics and widespread bank failures, to create a more systematic
banking crisis chronology. As there is no single correct definition of a banking crisis, our goal is
to provide one possible construction of clear-cut crisis episodes based on three systematic criteria:
bank equity losses, bank failures, and panics. Importantly, our approach also removes spurious
episodes from the previous narrative-based banking crisis chronologies and helps to reconcile
disagreements between them. With the help of large bank equity declines as a screening tool, we
also uncover a number of "forgotten" historical banking crises that are confirmed by new narrative
evidence.

       Our paper is organized as follows. Section I discusses conceptual issues. Section II
describes our new historical dataset. Section III presents the results on the informativeness of bank
equity returns for macroeconomic outcomes. Section IV explores the macroeconomic implications
of panics and non-panic bank distress episodes. Section V compares the timing of bank equity
declines, panics, and other financial market indicators around banking crises, and Section VI
presents our new banking crisis chronology.


                                    I.      Conceptual issues


       This section outlines theories of banking crises and discusses how these theories connect
to our empirical bank equity decline measure.


A. Theories of crises

       The classic model of Diamond and Dybvig (1983) has greatly influenced views of policy
makers and academics about banking crises. In their model, panics in the form of self-fulfilling
multiple equilibria can lead depositors to run on a fundamentally solvent but illiquid bank. This
situation arises because banks are funded by demand deposits, a type of short-term debt, which

                                                                                                   5
exposes banks to nonfundamental panic runs. When other households choose to withdraw their
deposits, each depositor finds it optimal to withdraw as well, even if the bank's illiquid assets are
able to pay off its liabilities in the long run. When panic runs occur, the bank is forced to liquidate
its assets at a discount, leading the bank to fail.

        While modern financial systems include non-bank financial institutions and non-deposit
funding, short-term debt remains the most important form of financing, thus exposing the banking
system to panic runs. Despite the instability it creates, short-term debt is widely used due to several
important economic considerations. Calomiris and Kahn (1991) argue that short-term debt
financing can serve as a mechanism for lenders to discipline borrowers in the presence of moral
hazard. Gorton and Pennacchi (1990) emphasize that when a borrower is far from insolvency, its
short-term debt is safe and thus insensitive to private information about its fundamentals, which
alleviates adverse-selection problems in financial markets and makes short-term debt liquid in
secondary markets. Dang, Gorton and Holmstrom (2019) further argue that the rapid growth of
securitization of mortgage loans in the shadow banking sector during the 1990s and 2000s was
largely driven by the market demand for information-insensitive securities.

        Short-term debt financing also exposes banks and non-bank financial institutions to
fundamental-driven panics. In the presence of asymmetric information about the health of a bank,
Chari and Jagannathan (1988), Allen and Gale (1998), and Calomiris and Kahn (1991) show that
panics occur not only after negative fundamental shocks but also when depositors suffer liquidity
shocks, because depositors cannot tell apart these situations. Goldstein and Pauzner (2005) and He
and Xiong (2012) develop both static and dynamic models to show that negative fundamental
shocks may exacerbate the coordination problem among short-term debt holders, leading to panic
runs on a fundamentally solvent bank. In these models, panic runs serve to amplify initial negative
fundamental shocks.

        These panic-based mechanisms, either through self-fulfilling runs or fundamental-driven
runs, tend to occur as discontinuous disruptions in credit markets. Bernanke (2018) provides a
summary of credit market disruptions during the 2007-2008 U.S. financial crisis, occurring in asset
classes such as asset-backed commercial paper (Kacperczyk and Schnabl 2010; Covitz, Liang, and
Suarez 2013; Schroth, Suarez and Taylor 2014), structured investment vehicles and other conduits
(Gorton 2008), and money market mutual funds (McCabe 2010). Bernanke (2018) highlights that,


                                                                                                     6
as these short-term credit-market instruments are by design information-insensitive during normal
periods, it is particularly difficult for policy makers to predict the occurrence of panic runs on these
instruments and the economic consequences of such runs.

        Instead of focusing on disruptions in bank funding markets, this paper explores bank equity
declines as an alternative lens to study banking crises. Our analysis is broadly motivated by the
literature that emphasizes bank equity as the key determinant of banks' intermediation capacity,
e.g., Holmstrom and Tirole (1997), Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010), He and Krishnamurthy (2013),
Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), and Rampini and Viswanathan (2019). For example, in
Holmstrom and Tirole (1997), banks are incentivized to monitor borrowers by investing a
sufficiently large stake of their own capital into firms. This implies that banks face an equity
constraint with their lending limited by their capital. According to these models, adverse shocks
that impair bank equity may constrain banks' capacity to finance the economy, depressing output
through a bank capital crunch.1

        What factors increase the likelihood of bank capital crunches and panics? An extensive
literature provides evidence that banking crises are not simply due to random realizations of
negative shocks, but rather deeply connected to prior credit booms. Specifically, credit booms
predict a higher probability of banking crises (Schularick and Taylor 2012, Baron and Xiong 2017)
and coincide with low credit spreads and an increase in debt issuance by riskier borrowers
(Greenwood and Hanson 2013, Mian, Sufi, and Verner 2017, López-Salido, Stein, and Zakrajsek
2017, Krishnamurthy and Muir 2018). These findings highlight that elevated sentiment or over-
optimism likely plays a central role in credit booms. Following a period of positive shocks, lenders
may over-extrapolate recent low defaults and neglect downside risk, leading to the underpricing
of risk during the credit boom and subsequent bank asset losses (Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer
2018, Greenwood, Hanson, and Jin 2019). Overall, credit booms increase the fragility of the
banking system and the economy, leaving banks vulnerable to future losses that lead to bank capital
crunches or even panics.




1
 He and Krishnamurthy (2013) also highlight a subtler channel beyond the bank lending channel: shocks to bank
health may depress asset prices, which in turn lowers the ability of households and firms to access credit due to
household and firm balance sheet constraints.

                                                                                                               7
B. Research questions

         The contrasting emphasis of the two strands of the literature on panics and bank equity
losses motivates our research questions:

         Are large bank equity declines associated with adverse macroeconomic consequences? An
extensive literature examines the macroeconomic consequences of bank distress by analyzing the
effects of sharply identified shocks to the banking sector. Peek and Rosengren (2000) and Amiti
and Weinstein (2011) use shocks from Japanese banks, which affected economic activity in the
U.S. and Japan; Khwaja and Mian (2008) analyzes a bank credit supply shock created by a political
event in Pakistan; Chodorow-Reich (2014) exploits the Lehman bankruptcy during the Great
Recession as a credit supply shock to study its effect on U.S. employment; while Huber (2018)
studies the effects of domestic lending cuts by Commerzbank, a large bank that suffered significant
losses in its international trading book. While these studies offer sharp identification, they are
limited to the specific countries and time periods in their respective samples, thus leaving open the
question regarding whether severe economic consequences of bank distress exist in a broad sample
that spans time and space. By addressing this question, we are also able to establish the empirical
performance of bank equity declines as a way of measuring banking distress.

         Are panics necessary for banking crises to have severe economic consequences? Bank
equity prices allow us to address this question, as large equity declines capture a sample of episodes
in which banks suffer large losses from the viewpoint of equity investors. Since a large bank equity
decline is necessary for a banking crisis,2 these episodes include both those that have experienced
banking panic and those without, and thus allow us to separately examine macroeconomic
consequences of large bank equity declines with and without observations of panics. Banking
crises without panics may occur when banks are undercapitalized and their ability to lend is
severely impaired, even when panics by bank creditors are prevented, often due to a combination
of regulatory forbearance, implicit creditor guarantees, and forceful government interventions.



2
  However, as we will show, measurement error can lead to observations of narrative accounts of bank panics that are
not associated with large equity declines for at least two reasons. First, because our bank equity index primarily covers
large commercial banks, our bank equity index may not reflect runs on private bank, regional banks, or nonbank
financial institutions are not captured by our bank equity index. Second, panics without large bank equity crashes
declines can also be episodes of short-lived panics, in which long-run bank solvency is not affected and bank equity
thus recovers by the end of the year.

                                                                                                                       8
These banking crises without panics may reflect episodes with narrative evidence of bank failures.3
However, importantly, bank equity declines also allow us to go one step further and identify
episodes of banking sector distress with neither panics nor narrative evidence of bank failures,
which we refer to as quiet crises. These quiet crises may reflect bank losses that do not translate
into headline events such as panics or bank failures, but where losses nevertheless impair banks'
ability to lend. Narrative-based approaches often miss such quiet episodes due to the difficulty of
detecting banking losses in the absence of salient characteristics such as depositor runs or bank
failures, as acknowledged by early studies that use narrative-based approaches, e.g., Caprio and
Klingebiel (1996, 2003).

        Do bank equity declines precede panics? The joint dynamics of bank equity returns, panics,
and credit-market spreads allow us to systematically examine the relative timing of bank equity
declines, panics, and credit-market disruptions around banking crises. If panics are driven by self-
fulfilling shocks unrelated to bank fundamentals, they would not be preceded by bank equity
declines. Thus, evidence of bank equity declines preceding subsequent panics helps to link panic
runs to prior bank losses, rather than non-fundamental runs causing bank losses.

        We further compare the timing of bank equity declines with the timing of credit spread
spikes, which reflect disruptions in credit markets. The lower sensitivity of credit-market
instruments to bank fundamentals leads us to expect that bank equity declines should detect crises
earlier than credit-market measures. As bank equity has the lowest payoff priority among all bank
stakeholders, bank equity prices should be sensitive to bank losses regardless of whether a bank is
close to or far away from insolvency. As a result, bank equity returns would be expected to provide
a continuous and cumulative measure of bank distress, in contrast to prices of credit-market
instruments, especially short-term debt instruments, which tend to display discontinuities around
panics. Nevertheless, their actual power in a large sample remains to be systematically examined.


C. Mapping historical banking crises

        In contrast to our approach emphasizing bank equity returns to identify periods of banking
distress, the traditional approach in the literature (e.g., Reinhart and Rogoff 2009, Schularick and

3
  Examples of bank failures without panics include situations when banks are orderly wound down or restructured
through judicial bankruptcy proceedings, merged by the government with a healthy bank, or nationalized.

                                                                                                             9
Taylor 2012, Laeven and Valencia 2013) identifies banking crises based on narrative accounts of
salient features such as bank runs, bank failures, and large-scale government interventions. Romer
and Romer (2017) point out that because narrative-based approaches are subjective and
retrospective, they may contain look-back biases that lead to an overstatement of average banking
crisis severity. Other drawbacks of narrative approaches include the treatment of crises as discrete
episodes (when a continuum between "normal recessions" and banking crises might be a more
accurate representation) and the lack of quantitative measures of bank impairment to distinguish
between minor versus major crises. These various narrative approaches also disagree with each
other about which episodes should be regarded as banking crises. Table 1 highlights this
disagreement in the case of Germany, while Table A1 shows this problem across all countries.4
This disagreement is due in part to a lack of a consistent definition of which features constitute a
banking crisis. 5 And, importantly, these traditional narrative-based approaches of identifying
historical banking crises may miss episodes without panics or other salient characteristics, due to
the difficulty of detecting banking losses in the absence of such salient features.

         In contrast to historical narrative accounts, bank equity returns provide an objective, real-
time, quantitative, and theoretically motivated measure to map out historical periods of bank
distress from the viewpoint of equity investors. Bank equity has strong predictive power for
macroeconomic consequences, as we show, both in terms of the magnitude and signal-to-noise
ratio. Furthermore, bank equity price and dividend data are readily available over much of the
sample, covering 46 countries over the period 1870-2016, in contrast to corporate bond and
interbank lending spreads, which are relatively limited historically.6 Finally, using bank equity


4
  Jalil (2015) discusses this disagreement among narrative chronologies in the case of U.S. pre-1929 banking crises.
5
   Moreover, these approaches (with the exception of Laeven and Valencia 2013) have minimal historical
documentation for each banking crisis episode, making it difficult for other researchers to reconcile these differences
between approaches or even to assess the basic facts of what happened during each crisis. Reinhart and Rogoff (2009)
and Caprio and Klingebiel (2003) write only a few sentences about each crisis, while Bordo et al. (2001)'s database
mainly presents macroeconomic variables. Schularick and Taylor (2012) do not provide publicly available
documentation to support their chronology; in personal correspondence, the authors say their chronology is
constructed by surveying country-specific experts in banking history in 17 countries.
6
  Bond markets in many countries have only been developed in recent decades. In the postwar period, corporate bond
markets mainly existed in the U.S. and U.K., while in most non-Anglophone advanced economies, corporate bond
markets were very limited or non-existent until deregulation in the 1980s (as corporate credit was channeled mainly
through the banking system). For example, there was only a single corporate bond each trading in Denmark and Japan
before the 1980s (that of Det Store Nordiske Telegrafselskab and Nippon Telegraph and Telephone, respectively).
Even organized interbank markets are a relative recent phenomenon, with data becoming available for most countries
starting in the 1990s. As a result, Krishnamurthy and Muir (2018) analyze a more limited sample, since they do not

                                                                                                                   10
returns does not rely on observing salient features, allowing us to capture a larger sample of
episodes of bank distress, which is key to our purpose of studying episodes without panics.


                                                   II.      Data


         We now describe how we gather and construct the historical database used in our analysis.
We discuss, in turn, the following types of variables: bank and nonfinancial equity real total
returns, bank and nonfinancial credit spreads, and macroeconomic variables. All variables are
annual (except those noted as monthly variables) and form an unbalanced country panel across 46
countries over the period 1870-2016.7 The Appendix contains further details on data sources and
data construction beyond what is presented here, and Tables B2 through B4 provide a
comprehensive summary by country of all data sources used to construct the main variables.

         Annual bank and nonfinancial stock returns. We construct a new historical dataset on bank
equity prices and dividends for 46 advanced and emerging economies going back to 1870. A
practical advantage of bank equity returns to study crises is that bank equity price and dividend
data are readily available over much of our sample. This abundance of data is due to the fact that,
in the 19th and early 20th centuries, bank stocks were highly prominent, featured in newspapers and
traded as much as railroad stocks.8

         For each country in the sample, we construct annual (as of December 31 of each year) price
return and dividend return indexes for both bank and nonfinancial stocks. In this paper, all equity
returns (unless otherwise noted) are expressed as real total returns of the country-level index. The



have corporate credit spread data for emerging market countries--or even for many advanced economies (Denmark,
Italy, France, the Netherlands, and Switzerland) in the modern period.
7
  We exclude country-year observations during major wars because supply-side contractions and large government
financing needs can lead to both macroeconomic contractions and banking sector losses, but these are not the typical
banking distress episodes we want to consider. In particular, we drop all countries during the world wars (1914-1918
and 1939-1945), Korea during 1950-53, Spain during 1936-1938, France and Germany in 1870, Mexico during 1910-
1920, South Africa during 1899-1902, Japan during 1894-1895, Colombia during 1899-1902, Russia during 1917-
1922, and Greece during 1946-1949.
8
  In the period 1870-1939, nearly all the major commercial banks in all our countries were publicly-traded joint stock
banks, much more so than even today--the main exception being the U.S., where banks were not widely traded until
the mid-1920s. (In fact, even most central banks were publicly traded in that period, though we do not include them
in our indexes). The private banks of this period were generally either merchant banks or mortgage banks, not
commercial banks. We are thus able to gather the stock prices and dividends of nearly all large commercial banks in
each country from historical newspapers during this period.

                                                                                                                   11
price and dividend indexes in a given country may not necessarily correspond to the exact same
underlying banks due to data availability, but they are either market-capitalization-weighted or
price-weighted indexes of the broad domestic banking and nonfinancial sectors within each
country.9 Each of these series is pieced together from a variety of sources (documentation and
source tables can be found in the Appendix).10 We start by collecting premade bank equity indexes
from Global Financial Data (mainly price indexes), Datastream (price and dividend indexes), and
Baron and Xiong (2017, newly constructed bank dividend indexes).

         In addition to using premade indexes, we construct bank equity price and dividend indexes
from individual bank and nonfinancial companies' stock prices and dividends. Our main source of
new data on individual stocks comes from historical newspapers in each country. From these
newspapers, we hand collect prices and dividends on an annual basis for the closing price closest
to December 31.11

         Data on individual stock prices and dividends of banks and nonfinancial firms also come
from several databases from Yale's International Center for Finance (gathered and made publicly
available by William Goetzmann and Geert Rouwenhorst) including Investor's Monthly Manual
data (1869-1934), New York Stock Exchange data (1800-1871), and St. Petersburg Stock
Exchange data (1865-1917). Other data on individual stock and index returns are from a variety of
additional sources including individual country studies and statistical yearbooks. Additional
dividend data for individual bank and nonfinancial stocks is hand-collected from Moody's Banking

9
  In price-weighted indexes, each stock is normalized to the same par value in the initial year. Its weight in subsequent
years is then determined by past returns.
10
   The nonfinancial equity index is constructed to represent a diverse set of important and large companies, mainly
covering the following industries: iron and steel, goods manufacturing, electrical equipment, textiles, chemicals, paper
and pulp products, food suppliers and breweries, and retail. We exclude transportation stocks (railroads and shipping),
commodity-related stocks (including mining), utilities, real estate companies, and foreign and colonial enterprises,
due to their high exposure to international factors or to real estate.
11
   Figure A1 in the Appendix provides examples of historical newspapers used to construct our bank equity return
data. To give a sense of the sheer number and diversity of historical sources we uncovered, we list the main ones here
(the full list is available in Table B2): Journal de Bruxelles for Belgium (1868-1935); Dagens Nyheder for Denmark
(1868-1909); Le Temps for France (1873-1939); Berliner Borsen-Zeitung and Berliner Morgenpost for Germany
(1871-1933); La Stampa for Italy (1865-1934); Japan Times for Japan (1897-1915); De Telegraaf and De Standaard
for the Netherlands (1875-1933); Diario de Lisboa for Portugal (1921-1990); the Straits Times for Singapore (1965-
1980); ABC for Spain (1909-1965); and Gazette de Lausanne, Journal de Genève, Le Temps, and Neue Zürcher
Zeitung for Switzerland (1852-1936). We also collect stock returns data from a variety of additional sources:
Argentinian stock returns data (1900-1935) from Nakamura and Zarazaga (2001); Belgian stock returns data from the
SCOB database (University of Antwerp, Belgium); Danish stock returns data (1911-1956) from Denmark Statistical
Yearbooks; Finnish stock returns data (1911-1974) from Nyberg and Vaihekoski (2010); and Swedish stock returns
data (1870-1901) from Waldenstrom (2014).

                                                                                                                     12
Manuals (1928-2000) and from individual financial statements of banks accessed at the Harvard
Business Library's Historical Collections. We add the bank equity price returns and dividend
returns to get bank equity total returns and then adjust by the CPI for each country to get bank
equity real total returns. Figure A3 plots the distribution of bank and nonfinancial equity returns
around banking crises defined by narrative-based approaches.

       The bank equity returns data start around 1870 for advanced economies such as Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, New Zealand, Sweden, Switzerland,
the U.K. and the U.S. and even for economies that are today considered emerging markets such as
Argentina, Brazil, Egypt, Greece, Hong Kong, India, Mexico, Russia, and Ottoman Turkey. To
assess the coverage of our bank index, Table B1 reports, for each country and decade, the number
of underlying banks used to construct the bank equity return index, or, when premade indexes are
available, the source of the premade index. The exact range of included banks varies across
countries and historical periods, due to historical data limitations. However, as can be seen both
from Table B1 and the associated lists of individual constituent banks (linked in the Appendix),
the bank equity index generally contains a broad representation of the largest domestically
chartered commercial banks mainly located in the country's financial center and covering a
substantial share of the country's bank assets and deposits. For many countries, our newly
constructed bank equity index is based on underlying returns for at least five banks (and often
much more), almost always the largest. It is important to note that the focus on large commercial
banks in the country's financial center may lead the bank equity measure to underrepresent banking
crises centered on smaller or provincial banks and fail to capture distress of private banks.

       Monthly stock returns and credit spreads for banks and nonfinancials. To analyze the
dynamics of how crises unfold, we also focus on a newly-constructed set of clearly identified
banking crisis episodes. We refer to the sample of clear-cut crisis episodes as the BVX Crisis List
(which we described in detail in Section VI). For these clear-cut crisis episodes, we construct
monthly series in a three-year window around each episode for the following four variables: bank
equity index returns, nonfinancial equity index returns, bank credit spreads, and nonfinancial
corporate credit spreads. Due to limitations on historical data availability, the monthly data is a
smaller subset of the larger annual dataset on bank equity returns and only covers around 100 crisis
episodes.


                                                                                                 13
       The complete list of sources for monthly equity returns and credit spreads for each country
is recorded in Table B3. For monthly bank and nonfinancial equity data for the period 1980-2016,
we mainly use country-level indexes from Datastream, which covers nearly all 46 countries. For
the period 1870-1979, the monthly equity data is limited to fifteen countries (Argentina, Australia,
Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, U.K., and U.S.) and three-year windows around banking crises, due to the difficulty
of hand-collecting monthly data from historical records. In this period, monthly bank and
nonfinancial stock prices are transcribed from the historical newspapers listed in the previous
section or obtained from other historical sources such as Investor's Monthly Manual and Global
Financial Data (see Table B3 for details). Credit spreads mainly come from Global Financial Data
or from newly transcribed historical statistics (again, see Table B3). Bank credit spreads are
typically from overnight interbank lending rates, while corporate credit interest rates are from
corporate bond yields. We subtract a short-term Treasury bill yield (typically three-month
maturity) to get the bank credit spread and a long-term Treasury bond yield (typically 10-year
maturity) to get the corporate credit spread.

       Macroeconomic variables. To construct real GDP growth, we obtain annual data for each
country on nominal or real GDP and the CPI from the Maddison database, the Jordà-Schularick-
Taylor macro-history database, Global Financial Data, and the OECD, IMF, and World Bank
datasets. The same CPI used to deflate returns is used to obtain real GDP. Data on bank credit-to-
GDP comes mainly from the Jordà-Schularick-Taylor database (which goes back to 1870 but for
17 countries only) and from the BIS long credit series for other countries. We supplement these
existing datasets on bank credit-to-GDP with newly transcribed data from: (i) IMF print statistical
manuals from the 1940s and 1950s, and (ii) "League of Nations: Money and Banking Statistics"
volumes from 1925 to 1939. These new data allow us to form aggregate bank credit-to-GDP series
going back at least to 1918 for nearly all the countries in our sample and back to 1870 for a subset
of those. The complete list of sources for each variable is recorded in Table B4.

       Narrative accounts of crises. To compare the information contained in bank equity declines
with the information content from narrative-based approaches, we construct a list of "Narrative
Crises," defined as the union of all banking crises from six prominent papers: Bordo et al. (2001),
Caprio and Klingebiel (2003), Demirgüç-Kunt and Detragiache (2005), Laeven and Valencia
(2013), Reinhart and Rogoff (2009, and online update 2014), and Schularick and Taylor (2012,
                                                                                                 14
online update 2017). Table A1 reports the Narrative Crisis list. We define the "Narrative Crisis
year" as the earliest reported starting year of each banking crisis across the six papers.

       The BVX crisis list. We systematically combine information on large bank equity declines
with a new database of episodes of panics and widespread bank failures to create a chronology of
historical banking crises, which we refer to as the BVX Crisis List. Details on constructing the
new chronology are discussed further in Section VI. This new database on episodes of panics and
widespread bank failures is reported in Table A2, and links to our extensive historical
documentation on episodes of panics and widespread bank failures can be found in Appendix
Section I.B.


               III.   Bank equity declines and future macroeconomic dynamics

       In this section, we examine the predictive power of large bank equity declines for
subsequent economic outcomes such as real GDP and bank credit-to-GDP, without being
concerned by whether these declines are accompanied by banking panics. By showing that large
bank equity declines tend to precede severe economic outcomes, this analysis serves to establish
that bank equity declines are not simply equity market noise and instead carry important
information. It thus highlights the potential relevance of bank capital crunches in a long and broad
macroeconomic sample and justifies our use of large equity declines to analyze banking crises.


A. Real GDP and credit dynamics around bank equity crashes

       As an initial exploration of the data, we start by examining how real GDP and bank credit-
to-GDP evolve around bank equity crashes compared to times without crashes. Our definition of
a "bank equity crash" is an annual bank equity decline of more than 30%. In our full sample, there
are 263 country-years with a 30% bank equity crash and 209 when we restrict the sample to
observations with non-missing GDP growth, credit-to-GDP, and nonfinancial equity returns.

       Figure 1 presents an event study around these bank equity crashes. We compute the average
cumulative change in log real GDP and credit-to-GDP around bank equity crashes relative to five
years before the crash. Year ! = 0 is defined as the year of the bank equity crash. For reference,
we also plot the average dynamics around normal times, defined as years without a crash. Panel A


                                                                                                 15
in Figure 1 shows that, in the years leading up to a bank equity crash, GDP growth is similar to
growth in normal times. However, in the year after the crash growth slows sharply, opening an
output gap of 4%, which persists even five years after the crash.

          In contrast to real GDP, credit-to-GDP expands rapidly in the run-up to bank equity crashes.
On average, credit-to-GDP expands by 8.3 percentage points in the five years preceding a crash,
relative to 5.1 percentage points during other periods. This pattern is consistent with the evidence
in Baron and Xiong (2017) that credit expansions predict bank equity crashes and shows that this
result holds for a broader and longer sample. After the crash in bank equity, credit-to-GDP stops
expanding and starts declining. This event study thus provides preliminary evidence that bank
equity crashes are preceded by credit booms and followed by contractions in output and bank
credit-to-GDP.


B. Bank equity declines and future GDP growth

          We next examine the predictability of large bank equity declines for subsequent GDP
growth more formally. To flexibly estimate such predictability and explore potential nonlinearities,
we estimate the following Jordà (2005) local projection specification for horizons  = 1, ... ,6:

               * +,,-./ = 0,/ + 4 34/ 1[6,,-
                                          7
                                              94 ] + 4 ;4/ 1[6,,-
                                                               <                     /
                                                                   94 ] +  * >,,- + ?,,- ,         (1)

where * +,,-./ is real GDP growth from year ! to ! + , 0,/ is a country fixed effect, and 1[6,,-
                                                                                              7
                                                                                                 
94 ] is an indicator variable for whether the bank equity return in year ! is within a range defined
                              <
by bin 94 . The indicator 1[6,,-  94 ] is similarly defined but for nonfinancial equity returns. To
examine the predictability across the full distribution of returns, we include eight evenly-spaced
bins, 94 ,for both bank and nonfinancial returns: less than -45%, -45% to -30%, -30% to -15%, -
15% to 0%, 0% to 15%, 15% to 30%, 30% to 45%, and greater than 45%. The omitted bin is the
0% to 15% range, which we think of as returns during "normal" times. Relative to the traditional
VAR framework, the advantage of the local projection method is that it is robust to misspecification
and allows for the estimation of nonlinearities and state-dependent responses, as argued by Jordà
(2005).

          Equation 1 controls for contemporaneous (! - 1 to !) and lagged real GDP growth and the
bank credit-to-GDP change, as well as lags of the bank and nonfinancial equity return bins,

                                                                                                   16
captured by >,,- . We include three annual lags for all variables, but the results are not sensitive to
the lag length. Our baseline specification does not include year fixed effects to exploit time series
variation within countries, but year fixed effects are included in robustness tests. We compute
Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors with a lag length of six to allow for serial correlation in
 /
?,,- that mechanically arises from overlapping observations at horizons  > 1 and residual
correlation across countries induced by common shocks. When reporting statistical significance
based on p-values, we employ Kiefer and Vogelsang's (2005) fixed-b asymptotic distribution to
correct for the tendency of heteroskedacity and autocorrelation consistent (HAC) variance
estimators to over-reject in finite samples.

        The key parameters of interest are the sequence of local projection impulse responses {34/ }
for each bin E , which capture the predictive power of bank equity returns after controlling for
nonfinancial returns and current and lagged economic conditions. Note that after controlling for
contemporaneous nonfinancial returns, bank equity declines reflect shocks from two sources. First,
they may reflect banks' loan losses in the current period. Second, as equity prices are forward-
looking, they may also reflect the stock market's anticipation of banks' losses in future periods.
Thus, the impulse responses capture not only the impact of banks' current losses on the broad
economy, as a result of banks' reduced capacity to lend to firms and households, but also the
anticipated interactions between future economic downturns and future bank losses. For the
purpose of our analysis, it is not particularly important to isolate these two effects.12 Bank equity
is probably also informative for reasons other than a banking channel: for example, bank equity
declines may also reflect the macroeconomic consequences of household balance-sheet distress,
as households are on the other side of bank lending.

        The left plot in Figure 2 Panel A depicts the cumulative response of real GDP to bank
equity return innovations. Relative to "normal times" (0% to 15% returns), declines in bank equity
of greater than 45% predict 3.6% lower output after three years. Note that Equation 1

12
  A more nuanced question is why bank equity declines contain information content about the broad economy not
captured by contemporaneous nonfinancial equity returns, which are supposed to reflect all information available
about nonfinancial sectors. We can think of at least two possible mechanisms. First, banks tend to provide credit to
households and small firms, which are not be fully represented by equity returns of nonfinancial firms. Second, stock
market participants may not immediately recognize the full consequences of banking sector losses for the broad
economy. The finance literature has offered extensive evidence that stock prices may often underreact to public
information. For example, Baron and Xiong (2017) show that stock prices do not fully reflect risks brought by banks'
credit expansions.

                                                                                                                 17
simultaneously estimates the responses to changes of both bank and nonfinancial equities, so that
the response plotted on the left side of Panel A is the additional response to bank equity returns
over-and-above the response to nonfinancial equity returns (which is plotted on the right side of
the panel). This negative effect is highly persistent, translating into a permanent loss in output after
6 years of about 3%. More moderate but still substantial shocks of -30% to -45% are followed by
2.5% lower output after 3 years, with some subsequent recovery. In contrast, smaller negative
shocks of -15% to 0% and positive shocks lead to weaker effects on future GDP.

        The strong impact of large negative bank equity returns but weaker impact of positive
returns provides evidence that shocks to bank equity have nonlinear predictive content for the real
economy. This nonlinear relationship between bank equity distress and output growth is consistent
with models of constrained intermediaries such as He and Krishnamurthy (2013), and highlights
the advantage of bank equity returns as a continuous measure of banking sector distress.
Interestingly, Romer and Romer (2017) find no evidence of nonlinearity between a continuous
narrative measure of financial distress and subsequent output, while Adrian et al. (2019) find
evidence of asymmetry in the response of GDP growth to financial conditions in U.S. data.

        The right plot in Figure 2 Panel A shows the GDP response to nonfinancial equity shocks.
Unsurprisingly, larger declines in nonfinancial equity predict lower subsequent output. In contrast
with bank equity returns, there is less evidence of nonlinearity in the predictive power of
nonfinancial equity returns. The ability of nonfinancial equity returns to predict future GDP growth
is consistent with Stock and Watson (2003) and justifies nonfinancial equity returns as a suitable
control for shocks to the broad economy.

        Table 2 presents the regression version of Figure 2 at the 1- and 3-year ahead horizons. For
expositional purposes, we replace the eight return bins with an indicator variable for whether there
                            7
is a bank equity crash, 1[6,,-  -30%], which is defined by an annual return below -30%:13

                             /
           * +,,-./ = 0,/ + I-           7
                               + 3 / 1[6,,-                   <
                                             -30%]  + ; / 1[6,,-                     /
                                                                  -30%] +  * >,,- + ?,,-                     (2)

                                                                 /
We report results with and without including year fixed effects I- . In Table 2 Panel A, a bank
equity crash of at least 30% is associated with a decline in real GDP of about 2.6% after one year


13
  Appendix Table A3 presents the table version of Figure 2 with all eight return bins for the three-year forecast
horizon.

                                                                                                              18
(column 2) and 3.4% after three years (column 5), with the estimated coefficients being statistically
significant. A crash of 30% in nonfinancial equity also predicts significant and persistently lower
real output, and the magnitude is similar to the impact of a bank equity crash.


C. Bank equity declines and future bank credit growth

       Why do bank equity declines predict lower future GDP growth, even controlling for
nonfinancial equity returns? In this subsection, we show that the bank lending channel may play a
key role.

       Figure 2 Panel B presents estimates of Equation 1 with the change in bank credit-to-GDP
as the dependent variable. The left plot shows that, after 6 years, a bank equity decline of over
45% predicts a 12-percentage point decline in credit-to-GDP, controlling for nonfinancial equity.
Declines of between 30% and 45% also predict sizeable credit contractions, amounting to a credit-
to-GDP decline of 8 percentage points after 6 years. Table 2 Panel B presents the regression version
of Figure 2 Panel B using the 30% bank equity crash indicator. It shows that the decline in credit-
to-GDP following a bank equity crash is statistically significant and robust to including controls.

       Figure 2 Panel B also shows that the response of credit-to-GDP to bank equity return shocks
is highly nonlinear. Large declines in bank equity are followed by sharp credit contraction, but
smaller declines (0% to -15%) and increases in bank equity are followed by muted changes in bank
credit. This nonlinearity in credit growth is again consistent with models in which banks are
financially constrained. Larger shocks to bank net wealth are more likely to force banks against
their capital constraint and therefore to contract the asset side of their balance sheet.

       The right plot in Figure 2 Panel B presents the credit-to-GDP response to nonfinancial
equity shocks. There is a striking contrast between bank equity and nonfinancial equity shocks.
Nonfinancial equity shocks have essentially no predictive content for future credit-to-GDP. Even
large declines or increases in nonfinancial equity returns have no impact on the subsequent credit-
to-GDP ratio. This sharp contrast provides one potential explanation for why bank equity shocks
matter for future growth, even after we control for nonfinancials. Bank equity declines likely
capture shocks to bank net wealth, which translate into a credit-supply contraction that may depress
household consumption, corporate investment, and production.



                                                                                                  19
D. Robustness, subsamples, and further evidence on the informativeness of bank equity

       The strong relation between bank equity crashes and subsequent output and credit
contraction is highly robust to alternative specifications. Appendix Figure A4 shows that the
results in Figure 2 are quantitatively similar when including year fixed effects to control for global
shocks. Figure A5 explores an alternative timing in which bank equity returns impact real GDP
and credit-to-GDP in the same year. Since bank equity returns are correlated with
contemporaneous GDP growth, this specification implies that bank equity crashes are associated
with even larger output and credit contractions. Panel A in Figure A6 shows that a simpler
specification with just a single indicator variable for 30% bank equity crashes (as in Table 2)
predicts persistent output gaps and credit-to-GDP contraction. Panel B presents another alternative
specification showing the responses to continuous innovations in bank and nonfinancial equity
returns, rather than using indicator variables. This specification assumes a linear relation between
innovations to returns and subsequent outcomes. Panel B shows that shocks to both bank equity
and nonfinancial equity predict subsequent output growth. The right plot shows that only bank
equity returns predict future credit-to-GDP. Table A4 shows that the nonlinear relation between
bank equity returns and subsequent output and credit also emerges using a quadratic specification
or separating positive and negative returns.

       Figure A7 and Table A5 estimate the responses to 30% bank and nonfinancial equity
crashes for various subsamples. Figure A7 Panel A excludes the Great Depression and Great
Recession years. Specifically, we drop years 1927-1937 and 2005-2015 for all countries and find
similar estimates to the full sample. Panel B focuses on the prewar sample and finds more modest
effects of bank equity crashes on both real GDP and credit-to-GDP. In contrast, Panel C shows that
effects are stronger in the postwar period. The postwar results hold in the Bretton Woods Era
(1946-1970, Panel D) and in recent decades (1971-2016, Panel E). The fact that bank equity
crashes predict output declines and credit contraction during the Bretton Woods Era, a period
without major banking crises according to narrative chronologies, suggests a role of bank equity
distress outside of traditionally defined banking crises and even during normal recessions. We
explore this point further in Section IV. Figure A8 presents estimates for the United States only




                                                                                                   20
and finds qualitatively similar results, even when excluding the Great Depression and Great
Recession.14

        In addition to having strong predictive power, large bank equity declines line up closely
with existing narrative classifications of banking crises in terms of signal-to-noise properties. To
explore the signal-to-noise properties of bank equity returns, Figure A2 shows that bank equity
returns provide the best real-time signal of banking crises on the list of Narrative Crises identified
by existing classifications, relative to a host of other variables including nonfinancial equity
returns, credit spreads, and macroeconomic conditions. See the full discussion in Appendix Section
II.A. Specifically, bank equity declines best coincide with banking crises identified from existing
classifications in terms of the signal-to-noise ratio (i.e. a higher "true positive" rate for a given
"false positive" rate, relative to other indicators). 57% of crises identified by narrative-based
approaches involve a bank equity crash of at least 30% in the year of the crisis or in adjacent years.
This further validates large bank equity declines as a reasonable measure of banking distress.

        As a final test to illustrate the informative content of bank equity returns, we focus on the
predictive content of bank equity declines conditional on Narrative Crisis episodes. Table A6
shows that the magnitude of the peak-to-trough bank equity decline of each Narrative Crisis
episode is associated with the magnitude of the decline in real GDP and with crisis characteristics
such as the severity of deposit withdrawals, nonperforming loans, bank failures, and the likelihood
of various forms of government interventions to support the banking sector. These findings are not
driven by general declines in equity markets, as they also hold, albeit not as strongly, when using
bank returns in excess of nonfinancial equity returns, as reported in Table A7. See the full
discussion in Appendix Section IV. These facts confirm that bank equity returns capture the salient
features of banking crises and motivate their use in identifying a broad sample of episodes of
banking sector distress, as well as in refining banking crisis chronologies.


                                  IV.      Banking crises without panics

        The global financial crisis and Great Recession rekindled a discussion about the role of
panics in banking crises. Bernanke (2018), for example, argues that the unusual depth and severity

14
  The episodes of 30% annual bank equity crashes for the U.S. capture the most serious episodes of banking distress,
namely in 1907, 1930, 1931, 1937, 1974, 1990, 2007, and 2008.

                                                                                                                21
of the Great Recession was caused by the panics in funding and securitization markets that
occurred in the fall of 2008 after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, which led to a sharp contraction
in credit supply. He argues that distressed bank and nonfinancial private sector balance sheets alone
would not have precipitated such a sharp decline in output. On the other hand, a bank capital crunch
may itself lead to a contraction in credit supply that depresses consumption and investment, even
without a panic. In this section, we compare the macroeconomic consequences of banking distress
with and without panics.


A. Bank equity declines with and without panics

        As in Section III, we estimate the response of real GDP and credit-to-GDP to bank equity
crashes. However, this time, we interact bank equity crashes with a "panic" indicator. This
specification thus allows us to analyze bank equity crashes without panics, bank equity crashes
with panics, and panics without bank equity crashes.

        To capture episodes of bank distress with and without panics, we systematically go through
all -30% bank equity crashes, classifying each episode as a "panic" or "non-panic." Table A2
provides a summary of our classification. We research each individual episode, drawing both on
standard narrative accounts of crises and also new narrative sources (e.g., newspaper articles,
research papers, IMF and governmental reports, first-hand accounts). Extensive historical
documentation for each episode regarding the presence or absence of panics can be found in
Appendix Section I.B.

        Following Calomiris and Gorton (1991) and Gorton and Huang (2003), we define a "panic"
as an episode containing (within a ±3-year window) any of the following criteria appearing in
narrative accounts: 1) severe and sudden depositor or creditor withdrawals at more than one of a
country's largest banks or more than ten smaller banks, that lead these banks to be on the verge of
collapse;15 2) severe and sudden strains in interbank lending markets; or 3) severe and sudden


15
   Our empirical mapping of panics is based on the definition of Gorton and Huang (2003), who, following Calomiris
and Gorton (1991), define a banking panic "as an event in which bank debt holders (depositors) at many or even all
banks in the banking system suddenly demand that their banks convert their debt claims into cash (at par) to such an
extent that banks cannot jointly honor these demands and suspend convertibility. Note that this definition excludes
events in which a single bank faces a run, as a panic is a system-wide phenomenon. Also, cases where depositors seek
to withdraw large amounts from the banking system, but banks can honor these withdrawals, are not `panics,' although
the banking system may shrink significantly" [emphasis added].

                                                                                                                22
foreign-currency capital outflows from the banking sector.16 In short, we define panic episodes as
an episode when banks experienced sudden salient funding pressures.17 Our goal is to err on the
side of being overly inclusive in calling episodes a panic and include all potential types of panics.
By being overly inclusive, we ensure that the "non-panic distress" episodes that we are most
interested in do not include any of these characteristics.

         To examine the consequences of banking sector distress by whether they coincide with a
panic, we estimate a macroeconomic predictive regression similar to Equation 2, but now interact
                                         7
the 30% bank equity crash indicator, 1[6,,-  -30%] , with an indicator for whether there is
narrative evidence of a panic.18 The specification we estimate is:

     * +,,-./ = 0,/ + 3J
                       /     7
                         1[6,,-            /
                                 -30%]  + 3K              /
                                             LMNOP,,- +  3Q     7
                                                            1[6,,-  -30%]  × LMNOP,,- +

            /
+ * >,,- + ?,,- ,                                                                                                   (3)

As in Equation 2, Equation 3 also includes a 30% nonfinancial equity crash indicator, along with
the standard control variables (country fixed effects, three lags in the bank equity crash,
nonfinancial equity crash, panic indicator, and the panic indicator interacted with the equity crash
measures, as well as contemporaneous and up to three-year lagged real GDP growth and change
in credit-to-GDP). We emphasize that the estimation of Equation 3 does not provide causal
evidence on the effects of panics. Instead, it provides the predicted path of output following a panic
episode, as well as evidence about whether episodes of non-panic distress are also associated with
subsequent downturns. Furthermore, as we define a panic based on narrative information, any
selection bias in narrative accounts might inflate the subsequent downturns after panics, but goes
against finding substantial downturns after non-panic bank equity crashes.


16
   Our broad definition of a panic is motivated by the fact that traditional depositor runs are rare in modern banking
crises and we thus want to capture a broad set of definitions of what modern banking panics look like. Furthermore,
traditional runs are difficult to observe directly because banks do not generally report their funding status at daily or
weekly frequencies, so we need other characteristics, such as sudden strains in interbank lending markets, to help infer
the existence of panics among bank creditors.
17
   Empirically it is challenging to disentangle panic runs on solvent but illiquid banks due to strategic uncertainty and
runs on insolvent banks. For our purpose, this distinction is not crucial, and we do not attempt it. Artavanis et al.
(2019) examine large scale depositor withdrawals in Greece and provide evidence that both fundamental and strategic
uncertainty led to sharp increases in depositor withdrawals, with about two-thirds being driven by fundamental
uncertainty.
18
  Specifically, the indicator Panici,t takes the value of 1 just in the year of a crash if there is a panic in any of the
surrounding three years. This accounts for the fact that the bank equity crash and the panic may not be exactly
contemporaneous. In all other times not near a crash, Panici,t takes the value of 1 just in the year of the panic.

                                                                                                                     23
        Impulse responses of real GDP and bank credit-to-GDP are plotted in Figure 3. The
                                                                              /
responses represent the impact of: (i) non-panic bank equity crash episodes, 3J , (109 episodes in
                                                                   /
the estimation), (ii) panic episodes without a bank equity crash, 3K , (67 episodes), and (iii) panic
                                    /    /    /
episodes with bank equity crashes, 3J + 3K + 3Q , (34 episodes).

        Figure 3 Panel A shows that both panic and non-panic bank equity crashes predict lower
subsequent output and credit contraction, though the magnitudes are stronger for panic episodes.
The corresponding coefficient estimates at the t+3 horizon are reported in Table 3 Panel A. Non-
panic bank equity crashes predict 2.8% lower output (column 2) and 3.4% lower credit-to-GDP
(column 5) after three years, and the estimates are statistically significant. Episodes of panic bank
equity crashes are associated with 4.9% lower output (column 2, sum of rows 1-3) and 9.1% lower
credit-to-GDP (column 5, sum of rows 1-3) after three years.19 While it is not surprising that panic
episodes are worse, these estimates suggest that even non-panic bank equity crash episodes are
associated with deep recessions and persistently tight credit conditions.

        Bank equity crashes allow us to pick up periods of banking sector distress that are not
associated with headline events such as a bank panic. However, one concern with Equation 3 is
that some of the bank equity crashes may reflect equity market "noise" that is not associated with
banking sector losses or other forms of impairment to the banking sector. That is, some of these
banking crises without panics may not be banking crises at all, but simply equity market crashes
due to sentiment.

        To address this concern, we can further refine the set of bank distress episodes into those
that also include narrative evidence of widespread bank failures. Observing widespread bank
failures is likely a sufficient condition for impairment of the banking system. Widespread bank
failures is defined as the failure of a top-5 (by assets) bank or more than five total banks failures
above the normal rate of bank failures. Widespread bank failures may still occur in the absence of
panics due to orderly bank resolutions, e.g., government-directed purchase-and-assumptions,
nationalizations, restructurings, or bank closures, all of which we consider bank failures. We again
interact bank equity crash episodes conditional on widespread bank failures with the panic

19
  For robustness, Figure A9 plots the full nonlinear specification for bank equity return (similar to Figure 2), but
excluding all panic episodes, and Figure A10 estimates a specification with continuous bank equity returns. These
results reinforce the finding that bank equity distress outside of panic episodes are also associated with weaker
macroeconomic performance.

                                                                                                                24
indicator and re-estimate Equation 3. Figure 3 Panel B presents the results, which are also reported
in Table 3 Panel B. Once we condition on episodes of bank failures, non-panic bank equity crash
episodes are now as severe as panic episodes. For example, three years after the start of a non-
panic bank equity crash, real GDP is 5.1% (column 2) below the previous trend, compared to 5.0%
for panic episodes (column 2, sum of rows 1-3). Over the same horizon, non-panic bank equity
crashes predict a 7.4 percentage point decline in bank credit-to-GDP (column 5), compared to 8.1
percentages points (column 5, sum of rows 1-3) for panic episodes.20

         Figure 3 also analyzes the reverse case: panics without bank equity crashes. The impulse
response for these episodes is not statistically or economically different from zero. Thus, panics
without bank equity crashes are not associated with any adverse macroeconomic consequences.21
One may wonder how we can observe panics without bank equity declines, given that in models
of panics described earlier, panics lead to bank failures and therefore to large losses for equity
holders. As we explained earlier in footnote 2, this can happen due to various forms of
measurement error.

         Our finding on the negligible impact of panics without bank equity crashes is consistent
with Calomiris (2010), who writes that most pre-Great-Depression panics in the U.S. were driven
by relatively small fundamental shocks, which created "temporary confusion" of depositors in
these cases but no long-term damage to the banking system or economy. As a result, minor panics
without bank equity declines are likely over-represented in narrative chronologies, due to the
salience of panics, even though their macroeconomic consequences are mild. On the other hand,
bank equity declines without panics may be under-represented in narrative chronologies, due to
the difficulties of detection, even though the consequences can be quite dire. The resulting bias


20
   One possibility, raised by the model of Gertler and Kiyotaki (2015), is that low output in non-panic bank equity
crash episodes may partly reflect anticipated panics that do not materialize. Anticipated panics that do not occur ex-
post can increase bank funding costs, reduce bank net worth, and decrease credit supply in their model. In some
settings, explicit government guarantees for distressed banks, including state-owned banks, likely imply that creditors
would assign close to zero probability on a panic occurring. In practice, it is difficult to ascertain whether bank
creditors assign a positive probability of a panic in our non-panic bank equity crash episodes. Nevertheless, our results
show that banking distress can be associated with adverse macroeconomic outcomes without the occurrence of a panic.
21
   Figure A11 addresses the concern that our conservative classification of panics introduces noise that biases down
the estimate on the impact of panics without bank equity crashes. Figure A11 performs a similar analysis to Figure 3,
but uses a finer classification of potential panic episodes. We distinguish between episodes with isolated creditor runs
(which also include borderline episodes with inconclusive evidence as to whether a panic occurred) versus clear-cut
panic episodes. Clear-cut panic episodes have the most severe consequences, but generally only if they are associated
with bank equity crashes.

                                                                                                                     25
towards salient but inconsequential panics may actually lead standard narrative chronologies to
underestimate the costs of banking crises driven by severe solvency concerns, which we will see
in Section VI.


B. Examples of non-panic bank distress episodes

       Non-panic bank distress episodes have been quite common historically. From Table A2,
we find that among Narrative Crises, 32.8% of these banking crises do not feature panics. Figure
A12 in the Appendix plots the frequency of banking crisis episodes (using our BVX Crisis List
introduced in Section VI) which are not associated with panics for each decade in our sample since
the 1870s. In the 19th century, virtually all banking crises featured banking panics. By the interwar
period, some crises did not involve banking panics, though most crises were associated with
panics. In the post-war era, especially in the post-Bretton-Woods period, the frequency of crises
without panics increased. This increase over time may reflect the expanded role of government in
financial regulation, including the gradual adoption of central banks with lender of last resort
facilities, deposit insurance, and expanded fiscal capacity for regulatory forbearance. The 20th
century also witnessed a gradual increase in banking sector leverage (Jordà, Richter, Schularick,
and Taylor 2017), which has increased bank vulnerability to losses.

       We highlight several prominent episodes of Narrative Crises that do not feature panics. Our
first example of non-panic bank distress is the initial stages of Japan's recent banking crisis (1991-
1996). In this phase of Japan's crisis, most of the major banks were thought to be near insolvency
following the crash in the Japanese real estate and stock market, but significant regulatory
forbearance and perceptions of strong government guarantees to creditors forestalled a creditor
panic. In general, strong government guarantees characterize many episodes of "non-panic bank
distress". This situation lasted until the fall of 1997, when the collapse of two major securities
firms and the Hokkaido Takushoku Bank led interbank markets to seize up, ushering in the panic
phase of the crisis (1997-98). The severe declines in bank equity experienced by Japanese banks
also translated into contractions in lending and construction activity in U.S. markets with large
penetration by subsidiaries of Japanese banks, highlighting that a cutback in credit supply had
important real effects in this crisis (Peek and Rosengren 2000).




                                                                                                   26
         Other examples of Narrative Crises that did not feature panics include the following well-
known historical banking crises: Sweden in 1921-1926, Spain in 1977-1982, Denmark in 1987-
1992, and the U.S. in 1990-1992. For example, a number of studies argue that bank losses
contributed to the severity of the 1990-91 recession in the U.S., despite the absence of panics,
especially in the northeast region (Syron 1991, Bernanke and Lown 1991, Peek and Rosengren
1992, and Mian, Sufi, and Verner 2019).22

         At the same time, we identify many other episodes of non-panic bank distress that were
not previously identified by narrative-based approaches, including:23

     ·   Canada during the Great Depression. Despite the lack of a banking panic and only a single
         bank failure (Weyburn Security Bank), Kryzanowski and Roberts (1993) argue that the
         large and widespread bank losses in Canada, as reflected by the large fall in bank stock
         prices, in part explain the extreme macroeconomic severity of the Great Depression in
         Canada.24
     ·   1973-75: Many countries experienced bank distress during the global downturn of 1973-
         75, including Australia, Finland, France, Greece, Hong Kong, Ireland, Italy, Singapore,
         Switzerland, Turkey, and the U.S., all of which saw large drops in bank equity, both in
         absolute terms and relative to nonfinancial equity.25,26 The recessions in these countries
         were relatively deep and prolonged, compared to previous postwar recessions.

22
   For example, writing about the 1990-91 recession, Syron (1991) argues that "[i]n substantial measure, this period
of tight credit is the result of a loss of bank capital, rather than a loss of deposits" (p. 4).
23
   Though it is not included on our list of non-panic bank equity crash episodes, because the bank equity decline is
less than 30% in magnitude, the U.S. in 1920-21, in which strong monetary contraction induced waves of bank failures
and a large aggregate credit contraction, is an important example too.
24
   Kryzanowski and Roberts (1993) note that the large Canadian banks "were insolvent at market values and remained
in business only due to the forbearance of regulators coupled with an implicit guarantee of all deposit", both policies
being held over from the previous Canadian banking crisis of 1923. They report that the largest Canadian bank at the
time, the Bank of Montreal, had estimated nonperforming loans in excess of 40%.
25
   Among these non-panic episodes, the banking problems were perhaps the most severe in Australia, which saw a
large real estate bust and numerous failures of building societies and small banks between 1974 and 1979 (Fitz-Gibbon
and Gizycki, 2001). In Western Europe, countries faced balance-of-payment crises, which impacted the banking sector
especially through large foreign exchange losses at banks and tight Eurodollar funding (Coombs, 1973). In particular,
Germany's Herstatt Bank failed in 1974, and Germany's Westdeutsche Landesbank and Switzerland's UBS suffered
large losses in foreign exchange markets (Schwartz, 1987). In Singapore, the Chung Khiaw Bank, then part of United
Overseas Bank, was rumored to be close to bankruptcy.
26
   In the U.S., in particular, there were large aggregate bank losses, widespread symptoms of financial distress, and
several prominent failures of large regional banks. Doyran (2016) writes: "Although bank profits subsided in 1974
because of high interest rates and foreign competition, US banks were particularly hard hit by bad loan portfolios,
poor regulatory oversight over foreign exchange transactions, inadequate capital (high loan/capital ratio), deficient

                                                                                                                   27
    ·    2002-03: Several countries, including Germany, Greece, Israel, Italy, Japan, and Portugal,
         saw large drops in bank equity, both in absolute terms and relative to nonfinancial equity.
         In Germany, for example, according to the IMF's financial stability report in 2003, three
         out of the four largest German private commercial banks suffered major losses in 2002,
         and a number of small and medium-sized institutions had to be merged, closed by the
         regulator, or assisted, due to serious difficulties. In Israel, banks suffered large credit losses,
         with the collapse of Trade Bank and large losses at Discount Bank. In Japan, still recovering
         from the banking crisis of the 1990s, new problem loans were disclosed across the banking
         sector; in particular, the government injected 2 trillion yen into Resona Bank, one of
         Japan's largest banks, which was effectively insolvent, and nationalized Ashikaga Bank, a
         large regional bank.


C. Quiet crises

         In this subsection, we ask whether large bank equity declines predict subsequent output
and credit contractions, even in the absence of any narrative evidence of either banking panics or
widespread bank failures. That is, are there "quiet" episodes of bank distress with negative
macroeconomic consequences? During such "quiet" crises, several factors may forestall bank
creditors from running on a bank, including government intervention that is kept hidden and the
absence of other bank failures, which may give the impression to creditors that the health of the
banking sector is sound. However, any banks losses experienced by a bank may still lead to tighter
credit conditions. We re-estimate Equation 1, but now exclude country-year observations within a
±3-year window around episodes with either a panic or widespread bank failure in Table A2. As
before, we control for nonfinancial equity return indicators, along with the standard control
variables.

         Figure 4 plots impulse responses from local projections for future real GDP and bank credit
to GDP. As can be seen in this non-parametric specification, the magnitudes of the real GDP


internal controls and audit procedures, and aggressive expansion through the use of short-term borrowed funds,
especially Eurodollar funds, money market CDs and federal funds. In early 1974, a tightened monetary policy
surprised banks expecting eased interest rates. This led to short-term borrowing for large real estate projects as many
large banks borrowed billions on a daily basis to collateralize short-term loans. When higher interest rates were
announced, they suffered enormous losses. The concern over the effects of financial instability increased greatly as
regulators reported substantial increases in the number of `problem banks' under their supervision."

                                                                                                                   28
decline are nearly as large excluding episodes with panics or bank failures as they are in the full
sample (Figure 2).27 Thus, the predictive content of bank equity declines is not simply driven by
episodes with panics or bank failures and reinforces the result that episodes of non-panic bank
distress are associated with adverse macroeconomic consequences. Moreover, it suggests that
banking sector distress and credit supply contraction play an important role in business cycles
more generally.


      V.      Relative timing of bank equity declines, panics, and other financial market
                                                       indicators

        The previous section showed that panics are not necessary for bank equity distress to be
associated with output and credit contractions. However, panics can substantially amplify the
consequences of banking sector distress. In this section, we examine the timing of bank equity
declines relative to the start of panics and financial market indicators. To do this, we use monthly
data around banking crises on the BVX Crisis List, a list of clear-cut crisis episodes fully described
in Section VI, to provide an in-sample analysis of the relative timing of bank equity declines,
panics, credit spread spikes, and nonfinancial equity declines. This analysis also illustrates how
bank equity returns can be useful in providing information on the timing and proximate causes of
banking crises. Monthly data tell us about the turning points of crises and the dynamics of how
crises evolve, as understood in real-time by equity and debt investors. This higher-frequency
information allows us to show that large bank equity declines usually precede panics and credit
spread increases during these clear-cut banking crisis episodes.

        The U.S. 2007-8 banking crisis provides a vivid illustration of the key results, so we start
with this case study before showing the results for a broad sample of crises. Figure 5 shows that,
for the 2007-8 U.S. crisis, bank equity declined substantially before the panic phase of the crisis,
which we date as starting in September 2008. Bank equity also detected the impending crisis before
credit spreads and nonfinancial equity. Bank equity peaked in January 2007, ten months before the
nonfinancial index peak in October 2007; similarly, bank equity cumulatively fell 30% by
February 2008, while nonfinancial equity did not do the same until September 2008. Meanwhile,


27
  Similarly, Table A8 show no difference between the predictive content of bank equity crashes in Narrative Crisis
episodes and outside them.

                                                                                                              29
corporate spreads (the AAA-Govt and BAA-AAA spreads) and interbank lending spreads (the
LIBOR-OIS spread) relative to baseline levels remained under one percentage point until the panic
phase of the crisis in September 2008, a full 21 months after bank equity had started declining.28
We will show in this section that these patterns also hold in other historical episodes on the BVX
Crisis List.


A. Bank equity crashes and panics

         Figure 6 presents the dynamics of bank equity returns, relative to other financial market
measures, systematically across all crises on the BVX Crisis List. 29 We focus on a three-year
window around the crises on the BVX Crisis List and compute the average evolution of equity
indexes and credit spreads. Time 0 in event time is defined as January of the BVX crisis year, and
equity indexes (measured on the left axis) and credit spread measures (right axis) are normalized
to zero in this month. In the same figure, we plot the frequency distribution of panics, conditional
on panics occurring, to provide a visual sense of whether panics tend to occur before or after large
bank equity declines.30 Panel A in Figure 6 presents the average dynamics for the full sample, and
the remaining panels present results for various subsamples.

         We start by focusing on the relative timing of bank equity declines and panics. The blue
line in Figure 6 plots the average dynamics of bank equity returns, and the orange line represents
a frequency plot of the first panic month, with the area under this curve normalized to one. Figure
6 shows that on average bank equity falls substantially before the panic phase of the crisis. Panics
tend to occur during the crisis year (months 0 to 11 in event time), while bank equity generally
peaks and begins declining in the year prior to when the crisis is dated.




28
   Equity and bond prices for Lehman Brothers, whose failure precipitated the panic phase of the 2007-08 crisis,
display similar dynamics. Lehman Brothers' stock price saw a gradual but large decline of 67% relative to the S&P
500 from its peak in January 2008 to the week before its bankruptcy in September 2008. In contrast, returns on Lehman
bonds were much more stable throughout the spring and summer of 2008. Relative to January 2008, the cumulative
abnormal return on Lehman bonds was only -3% one week before its bankruptcy. Lehman bonds then fell sharply in
the week leading up to its bankruptcy (Denison, Fleming, and Sarkar 2019).
29
   Figure A13 presents the same results across crises on the Narrative Crisis list, demonstrating that these results are
robust to alternative banking crisis lists.
30
   The starting month of each panic, according to narrative accounts, is reported in Table A2. Appendix I.B links to
extensive historical documentation on the onset month of panics.

                                                                                                                    30
        Table 4 Panel A analyzes the timing of bank equity declines and panics more formally.
Column 1 computes the average number of months between the "bank equity crash" (defined here
as when bank equity has declined cumulatively by 30% from its previous peak) and the month of
the panic. For example, in the U.S. in 2008, the bank equity crash occurs in February 2008, while
the panic occurs in September 2008, giving this episode a value of seven months. On average
across BVX Crisis List episodes with a panic, the panic occurs 7.5 months after the bank equity
crash. Column 1 also reveals that in 74% (69 out of 93) of crises with panics for which we have
data, the bank equity crash strictly precedes the panic. In contrast, panics occur before bank equity
crashes in only 20% of cases (19 out of 93).31 This difference is statistically significant based on a
p-value calculated under the null hypothesis that the event "bank equity crash happens before the
panic" is Bernoulli-distributed with parameter 0.50.32

        Figure 7 Panel A presents the full distribution of bank equity declines from the previous
peak to the month just prior to the panic for the sample of banking crises with panics. On average
across BVX Crisis List episodes, bank equity declines by 36% from the peak to the month strictly
prior to the panic. Figure 7 Panel B plots the distribution of bank equity declines at the month
strictly prior to the panic expressed as a percent of its total eventual peak-to-trough decline. On
average across banking crises with panics, bank equity has sustained 55% of its total eventual
peak-to-trough decline before the panic occurs.

        Overall, the evidence shows that panics, when they occur, tend to occur substantially after
the crisis has been detected by bank equity and large losses have been realized by bank equity
investors. This pattern therefore implies that a non-trivial proportion of bank losses are already
present at the early stages of a crisis, before the panic, rather than being caused by the panic. Panics
thus tend to represent the final, most extreme phase of a crisis that arises after substantial losses
have been realized. This general pattern lends support to the second group of theories discussed in




31
   Gorton (1988) finds that panics in the U.S. National Banking Era (1863-1914) typically occurred a few months after
NBER business cycle peaks. He argues these panics were due to systematic responses by depositors to changing
perceptions of risk, based on the arrival of new information about a coming recession and resulting loan losses.
Calomiris and Gorton (1991) also focus on panics in the U.S. National Banking Era and find that panics were preceded
by sharp declines in stock prices.
32
   Appendix Table A9 shows these results are robust to using the sample of episodes on the Narrative Crisis List,
demonstrating that the result is not specific to the BVX Crisis List.

                                                                                                                 31
Section I.A, i.e., Goldstein and Pauzner (2005) and He and Xiong (2012), which highlights panic
bank runs as an amplification mechanism of initial negative fundamental shocks.

        Do bank equity declines pick up crises before or after the crisis dates from previous
narrative approaches? Table 4 Panel A shows that bank equity crashes pick up banking crises 3.2
months before the Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) dates and 2.9 months before the Narrative Crisis
dates (defined as the earliest date across the six narrative approaches). This calculation uses
January as the starting month of each Narrative Crisis, as narrative chronologies usually only
provide the year of the crisis, so this estimate is conservative. Given that narrative chronologies
often date crises based on the year when the panic starts, this provides further support for the result
that bank equity declines precede panics. It also suggests that narrative accounts tend to date crises
late. This result is consistent with Boyd, De Nicolo, and Rodionova (2019), who show that bank
lending contracts before crises are dated by narrative approaches.


B. Bank equity crashes and credit spread spikes

        What is the relationship between bank equity declines and credit spread increases? As we
discussed earlier, policy makers tend to use disruptions in credit-markets as indicators of panics
by bank creditors. Credit spread spikes serve as our proxy of disruptions in credit markets. Figure
6 shows that, in all subsamples of the data, bank equity falls by large amounts well ahead of the
credit spread increases. Both interbank lending spreads (the green line) and corporate credit
spreads (the black line) increase after the start of the crisis, while bank equity falls prior to the year
of the crisis. The spike in credit spreads tends to coincide with the occurrence of panics (the orange
line), confirming that credit spread spikes proxy for the occurrence of panics. Because credit
spreads are only available for a smaller subset of crises, Panel B in Figure 6 presents the same
event study for a consistent sample with non-missing equity measures and bank credit spreads.
Panel B confirms that the differences in the timing of bank equity declines and credit spread spikes
are not driven by different underlying samples. The fact that bank equity falls first before the spike
in credit spreads is consistent with our earlier discussion that credit-market instruments tend to
have lower information sensitivity than bank equity because equity holders take first losses while
creditors suffer losses only when banks approach default.




                                                                                                       32
          Table 5 reinforces the evidence that bank equity tends to lead credit spreads by showing
the distribution of credit spread increases conditional on bank equity falling by a certain amount.
For example, Panel A shows that, by examining BVX Crisis List episodes, when bank equity first
falls by more than 30% (row 3), the median credit spread increase is only 52 basis points (bps). In
more than 20% of cases, bank credit spreads have not increased at all at this point. Only in 10% of
cases has the bank credit spread increased by more than 1 percentage point. For reference, the
median trough-to-peak bank credit spread spike across BVX Crisis List episodes is 2.5 percentage
points.

          Panel B in Table 5 presents the results for corporate credit spreads, rather than bank credit
spreads. Similar to the results in Panel A, when bank equity first falls by more than 30% (row 3),
the median corporate credit spread increase is only 2 bps, and in over 40% of cases corporate credit
spreads have not increased at all. For reference, the median trough-to-peak corporate credit spread
spike across BVX Crisis List episodes is 1.7%.33

          Taken together, the analysis in this subsection shows that bank equity declines tend to
precede credit spread spikes, which motivates policy makers to pay more attention to bank equity
declines in assessing the developing risk of an emerging banking crisis.


C. Bank and nonfinancial equity crashes

          Figure 6 also shows that bank equity tends to peak and decline earlier that nonfinancial
equity during banking crises. Column 1 in Table 4 Panel B confirms this result by showing that
bank equity crashes precede similarly defined nonfinancial equity crashes by a statistically
significant average of 1.94 months. Similarly, Column 2 in Table 4 Panel B shows that the bank
equity index peaks 1.37 months before the nonfinancials index peaks. The fact that bank equity
leads nonfinancial equity in declining suggests that many banking crises originate with shocks to
specific segments of the economy to which banks have significant exposures (e.g., subprime
exposure in 2008), rather than with broad macroeconomic shocks affecting the entire nonfinancial

33
  As a robustness check, Table 4 Panel A compares the timing of 30% bank equity crashes to the timing of credit
spreads spikes. We record a credit spread "spike" as the first month in which credit spreads increase at least 1
percentage point above their pre-crisis average levels. Since a 1 percentage point increase is somewhat arbitrary, we
present this evidence mainly as robustness analysis confirming the result in Figure 6. Nevertheless, Table 4 Panel A
shows that 30% bank equity crashes detect the crisis 3.4 months before a 1% spike in bank credit spreads (column 5)
and 4.1 months before a 1% spike in corporate credit spreads (column 7).

                                                                                                                 33
sector. Interestingly, Panels C and D in Figure 6 show that the pattern that bank equity leads
nonfinancial equities holds mainly for post-WWII crises and advanced economies--and is often
the opposite for prewar crises or emerging economies (see also Table A10). This suggests that the
initial causes of banking crises may have changed over time. More recent crises in advanced
economies tend to start with distress to banks exposed to specific segments of the economy, such
as real estate. In contrast, prewar banking crises may have been the result of broader
macroeconomic shocks that only later translated into bank equity losses.

        Figure 6 Panel A also reveals several additional new facts about bank equity around
banking crises. First, bank equity falls substantially more than nonfinancial equity conditional on
a BVX banking crisis, even though bank equity has an unconditional market beta of 0.8 in our
sample. Second, bank equity declines are "permanent," in the sense that they do not recover post-
crisis, presumably reflecting permanent credit losses. In contrast, nonfinancial equity gradually
recovers after the crisis. Third, bank equity declines tend to unfold gradually over several years,
with an average peak-to-trough duration of 27.2 months (also see column 3 in Table 4 Panel B).
This slow decline could potentially reflect a behavioral bias of overoptimistic investors initially
underestimating the true depth of the crisis (e.g., Gennaioli and Shleifer, 2018), or, in a rational
framework, the presence of informational frictions making it difficult for investors in real-time to
assess the extent of bank losses.


                         VI.     Forgotten crises and the BVX Crisis List

        While bank equity declines allow us to screen out a relatively complete set of episodes of
banking distress with and without narrative evidence of panics, some bank equity crashes may be
due to equity market sentiment unrelated to banking distress. For some in-sample studies of
banking crises, such as the timing analysis on specific events in the previous section, it is useful to
create a chronology of clear-cut banking crisis episodes that are free of false positives, albeit at the
expense of potentially selecting more severe episodes. This section provides details on
constructing the BVX Crisis List, which uses bank equity returns along with narrative information
on crises to refine the existing chronology of banking crises in a systematic way. There is obviously
no single correct definition of a banking crisis or list of them, but our goal is to provide one possible



                                                                                                      34
construction of clear-cut crisis episodes based on systematic criteria emphasizing bank equity
losses, bank failures, and panics.

         To construct the BVX Crisis List, we actually construct two chronologies. The first is a
chronology of "bank equity crises." We build this list by first screening for cumulative 30%
declines in bank equity, which may indicate potential banking crises, then only including the subset
of these with narrative evidence of widespread bank failures. Widespread bank failures is defined
as the failure of a top-5 (by assets) bank or more than five total banks failures above the normal
rate of bank failures.34 The second is a chronology of "panic banking crises," based on the list of
panics from Table A2. The union of these two sets is the BVX Crisis List, which we present in
Table 6. The BVX Crisis List distinguishes between crises involving bank equity losses and those
involving panics (or both), emphasizing that banking crises take various forms. We date the start
of each crisis as the year in which the bank equity index first falls more than 30% from its previous
peak. (In cases in which there is no cumulative 30% decline, we use the Narrative Crisis date.) We
also list the bank equity peak-to-trough real total return in Table 6 (i.e. the cumulative return from
the previous peak before the crisis to the subsequent trough, based on annual data) as a measure of
the severity of each banking crisis.35,36

         Our new bank equity data allow us to uncover 27 newly-identified crises (meaning they
are not Narrative Crisis episodes), which are marked with an asterisk in Table 6. While some of
them are newly-identified just because they are very recent episodes (e.g., the 2011 Eurozone
crises), others are "forgotten" historical crises (meaning that they do not appear to have been
known by the authors of the Narrative Crisis lists), such as the following examples37:

34
    See Appendix Section I.B for a more detailed definition of "widespread bank failure" and for historical
documentation of bank failures for each episode. A "bank failure" is defined broadly to include forced mergers,
restructurings, government equity injections, and nationalizations of nearly failing banks.
35
   We also revise the starting years of all bank crises (see Table A12, Panel A) to correspond with the initial year of
30% bank stocks crashes. Of course, there are reasons why the narrative accounts date the starting year when they do.
With the new dates, our goal is simply to offer additional and alternative information about when markets first
recognized the bank equity losses. See Table A2 for a comparison with the Narrative Crisis dates, which in most cases
are very similar. Also, on the BVX Crisis List, we occasionally combined several pairs of episodes occurring close
together in time (see Table A12 Panel B), when it seems more appropriate to consider them as a single crisis (i.e. when
bank equity returns did not show two separate declines and when the narrative evidence on bank failures conveyed a
continuous sequence of banking distress across time, not clustered into two phases).
36
   In Appendix Section VI.C and Figure A15, we use these crisis severity measures to analyze episodes from the global
Great Depression, in which there is some debate about which countries experienced severe banking crises.
37
   They have not been forgotten by all banking crisis historians, as we collect narrative evidence on each of these
episodes, as presented here.

                                                                                                                   35
     ·   Belgium in 1876. As reported by Grossman (2010): "the boom in Belgium after the Franco-
         Prussian war led to the establishment of new banks. Several of these failed when the
         international crisis of 1873 arrived in Belgium. A few smaller banks went into receivership,
         and the larger Banque de Belgique, Banque de Bruxelles, and Banque Central Anversoise
         had to be re-organized. Durviaux (1947) calls this a serious crisis, while Chelpner (1943)
         suggests it may have been less serious." In this episode, the bank equity total return index
         declined by 37.4%.

     ·   Japan in 1922. This episode is distinct from the Japanese banking crises of 1920 and 1923.
         Shizume (2012) writes: "Ishii Corporation, a lumber company engaged in speculative
         activities, went bankrupt at the end of February 1922, triggering bank runs in Kochi
         Prefecture (in south-western part of Japan) and Kansai region (Osaka, Kyoto and their
         environs). Then, from October through December 1922, bank runs spread far across the
         country, from Kyushu (the westernmost part of Japan) through Kanto (Tokyo and its
         environs in eastern Japan)... The BOJ extended `special loans' to 20 banks from December
         1922 to April 1923." In this episode, the bank equity total return index declined by 40.5%.


         Table A11 lists the "removed banking crises", which include 53 episodes from the
Narrative Crisis list that are not considered banking crises on the BVX Crisis List. Of the "removed
banking crises," we mark a subset of them with an asterisk which we consider "spurious banking
crises," defined as episodes which have few or no characteristics typically associated with banking
crises and are likely the result of clear-cut typographical or historical errors on one of the Narrative
Crisis chronologies. 38 As a concrete example, our BVX Crisis List omits Germany in 1977. For
this episode, Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) simply report that "Giro institutions faced problems,"
though we could not find any independent verification from contemporaneous German- or
English-language newspaper accounts of any unusual problems affecting the banking sector at the
time, and the peak-to-trough bank equity decline was small (-11.7%). These errors are often



38
   The documentation linked to Appendix I.B traces many of the sources of these errors. One problem inherent in
many older accounts of crises is that the terms "financial crisis" and "panic" are used variously to describe: monetary
crises, currency crises, sovereign debt crises, or even just stock market crashes, without being clear about what they
are describing. These other types of financial crises often get conflated with banking crises in secondary sources that
cite these original historical accounts.

                                                                                                                   36
perpetuated across studies that build on previous chronologies.39 Bank equity declines thus provide
an objective criterion to screen crisis episodes and remove episodes that feature little evidence of
any of the features commonly associated with banking crises.

         Table 7 summarizes the properties of the BVX Crisis List. Column 1 shows that the average
peak-to-trough bank equity decline in BVX Crises is 46.2% and the average peak-to-trough decline
in real GDP is 5.5%. Crises with a bank equity decline of greater than 30% display even larger
declines in real GDP (column 2). Columns 3 and 4 in Table 7 also provide summary statistics on
the newly-uncovered crises and removed crises. Column 3 shows that the newly-identified crises
display larger declines in bank equity and real GDP compared to the average for all episodes on
the BVX Crisis List (column 1), suggesting that these added episodes are worthy of being
considered crises. In contrast, column 4 shows that the removed episodes are considerably less
severe, suggesting that some of these episodes may indeed be "spurious crises".

         To assess potential biases of the narrative lists, we compare the BVX Crisis List with
various narrative crisis lists. Appendix Figure A16 compares the macroeconomic consequences of
BVX Crisis List episodes with those from Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) and Laeven and Valencia
(2013). Appendix Table A13 likewise compares along various banking crisis dimensions.
Compared to Reinhart and Rogoff's list of banking crises, for example, we find the consequences
of the BVX Crisis List episodes are actually slightly more severe in terms of the decline in real
GDP and credit-to-GDP. 40 These results are discussed in detail in Appendix Section VI.D. The fact




39
  For example, Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) call Italy in 1935 a crisis, because Bordo et al. (2001) consider it a crisis,
because, in turn, Bernanke and James (1991) consider it a crisis, though it is unlikely that any banking crisis, however
defined, started in 1935. In fact, the main banking crisis in Italy erupted in 1930 and by 1935 was largely resolved (the
entire banking sector had largely been nationalized). According to Italian government records, the only bank to fail in
1935 was Credito Marittimo, which had been nationalized years earlier and was only finally liquidated by the
government in 1935.
40
   Table A13 Panel B performs the same comparison with Laeven and Valencia's crisis chronology (on the same time
sample, 1970-2012). On average, BVX crisis episodes are slightly less severe than Laeven and Valencia's, perhaps
because Laeven and Valencia only identify crises that are serious enough to warrant several forms of major government
intervention. In unreported results we find that the BVX Crisis List episodes are more severe than Schularick and
Taylor's (when compared on their sample of 14 countries) and Bordo et al.'s. As an alternative way to compare the
accuracy of the BVX Crisis List and previous chronologies, Table A14 shows that a variety of crises indicators (real
GDP growth, bank equity returns, and credit growth) line up more closely with the BVX Crisis List than with crises
identified by Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) and Laeven and Valencia (2013).

                                                                                                                     37
that the BVX Crisis List is on average more severe may be, in large part, due to eliminating many
spurious crises from their list.41


                                            VII.     Conclusion

        By constructing a new historical dataset of bank equity returns for 46 countries going back
to 1870, we document that large bank equity declines are a strong predictor of lower subsequent
GDP growth and bank credit-to-GDP, even after controlling for nonfinancial equity returns. The
relation between bank equity returns and subsequent macroeconomic outcomes is highly nonlinear,
showing that bank equity is particularly informative about severe negative macroeconomic events
involving a decline in intermediated credit. The informativeness of large declines in bank equity
allows us to map out a broader sample of crises, including banking crises with and without panics.
By separately examining these subsamples of crisis episodes, we find that while large bank equity
declines coupled with narrative evidence of panics are followed by the most severe
macroeconomic downturns, episodes of non-panic banking distress also translate into prolonged
output gaps and non-trivial credit contractions. Moreover, panics, when they do occur, tend to
come after substantial bank equity declines, reflecting the fact that large current and expected
future losses have already been realized by equity investors.

        Our results suggest that the defining feature of a banking crisis is a bank capital crunch.
These capital crunches often, though not always, lead bank creditors to run on bank debt, especially
once large current and expected future losses have been realized and banks appear sufficiently
undercapitalized. However, even when panics are averted, for example by implicit or explicit
guarantees, an undercapitalized banking system is still unable to adequately service the economy.
Thus, it is important for regulators to focus on bank capital adequacy during emerging crises, in
addition to preventing funding pressures and outright panics. Furthermore, while credit spreads
directly capture panic-like disruptions in credit markets, bank equity, by being more information-
sensitive to banking sector health, may give more information about the state of the banking sector
in the early stages of the crisis. Our evidence suggests that simple bank equity measures, in addition


41
  On the BVX Crisis List, we removed 44 events from Reinhart and Rogoff's list, and these removed events have an
average GDP decline of -2.1%. Thus, this small average GDP decline from removed crises likely biases down the
average severity of Reinhart and Rogoff's crises.

                                                                                                             38
to credit expansion measures, provide a useful real-time barometer of the health of the banking
sector.

          As a final caveat, we emphasize that while our results provide new insights into the roles
of bank losses and panics, we cannot causally identify the role of bank losses and panics in
depressing bank lending and output. Our episodes of large bank equity declines capture broad
episodes of bank distress and output contraction, but these declines may in part be due to weak
corporate and household balance sheets, beyond banking sector distress itself. We look forward to
future work that attempts to disentangle the causal roles of the bank lending channel, banking
panics, and non-financial balance sheet distress.



                                             References

Admati, Anat, and Martin Hellwig. The Bankers' New Clothes: What's Wrong with Banking and
  What to Do about It. Princeton University Press, 2014.
Adrian, Tobias, Nina Boyarchenko, and Domenico Giannone. "Vulnerable Growth." American
   Economic Review 109, no. 4 (2019): 1263-89.
Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale. "Optimal Financial Crises." Journal of Finance 53, no. 4
    (1998): 1245-1284.
Amiti, Mary, and David Weinstein. "Exports and Financial Shocks." Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 126, no. 4 (2011): 1841-1877.
Artavanis, Nikolaos, Daniel Paravisini, Claudia Robles-Garcia, Amit Seru, and Margarita
   Tsoutsoura. "Deposit Withdrawals." Working paper, 2019.
Baron, Matthew, and Wei Xiong. "Credit Expansion and Neglected Crash Risk." Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 132, no. 2 (2017): 713-764.
Bernanke, Ben, and Cara Lown. "The Credit Crunch." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
   1991, no. 2 (1991): 205-247.
Bernanke, Ben, and Harold James. "The Gold Standard, Deflation, and Financial Crisis in the
   Great Depression: An International Comparison." In Financial Markets and Financial Crises,
   pp. 33-68. University of Chicago Press, 1991.
Bernanke, Ben. "The Real Effects of the Financial Crisis." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
   20 (2018).
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. "Diagnostic Expectations and Credit
   Cycles." Journal of Finance 73, no. 1 (2018): 199-227.

                                                                                                 39
Bordo, Michael, Barry Eichengreen, Daniela Klingebiel, and Maria Soledad Martinez-Peria. "Is
   the Crisis Problem Growing More Severe?" Economic Policy 16, no. 32 (2001): 52-82.
Boyd, John, Gianni De Nicolo, and Tatiana Rodionova. "Banking Crises and Crisis Dating:
   Disentangling Shocks and Policy Responses." Journal of Financial Stability 41 (2019): 45-54.
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Yuliy Sannikov. "A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial Sector."
   American Economic Review 104, no. 2 (2014): 379-421.
Calomiris, Charles. "Banking Crises Yesterday and Today." Financial History Review 17, no. 1
   (2010): 3-12.
Calomiris, Charles, and Charles Kahn. "The Role of Demandable Debt in Structuring Optimal
   Banking Arrangements." American Economic Review 81, no. 3 (1991): 497-513.
Calomiris, Charles, and Gary Gorton. "The Origins of Banking Panics: Models, Facts, and Bank
   Regulation." In Financial Markets and Financial Crises, pp. 109-174. University of Chicago
   Press, 1991.
Calomiris, Charles, and Joseph Mason. "Fundamentals, panics, and bank distress during the
   Depression." American Economic Review 93, no. 5 (2003): 1615-1647.
Caprio, Gerard, and Daniela Klingebiel. "Bank Insolvency: Bad Luck, Bad Policy, or Bad
   Banking?" In Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics, vol. 79, World
   Bank publication (1996).
Caprio, Gerard, and Daniela Klingebiel. "Episodes of Systemic and Borderline Banking Crises."
   In Managing the Real and Fiscal Effects of Banking Crises, World Bank publication (2003):
   31-49.
Chari, Varadarajan, and Ravi Jagannathan. "Banking Panics, Information, and Rational
   Expectations Equilibrium." Journal of Finance 43, no. 3 (1988): 749-761.
Chelpner, B. Belgian Banking and Banking Theory. Washington: Brookings Institution, 1943.
Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel. "The Employment Effects of Credit Market Disruptions: Firm-Level
   Evidence from the 2008­9 Financial Crisis." Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, no. 1
   (2014): 1-59.
Coombs, Charles. "Treasury and Federal Reserve Foreign Exchange Operations." Monthly Review
   (New York Fed) 55 (1973): 47-65.
Covitz, Daniel, Nellie Liang, and Gustavo Suarez. "The Evolution of a Financial Crisis: Collapse
   of the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Market." Journal of Finance 68, no. 3 (2013): 815-
   848.
Dang, Tri Vi, Gorton, Gary and Holmström, Bengt. "The Information View of Financial Crises."
   Annual Review of Financial Economics, forthcoming (2019).



                                                                                             40
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Enrica Detragiache. "Cross-Country Empirical Studies of Systemic
  Bank Distress: A Survey." National Institute Economic Review 192, no. 1 (2005): 68-83.
Denison, Erin, Michael Fleming, and Asani Sarkar. "The Indirect Costs of Lehman's Bankruptcy".
   Liberty Street Economics blog, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2019.
   https://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2019/01/the-indirect-costs-of-lehmans-
   bankruptcy.html
Diamond, Douglas, and Philip Dybvig. "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity." Journal
   of Political Economy 91, no. 3 (1983): 401-419.
Doyran, Mine Aysen. Financial Crisis Management and the Pursuit of Power: American Pre-
   eminence and the Credit Crunch. Routledge, 2016.
Driscoll, John, and Aart Kraay. "Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimation with Spatially
   Dependent Panel Data." Review of Economics and Statistics 80, no. 4 (1998): 549-560.
Durviaux, Roland. La Banque Mixte: Origine et Soutien de l'Expansion Économique de la
   Belgique. E. Bruylant, 1947.
Fitz-Gibbon, Bryan, and Marianne Gizycki. "A History of Last-Resort Lending and Other Support
    for Troubled Financial Institutions in Australia." Reserve Bank of Australia Research
    Discussion Paper, 2001.
Friedman, Milton, and Anna Schwartz. A Monetary History of the US 1867-1960. Princeton
    University Press, 1963.
Gennaioli, Nicola, and Andrei Shleifer. A Crisis of Beliefs: Investor Psychology and Financial
   Fragility. Princeton University Press, 2018.
Gertler, Mark, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. "Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in Business
   Cycle Analysis." In Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3, pp. 547-599. Elsevier, 2010.
Gertler, Mark, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. "Banking, Liquidity, and Bank Runs in an Infinite Horizon
   Economy." American Economic Review 105, no. 7 (2015): 2011-43.
Goldstein, Itay, and Ady Pauzner. "Demand­Deposit Contracts and the Probability of Bank Runs."
   Journal of Finance 60, no. 3 (2005): 1293-1327.
Gorton, Gary. "Banking Panics and Business Cycles." Oxford Economic Papers 40, no. 4 (1988):
   751-781.
Gorton, Gary. "The Panic of 2007." NBER Working Paper No. w14358. National Bureau of
   Economic Research, 2008. https://www.nber.org/papers/w14358
Gorton, Gary. "Some Reflections on the Recent Financial Crisis." Trade, Globalization and
   Development. pp. 161-184. Springer, 2014.
Gorton, Gary, and George Pennacchi. "Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity Creation." Journal
   of Finance 45, no. 1 (1990): 49-71.

                                                                                            41
Gorton, Gary, and Lixin Huang. "Banking panics and the origin of central banking." D. Altig, B.
   Smith (Eds.), Evolution and Procedures of Central Banking, Cambridge University Press,
   Cambridge (2003): 181-219
Greenlaw, David, Jan Hatzius, Anil Kashyap, and Hyun Song Shin. "Leveraged Losses: Lessons
   from the Mortgage Market Meltdown." In Proceedings of the US Monetary Policy Forum, vol.
   2008, pp. 8-59. 2008.
Greenwood, Robin, and Samuel Hanson. "Issuer Quality and Corporate Bond Returns." Review of
   Financial Studies 26, no. 6 (2013): 1483-1525.
Greenwood, Robin, Samuel Hanson, and Lawrence Jin. "Reflexivity in Credit Markets." NBER
   Working Paper No. w25747, 2019. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3372051
Grossman, Richard. Unsettled Account: The Evolution of Banking in the Industrialized World since
   1800. Princeton University Press, 2010.
He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. "Intermediary Asset Pricing." American Economic
   Review 103, no. 2 (2013): 732-70.
He, Zhiguo, and Wei Xiong. "Dynamic Debt Runs." Review of Financial Studies 25, no. 6 (2012):
   1799-1843.
Holmström, Bengt, and Jean Tirole. "Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and the Real
   Sector." Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, no. 3 (1997): 663-691.
Huber, Kilian. "Disentangling the Effects of a Banking Crisis: Evidence from German Firms and
   Counties." American Economic Review 108, no. 3 (2018): 868-98.
Jalil, Andrew. "A New History of Banking Panics in the United States, 1825-1929: Construction
    and Implications." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7, no. 3 (2015): 295-330.
Jordà, Òscar and Richter, Björn and Schularick, Moritz and Taylor, Alan M. "Bank Capital Redux:
    Solvency, Liquidity, and Crisis." NBER Working Paper No. w23287, 2017. Available at SSRN:
    https://ssrn.com/abstract=2941265
Jordà, Òscar. "Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections." American
    Economic Review 95, no. 1 (2005): 161-182.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, and Philipp Schnabl. "When Safe Proved Risky: Commercial Paper during
   the Financial Crisis of 2007-2009." Journal of Economic Perspectives 24, no. 1 (2010): 29-50.
Khwaja, Asim, and Atif Mian. "Tracing the Impact of Bank Liquidity Shocks: Evidence from an
  Emerging Market." American Economic Review 98, no. 4 (2008): 1413-42.
Kiefer, Nicholas, and Timothy Vogelsang. "A New Asymptotic Theory for Heteroskedasticity-
   Autocorrelation Robust Tests." Econometric Theory 21, no. 6 (2005): 1130-1164.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Tyler Muir. "How Credit Cycles across a Financial Crisis." Working
   paper, 2018.

                                                                                             42
Kryzanowski, Lawrence, and Gordon Roberts. "Canadian Banking Solvency, 1922-1940." Journal
   of Money, Credit and Banking 25, no. 3 (1993): 361-376.
Laeven, Luc, and Fabian Valencia. "Systemic Banking Crises Database." IMF Economic Review
   61, no. 2 (2013): 225-270.
López-Salido, David, Jeremy Stein, and Egon Zakrajsek. "Credit-Market Sentiment and the
   Business Cycle." Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, no. 3 (2017): 1373-1426.
McCabe, Patrick. "The Cross Section of Money Market Fund Risks and Financial Crises." Finance
  and Economics Discussion Series working paper, Federal Reserve Board, 2010.
Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Emil Verner. "Household Debt and Business Cycles Worldwide."
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, no. 4 (2017): 1755-1817.
Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Emil Verner. "How Does Credit Supply Expansion Affect the Real
   Economy? The Productive Capacity and Household Demand Channels." Journal of Finance
   75, no. 2 (2019): 949-994.
Nakamura, Leonard, and Carlos Zarazaga. "Banking and finance in Argentina in the period 1900-
   35." Working paper, (2001).
Nyberg, Peter, and Mika Vaihekoski. "A new value-weighted total return index for the Finnish
   stock market." In Research in international business and finance 24.3 (2010): 267-283.
Peek, Joe, and Eric Rosengren. "The Capital Crunch in New England." New England Economic
   Review May (1992): 21-31.
Peek, Joe, and Eric Rosengren. "Collateral Damage: Effects of the Japanese Bank Crisis on Real
   Activity in the United States." American Economic Review 90, no. 1 (2000): 30-45.
Puri, Manju, Jörg Rocholl, and Sascha Steffen. "Global Retail Lending in the Aftermath of the US
   Financial Crisis: Distinguishing Between Supply and Demand Effects." Journal of Financial
   Economics 100, no. 3 (2011): 556-578.
Rampini, Adriano, and S. Viswanathan. "Financial Intermediary Capital." Review of Economic
   Studies 86, no. 1 (2019): 413-455.
Reinhart, Carmen, and Kenneth Rogoff. This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly.
   Princeton University Press, 2009.
Romer, Christina, and David Romer. "New Evidence on the Aftermath of Financial Crises in
  Advanced Countries." American Economic Review 107, no. 10 (2017): 3072-3118.
Schroth, Enrique, Gustavo Suarez, and Lucian Taylor. "Dynamic Debt Runs and Financial
   Fragility: Evidence from the 2007 ABCP Crisis." Journal of Financial Economics 112, no. 2
   (2014): 164-189.




                                                                                              43
Schularick, Moritz, and Alan Taylor. "Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage
   Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870-2008." American Economic Review 102, no. 2 (2012):
   1029-61.
Schwartz, Anna. "Real and Pseudo-Financial Crises." In Money in Historical Perspective, pp. 271-
   288. University of Chicago Press, 1987.
Shizume, Masato. "The Japanese Economy during the Interwar Period: Instability in the Financial
   System and the Impact of the World Depression." In The Gold Standard Peripheries, pp. 211-
   228. Palgrave Macmillan, London, 2012.
Stock, James, and Mark Watson. "Forecasting Output and Inflation: The Role of Asset Prices."
   Journal of Economic Literature 41, no. 3 (2003): 788-829.
Syron, Richard. "Are We Experiencing a Credit Crunch?" New England Economic Review, July
   (1991): 3-10.
Waldenström, Daniel. "Swedish stock and bond returns, 1856­2012." Working paper, 2014.




                                                                                             44
           Figure 1: Dynamics of output and credit around bank equity crashes
This figure presents the average dynamics of real GDP and credit-to-GDP around 30% bank equity
crashes. Bank equity crashes are defined to occur in year t = 0. Each panel plots cumulative
growth in a given variable from five years before a bank equity crash (t = 5) to five years after
the crash (t = 5). For comparison, average dynamics around years with no crash are presented in
red.

                                         (A) Real GDP




                                       (B) Credit-to-GDP
         Figure 2: Bank equity crashes predict output gaps and credit contraction
This figure plots the impact of bank equity and nonfinancial equity returns on real GDP (Panel A)
and bank credit-to-GDP (Panel B). The responses are estimated jointly using Equation 1, which
includes eight bins of bank and nonfinancial equity returns to capture the predictive content across
the return distribution. The specification controls for country fixed eects, contemporaneous real
GDP growth and change in credit-to-GDP, and three lags of real GDP growth, change in credit-to-
GDP, and bank and nonfinancial equity return bins. The responses to bank equity and nonfinancial
equity returns are estimated jointly. The x-axis is time in years, and the y-axis is real GDP or
bank credit-to-GDP relative to the omitted return bin (return between 0% and 15%).
                                      (A) Real GDP response




                                    (B) Credit-to-GDP response
                Figure 3: Banking distress with and without banking panics
This figure presents the response of real GDP and credit-to-GDP to 30% bank equity crashes,
distinguishing between 30% bank equity crashes that coincide with a banking panic and crashes
that are not associated with a panic. The impulse responses are estimated from Equation 3. Panel
A presents the results from the baseline specification. Panel B analyzes episodes with a 30% bank
equity crash and narrative evidence of widespread bank failures. The specification controls for
country fixed eects, contemporaneous real GDP growth and change in credit-to-GDP, and three
lags of real GDP growth, change in credit-to-GDP, and bank and nonfinancial equity return bins.
The dashed lines represent 95% confidence intervals based on Driscoll-Kraay standard errors with
a lag length of six.
                                          (A) Baseline




                                (B) Conditioning on bank failures
   Figure 4: Impact of bank equity crashes outside of narrative banking crisis episodes
This figure shows that bank equity crashes predict output gaps and credit contraction even ex-
cluding episodes with narrative evidence of panics or widespread bank failures. Local projection
impulse responses are estimated as in Figure 2 but exclude observations within a ±3-year window
around a panic or an episode of widespread bank failures.
                                     (A) Real GDP response




                                   (B) Credit-to-GDP response
                      Figure 5: Equity returns and credit spreads around the U.S. 2007-8 banking crisis
This figure plots bank and nonfinancial equity total return indexes and credit spreads around the
U.S. 2007-8 banking crisis. The bank equity index is in blue, the nonfinancial equity index is in
red, corporate credit spreads are in black (dashed is the AAA 10-year Corporate minus 10-year
Treasury spread, solid is the BAA minus AAA 10-year Corporate spread), and the 3-month LIBOR
minus OIS spread is in green. The scale on the left corresponds to equity returns, and the scale on
the right corresponds to bond yield spreads.
                      1
total returns index
                      .75
                      .5




                                                                                                      .04
                      .25




                                                                                                      bond spread
                      0




                                                                                                      0     .02

                            2002      2004         2006         2008          2010         2012
                                                             year

                                            Bank equity index         Nonfin equity index
                                      AAA - Govt              BAA - AAA           LIBOR - OIS
Figure 6: Timing of bank equity declines relative to panics and other financial market indicators
This figure compares the average evolution, around BVX Crises, of monthly bank equity returns relative
to a series of other financial market indicators. The other financial market indicators are nonfinancial
equity returns, bank credit spreads, corporate credit spreads, and the first month of a banking panic
based on narrative accounts. Equity returns correspond to the left axis, and credit spreads correspond
to the right axis. Equity indexes and credit spreads are normalized to 0 in event month 0, defined as
January of the BVX crisis year. The curve representing the Start of Panic is a frequency plot of the first
month of the banking panic based on narrative accounts. The Start of Panic curve corresponds to a third
axis that we omit to minimize clutter, but the area under this curve is one. Panel A presents results for
the full sample, Panel B uses a sample where bank equity, nonfinancial equity, and bank credit spreads
are all non-missing, and Panels C to E present results across subsamples.
                                             (A) Full sample




                  (B) Consistent sample                               (C) 1870-1939




                      (D) 1940-2016                                   (E) 1940-2006
        Figure 7: Bank equity falls substantially before the start of banking panics
This figure illustrates that bank equity falls substantially (on average by 36%) before a banking
panic. Panel A shows the distribution of bank equity returns from its previous peak to the month
before a panic. The unit of observation is an episode in which a panic occurred and the month of
the panic is known. Panel B is the bank equity decline from Panel A normalized by the eventual
total peak-to-trough decline.

                          (A) Bank equity decline up to month before panic

          2.5



            2



          1.5



            1



           .5



            0
                -1                 -.5                0                    .5            1
                                Bank equity decline (relative to previous peak)


                     (B) As a percentage of total eventual peak-to-trough decline

          2.5



            2



          1.5



            1



           .5



            0
                0%           20%             40%              60%                 80%   100%
                                                   Percent
                     Table 1: Narrative-based banking crises in Germany
This table illustrates disagreement among narrative-based chronologies regarding the occurrence of
historical banking crises, focusing on the case of Germany (similar results hold for other countries,
see Appendix Table A1). It lists the occurrence of banking crises according to six prominent papers.
Years listed correspond to the starting year of the banking crisis, according to each paper. A "0"
means that the source reports no banking crisis in a given year, while a blank cell means that the
crisis is not covered in the sample period. Note that Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache (2005) focus
on the period 1980-2002 and do not report any crises for Germany during this period.



       Reinhart      Schularick     Laeven          Bordo        Caprio       Demirguc-Kunt
        Rogo           Taylor       Valencia                    Klingebiel    & Detragiache
           0            1873
         1880             0
         1891           1891                         0
         1901           1901                        1901
           0            1907                          0
         1925             0                          0
         1929           1931                        1931
         1977             0             0            0         late 1970s
         2008           2008          2008                           0
          Table 2: Bank equity crashes predict output gaps and credit contraction
This table shows that bank equity crashes predict lower subsequent real GDP and credit-to-GDP.
The results are estimated using Equation 2. A bank (nonfinancial) equity crash is defined as 30%
decline in the bank (nonfinancial) equity real total return index from year t 1 to year t. Controls
are contemporaneous real GDP growth and credit-to-GDP change, as well as three lags in the bank
equity crash indicator, nonfinancial equity crash indicator, credit-to-GDP change, and real GDP
growth. t -statistics in brackets are computed from Driscoll-Kraay standard errors with a lag length
of six. *,**,*** indicate significance at the 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively, computed from
fixed-b p-values based on Kiefer and Vogelsang (2005).

                                      Panel A: Real GDP growth
                                   Real GDP growtht,t+1                  Real GDP growtht,t+3
                                 (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
 Bank equity crash             -0.033      -0.026     -0.019      -0.045       -0.034      -0.029
                                [-9.90]     [-8.12]    [-8.45]     [-6.20]      [-5.92]     [-8.05]
 Nonfinancial equity crash     -0.023      -0.022     -0.010      -0.031       -0.029      -0.023
                                [-3.87]     [-5.12]    [-2.36]     [-2.61]      [-2.83]     [-2.77]
 Country fixed eects              X           X         X            X            X           X
 Controls                                     X         X                         X           X
 Year fixed eects                                       X                                     X
 Adj. R2 (within)               0.11        0.19       0.09        0.05         0.11         0.07
 N                              2548        2548       2548        2548         2548         2548

                                  Panel B: Credit-to-GDP change
                                 Credit-to-GDP changet,t+1        Credit-to-GDP changet,t+3
                                  (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)
   Bank equity crash            -0.020      -0.010    -0.011     -0.077      -0.057       -0.051
                                 [-2.81]    [-1.72]   [-2.07]    [-6.10]      [-5.08]      [-4.70]
   Nonfinancial equity crash    0.010      0.0071     0.0031     0.0077       0.0035      -0.0038
                                 [2.72]     [2.36]    [0.82]     [0.71]       [0.37]       [-0.32]
   Country fixed eects             X          X         X          X            X           X
   Controls                                   X         X                       X           X
   Year fixed eects                                     X                                   X
   Adj. R2 (within)              0.01        0.22      0.21       0.03         0.14        0.13
   N                             2535        2535      2535       2535         2535        2535
                Table 3: Impact of banking distress with and without panics
This table presents the response of real GDP and credit-to-GDP to 30% bank equity crashes,
distinguishing between 30% bank equity crashes that coincide with a banking panic and crashes that
are not associated with a panic. The coe cients are estimated from Equation 3. Panel A presents
the results from the baseline specification. Panel B defines episodes of banking sector distress as
years with a 30% bank equity crash and narrative evidence of widespread bank failures ("Bank
eq. crash and failures"). The specification controls for country fixed eects, contemporaneous real
GDP growth and change in credit-to-GDP, and three lags of real GDP growth, change in credit-
to-GDP, and all right-hand-side variables in the table. t -statistics in brackets are computed from
Driscoll-Kraay standard errors with a lag length of six. *,**,*** indicate significance at the 0.1,
0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively, computed from fixed-b p -values of Kiefer and Vogelsang (2005).

                                            Panel A: Baseline
                                     Real GDP growtht,t+3                      Credit-GDP changet,t+3
                                   (1)             (2)           (3)       (4)              (5)           (6)
 Bank equity crash               -0.030       -0.028        -0.023       -0.050       -0.034         -0.032
                                  [-3.95]      [-4.88]       [-5.60]      [-3.95]      [-3.40]        [-2.80]
 Panic                           -0.022        -0.0091       0.0034       0.0046       -0.0089        -0.0084
                                  [-2.27]       [-0.93]      [0.37]       [0.32]        [-0.65]        [-0.56]
 Bank equity crash  Panic        -0.026        -0.012       -0.021       -0.075        -0.048         -0.044
                                  [-2.61]      [-1.37]       [-2.71]      [-3.26]       [-1.99]        [-1.77]
 Nonfinancial equity crash       -0.029        -0.028       -0.024        0.0092       0.0038         -0.0044
                                  [-2.39]       [-2.72]      [-2.77]      [0.77]       [0.38]          [-0.36]
 Country fixed eects                X                X         X               X            X             X
 Controls                                            X         X                            X             X
 Year fixed eects                                              X                                          X
 Adj. R2 (within)                  0.06         0.11          0.07         0.03         0.15             0.13
 N                                 2548         2548          2548         2536         2536             2536

                               Panel B: Conditioning on bank failures
                                                Real GDP growtht,t+3                   Credit-GDP changet,t+3
                                               (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)
 Bank eq. crash and failures                -0.062        -0.051       -0.039       -0.11         -0.074        -0.074
                                             [-4.04]       [-4.23]      [-4.50]      [-3.99]       [-4.14]       [-4.50]
 Panic                                      -0.024        -0.0079      0.00022      0.0021         -0.011        -0.0081
                                             [-2.58]       [-0.74]     [0.018]      [0.17]         [-0.87]        [-0.59]
 Bank eq. crash and failures  Panic          0.0062        0.0083       0.0036      -0.028         -0.018        -0.014
                                             [0.38]        [0.51]       [0.23]      [-0.84]        [-0.64]       [-0.51]
 Nonfinancial equity crash                  -0.037        -0.036       -0.029       -0.0044       -0.0046        -0.0078
                                             [-4.07]       [-4.55]      [-3.32]      [-0.54]       [-0.59]        [-0.70]
 Country fixed eects                           X             X           X             X             X             X
 Controls                                                    X           X                           X             X
 Year fixed eects                                                        X                                         X
 Adj. R2 (within)                             0.06         0.11         0.07         0.03          0.16           0.15
 N                                            2548         2548         2548         2536          2536           2536
Table 4: Timing of bank equity crashes relative to panics, nonfinancial equity crashes, and
credit spread spikes
This table analyzes monthly data around BVX Crisis List episodes to compare the relative timing
of various other financial market indicators. Panel A compares the timing of 30% bank equity
crashes with the panic start date, credit spread spikes, and narrative crisis start dates. The time
dierence is positive if the bank equity crash is recorded before the other event and negative if after
the event. Panel B column 1 records the average time dierence in months between detecting a 30%
bank equity crash relative to a 30% nonfinancial equity crash. Column 2 records the average time
dierence in months between a bank equity peak and a nonfinancial equity peak. Column 3 records
the average duration of a bank equity crash from peak to trough. For each column in all panels,
a t -statistic is calculated under the null hypothesis that the average time dierence is zero. As an
alternative non-parametric test, we also count the number of episodes the bank equity decline is
recorded first ("pos"), the other event is recorded first ("neg"), or both events are recorded in the
same month ("zero"). We then calculate the fraction of times that the bank equity decline happens
first ("pos / (pos + neg)") and calculate a p -value under the null hypothesis that the bank equity
decline happening first is Bernoulli-distributed with parameter 0.50. *,**,*** indicate significance
at the 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.

 Panel A: Bank equity crashes detect the crisis before panics, credit spread spikes, and narrative
                                          crisis dates
                       Before panic      Before        Before earliest       Before 2%       Before 1%       Before 2%       Before 1%
                                        Reinhart-      narrative start     spike in bank   spike in bank    spike in corp   spike in corp
                                       Rogo start          dates           credit spread   credit spread    credit spread   credit spread
                                         dates


 Average                 7.46***         3.22**            2.94**               6.10***       3.37**          9.11***          4.11*
 (in months, signed)
 t-stat                    4.92           2.52              2.43                  5.87         1.97             6.65            1.75
 N                          93             94               102                    40           41               19              19

 Pos                       69              39                33                   32            23               16              12
 Zero                       5              33                53                   4             2                 1               0
 Neg                       19              22                16                   4             16                2               7

 Pos / (Pos + Neg)      78.4%***         63.9%**          67.3%**            88.89%***        59.0%          88.9%***          63.2%
 p-value                  0.000           0.020            0.011                0.000         0.168            0.001           0.180




        Panel B: Bank equity crashes pick up the crisis first before nonfinancial equity crashes
                                      Before nonfin.       Bank equity peaks before          Duration of bank equity decline
                                        eq. crash             nonfin. eq. peak
  Average (in months, signed)            1.94**                          1.37**                            27.17***
  t-stat                                  2.44                            2.11                              24.32
  N                                        127                             138                               140

  Pos                                      65                              56               Duration       24 mo. = 85 episodes
  Zero                                     16                              40
  Neg                                      46                              42               Duration < 24 mo. = 55 episodes

  Pos / (Pos + Neg)                     58.56%**                         57.1%*              % Duration      24 mo. = 61%***
  p-value                                 0.044                           0.094                             0.007
                             Table 5: Distribution of credit spread increases just after bank equity crashes
This table presents the distribution of credit spread increases just after bank equity crashes around BVX Crisis List episodes. Each row
presents the distribution of credit spread increases in the month following a given decrease in bank stocks (relative to the previous bank
stock peak). For example, the third row of Panel A reports the distribution of credit spread increases when the bank equity index first
falls by more than 30%. Panel A presents the analysis for bank credit spreads, and Panel B presents the analysis for corporate credit
spreads.

                   Panel A: The distribution of bank credit spread increases subsequent to bank equity crashes
                             . . . bank credit spreads increase by (in percentage points):
                             10th pctile 20th pctile 30th pctile 40th pctile 50th pctile          60th pctile    70th pctile    80th pctile    90th pctile
       When banks stocks
       fall more than. . .
                    -20%        0.00          0.00         0.00         0.00          0.00           0.00           0.10           0.29           0.40
                    -25%        0.00          0.00         0.00         0.01          0.29           0.36           0.49           0.59           0.63
                    -30%        0.00          0.00         0.29         0.36          0.52           0.55           0.62           0.85           1.09
                    -35%        0.29          0.36         0.44         0.52          0.63           0.68           0.85           1.10           1.30
                    -40%        0.52          0.52         0.54         0.68          0.85           0.86           1.23           1.35           2.02
                    -45%        0.69          0.69         0.78         0.99          1.29           1.33           2.02           2.50           2.50
                    -50%        0.98          0.98         0.99         1.33          2.27           2.40           2.81           3.26           5.19
                    -55%        1.14          1.14         2.27         2.88          3.26           3.26           6.71           6.49           7.11


                Panel B: The distribution of corporate credit spread increases subsequent to bank equity crashes
                             . . . corporate credit spreads increase by (in percentage points):
                             10th pctile 20th pctile 30th pctile 40th pctile 50th pctile           60th pctile    70th pctile    80th pctile    90th pctile
      When banks stocks
      fall more than. . .
                   -20%         0.00         0.00          0.00         0.00          0.00            0.00           0.00           0.00           0.09
                   -25%         0.00         0.00          0.00         0.00          0.00            0.00           0.00           0.00           0.39
                   -30%         0.00         0.00          0.00         0.00          0.02            0.23           0.23           0.15           1.00
                   -35%         0.00         0.00          0.11         0.19          0.27            0.34           0.34           0.32           1.14
                   -40%         0.00         0.12          0.27         0.29          0.41            0.45           0.45           0.41           1.30
                   -45%         0.36         0.36          0.59         0.73          0.86            0.96           0.96           1.06           1.49
                   -50%         0.86         0.86          1.16         1.25          1.35            1.41           1.41           1.45           1.88
                   -55%         1.13         1.13          1.54         1.57          1.59            1.61           1.61           2.67           3.31
                                                          Table 6: The BVX Crisis List
This table lists a chronology of banking crisis episodes, covering 46 countries over the period 1870-2016, which we refer to as the BVX
Crisis List. The BVX Crisis List is then divided into two (non-mutually exclusive) types of banking crisis episodes: those featuring
a panic ("Panic banking crisis") and those featuring both a 30% bank equity crash and evidence of widespread bank failures ("Bank
equity crisis"). Newly-identified banking crises (i.e., those that did not previously appear on the Narrative Crises list) are marked with
a "*". The column labeled "Bank equity return" reports the peak-to-trough real total return for each episode, which is computed as
the maximum cumulative decline (based on annual data) in the bank equity real total return index relative to its previous peak. "0"
indicates no decline in bank equity. A blank entry indicates a lack of bank equity return data for that episode.

 Country       BVX       Bank     Panic    Bank      Country           BVX       Bank     Panic    Bank      Country       BVX       Bank     Panic    Bank
             starting   equity   banking   equity                    starting   equity   banking   equity                starting   equity   banking   equity
               year     return    crisis    crisis                     year     return    crisis    crisis                 year     return    crisis    crisis
 Argentina     1891     -0.307     1         1       Chile (cont.)     1914                1         0       Greece       1929      -0.727     1         1
              1914      -0.473     1         0                         1925                1         1                     2008     -0.671     1         0
              1930      -0.819     1         0                        1931*     -0.356     1         1                    2010*     -0.961     1         1
              1934      -0.563     1         1                         1976        0       1         0       Hong Kong    1892*     -0.565     1         1
              1980                 1         1                         1982     -0.837     1         1                     1965     -0.196     1         0
              1985                 1         1       Colombia         1931*     -0.675     1         0                     1982     -0.445     1         1
              1989                 1         1                         1982     -0.831     0         1                     1991     -0.096     1         0
              1995      -0.305     1         1                         1998     -0.813     1         1                     1998     -0.464     1         1
              2000      -0.656     1         1       Czech             1923                1         1       Hungary      1873*     -0.518     1         1
 Australia    1893      -0.469     1         1                         1991                1         1                     1931                1         1
              1931      -0.230     1         0                         1995     -0.904     1         1                     1991                0         1
              1989      -0.281     1         0       Denmark           1877     -0.207     1         0                    1995*     -0.398     1         1
 Austria      1873      -0.715     1         1                         1885     -0.043     1         0                     2008     -0.671     1         0
              1924      -0.344     0         1                         1907     -0.269     1         0       Iceland      1920*     -0.535     1         1
              1931      -0.566     1         1                         1919     -0.347     1         1                    1930*     -0.359     1         1
              2008      -0.673     1         1                         1992     -0.425     0         1                     1985                0         1
              2011*     -0.509     0         1                         2008     -0.739     1         1                     1993                0         1
 Belgium      1870      -0.018     1         0                        2011*     -0.444     0         1                    2008      -0.963     1         1
              1876*     -0.374     1         1       Egypt             1907     -0.132     1         0       India         1913     -0.249     1         0
              1883      -0.139     1         0                         1914     -0.407     1         0                     1920     -0.495     0         1
              1914                 1         1                         1931     -0.608     1         1                     1993     -0.561     0         1
              1929      -0.831     1         1       Finland           1900                1         1       Indonesia     1990     -0.659     1         1
              1939      -0.511     1         1                         1921     -0.569     0         1                     1998      -0.88     1         1
              2008      -0.842     1         1                         1931     -0.252     1         0       Ireland       2007     -0.918     1         1
              2011*     -0.755     0         1                         1990     -0.814     1         1                    2010*     -0.908     1         1
 Brazil        1890     -0.275     1         0       France            1871                1         0       Israel       1983      -0.499     0         1
              1900         0       1         0                         1882     -0.456     1         1       Italy         1873     -0.237     1         0
              1914      -0.374     1         0                         1889     -0.106     1         0                     1889     -0.348     1         1
              1929      -0.182     1         0                         1914     -0.475     1         0                     1891     -0.453     1         1
              1985                 1         1                         1930     -0.571     1         1                     1907      -0.24     1         1
              1990                 1         0                        1937*     -0.435     1         0                     1914     -0.333     1         1
              1994                 1         1                         2008      -0.64     1         0                     1921      -0.55     1         1
 Canada       1873         0       1         0       Germany           1874     -0.371     1         1                     1930     -0.073     1         0
              1920      -0.426     1         1                         1891      -0.23     1         0                     1992     -0.397     0         1
              1982      -0.164     1         0                         1901      -0.05     1         0                     2008     -0.575     1         0
 Chile         1878                1         1                         1914                1         0                    2011*     -0.601     0         1
              1898      -0.003     1         0                         1930     -0.489     1         1                    2016*     -0.304     0         1
              1907                 1         1                         2008     -0.728     1         1
                                                      Table 6: The BVX Crisis List (cont.)

Country         BVX       Bank     Panic    Bank       Country           BVX         Bank     Panic    Bank      Country         BVX       Bank     Panic    Bank
              starting   equity   banking   equity                     starting     equity   banking   equity                  starting   equity   banking   equity
                year     return    crisis    crisis                      year       return    crisis    crisis                   year     return    crisis    crisis
Japan           1871                1         1        Peru              1876                  1         1       Switzerland     1870     -0.418     1         0
                1882                1         1                         1914*       -0.612     1         0                      1914                 1         0
                1890                1         1                         1931*       -0.373     1         1                      1919      -0.432     0         1
                1901     -0.221     1         0                          1981       -0.980     0         1                      1931      -0.559     1         1
                1907     -0.377     1         1                          1998       -0.396     0         1                      1990      -0.326     1         1
                1920     -0.405     1         1        Philippines      1971*       -0.781     1         0                      2008      -0.676     1         0
               1922*     -0.405     1         1                          1981       -0.719     1         1       Taiwan          1923                1         0
                1923     -0.157     1         1                          1997       -0.687     0         1                      1927                 1         1
                1927     -0.168     1         0        Portugal          1876                  1         1                       1983                1         1
                1990     -0.546     0         1                          1890                  1         1                      1995      -0.307     1         1
                1997     -0.605     1         1                          1921       -0.643     1         1                      1998      -0.557     0         1
               2001*     -0.808     0         1                          1923       -0.684     1         1       Thailand        1979     -0.461     0         1
Korea          1997      -0.726     1         1                          1931       -0.597     1         1                      1983         0       1         0
Luxembourg      2008     -0.474     1         1                          2008       -0.613     1         1                      1997      -0.734     1         1
Malaysia       1985      -0.368     1         1                         2011*       -0.725     0         1       Turkey         1914*     -0.654     1         1
                1997     -0.686     1         1                         2014*       -0.800     0         1                      1930      -0.719     1         1
Mexico          1883                1         1        Russia            1875       -0.188     1         0                       1980     -0.409     1         1
                1893     -0.325     1         0                          1900       -0.401     1         1                      1991      -0.758     1         0
                1913     -0.596     1         1                          1995                  1         1                      1994      -0.203     1         0
                1921                1         1                          1998       -0.751     1         1                      2001      -0.622     1         1
                1928     -0.839     1         1                          2008       -0.723     1         1       U.K.            1878     -0.132     1         0
                1981                1         1        Singapore      (no crises)                                               1890      -0.128     1         0
                1994     -0.602     1         1        South Africa      1881        -0.27     1         0                       1914                1         0
Netherlands     1907     -0.083     1         0                          1890       -0.062     1         0                       1973     -0.737     1         1
                1914     -0.093     1         0        Spain             1882       -0.349     1         1                       1991     -0.147     1         0
                1921     -0.334     0         1                          1890       -0.124     1         0                      2008      -0.707     1         1
               1931*     -0.418     0         1                          1913       -0.038     1         0       U.S.            1873     -0.172     1         0
                2008     -0.562     1         1                          1920        -0.14     1         0                      1884         0       1         0
New Zealand     1888     -0.549     1         1                          1924       -0.222     1         0                       1890        0       1         0
                1987     -0.892     1         1                          1931       -0.336     1         1                      1893       -0.29     1         0
Norway         1898                 1         1                          1975       -0.814     0         1                       1907     -0.334     1         1
                1914                1         0                          2008       -0.466     1         1                      1930      -0.654     1         1
                1919      -0.71     1         1                         2010*       -0.411     0         1                      1984      -0.263     1         0
                1931        0       1         0        Sweden            1878                  1         1                       1990     -0.332     0         1
                1987     -0.464     1         1                          1907       -0.135     1         0                      2007      -0.676     1         1
               2008*     -0.670     1         0                          1919       -0.395     0         1       Venezuela       1981      -0.34     1         1
                                                                         1991       -0.787     1         1                       1992     -0.839     1         1
                                                                         2008       -0.519     1         1                       2008     -0.614     1         1
                                              Table 7: BVX Crisis List summary statistics
This table reports average outcomes for episodes on the BVX Crisis List, BVX Crisis List episodes having a bank equity decline of more
than -30%, newly-uncovered banking crises on the BVX Crisis List, and episodes that are recorded as crises on the list of Narrative Crises
but that do not appear on the BVX Crisis List ("Removed crises").

                                                   BVX Crisis List      BVX Crisis List     Newly-uncovered       Removed crises
                                                                         (Bank equity            crises
                                                                        decline > -30%)
      Bank equity decline                         -0.462   (N=183)     -0.603   (N=113)     -0.550     (N=27)    -0.116     (N=47)
      Abnormal bank equity decline                -0.344   (N=170)     -0.420    (N=99)     -0.329     (N=22)    -0.180     (N=45)
      Bank market cap decline                     -0.416    (N=79)     -0.523    (N=53)     -0.536     (N=13)    -0.116     (N=23)

      Real GDP decline (pk to tr)                 -0.055   (N=210)     -0.063   (N=109)     -0.082     (N=30)    -0.021     (N=54)
      Real GDP growth decline (pk to tr)          -0.085   (N=209)     -0.091   (N=108)     -0.085     (N=29)    -0.057     (N=54)
      Real GDP growth (max dev from trend)        -0.060   (N=210)     -0.066   (N=111)     -0.072     (N=30)    -0.036     (N=54)

      Failed banks (% of total bank assets)       0.296     (N=66)     0.317     (N=47)     0.322       (N=1)     0.060     (N=11)
      NPL at peak                                 0.171     (N=79)     0.170     (N=61)      0.188      (N=9)     0.054      (N=8)
      Decline in deposits (pre-war only)          -0.196    (N=49)     -0.209    (N=24)     -0.143      (N=3)    -0.051     (N=18)
      Significant liability guarantees            0.561    (N=148)     0.638     (N=94)     0.545      (N=22)     0.357     (N=28)
      Significant liquidity support               0.761    (N=159)     0.827     (N=98)      0.783     (N=23)    0.407      (N=27)
