                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF DATA PRIVACY REGULATION:
                     EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE FROM GDPR

                                         Guy Aridor
                                        Yeon-Koo Che
                                         Tobias Salz

                                      Working Paper 26900
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26900


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2020




We would like to thank Daron Acemoglu, Francesco Decarolis, Glenn Ellison, Sara Ellison, and
seminar participants at Columbia for helpful comments. We would further like to thank William
Nelson for his help. Krista Moody provided outstanding research assistance. All errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Guy Aridor, Yeon-Koo Che, and Tobias Salz. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Economic Consequences of Data Privacy Regulation: Empirical Evidence from GDPR
Guy Aridor, Yeon-Koo Che, and Tobias Salz
NBER Working Paper No. 26900
March 2020
JEL No. K24,L0,L5,L81

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper studies the effects of the EU's General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) on the
ability of firms to collect consumer data, identify consumers over time, accrue revenue via online
advertising, and predict their behavior. Utilizing a novel dataset by an intermediary that spans
much of the online travel industry, we perform a difference-in-differences analysis that exploits
the geographic reach of GDPR. We find a 12.5% drop in the intermediary-observed consumers as
a result of the new opt-in requirement of GDPR. At the same time, the remaining consumers are
observable for a longer period of time. We provide evidence that this pattern is consistent with
the hypothesis that privacy-conscious consumers substitute away from less efficient privacy
protection (e.g, cookie deletion) to explicit opt out, a process that would reduce the number of
artificially short consumer histories. Further in keeping with this hypothesis, we observe that the
average value of the remaining consumers to advertisers has increased, offsetting most of the
losses from consumers that opt out. Finally, we find that the ability to predict consumer behavior
by the intermediary's proprietary machine learning algorithm does not significantly worsen as a
result of the changes induced by GDPR. Our results highlight the externalities that consumer
privacy decisions have both on other consumers and for firms.

Guy Aridor                                       Tobias Salz
Columbia University                              MIT Deparatment of Economics
420 West 118th St                                77 Massachusetts Avenue, E52-404
New York, NY 10027                               Cambridge, MA 02139
ga2449@columbia.edu                              and NBER
                                                 tsalz@mit.edu
Yeon-Koo Che
Columbia University
420 W. 118th Street, 1029 IAB
New York, NY 10027
yc2271@columbia.edu
1       Introduction
Technological advances in the past several decades have led to enormous growth in the scale and
precision of consumer data that rms collect. ese advances have been followed by progress in
machine learning and other data processing technologies that have allowed rms to turn data into
successful products and services and earn vast economic returns along the way.1 However, at the
same time, there has been an increasing number of high pro le data breaches and a growing feel-
ing of despondency amongst consumers who lack control over this process.2 , 3 Against this back-
drop, government regulators have proposed and enacted data privacy regulation that empowers
consumers to have more control over the data that they generate. e European Union was the
  rst to enact such legislation - the General Data Protection Regulation - which has served as a
blueprint for privacy legislation in California, Vermont, Brazil, India, Chile, and New Zealand.4
However, we lack empirical evidence on the e ectiveness and broader impact of such regula-
tion. Such evidence is critical not only for guiding the design of upcoming regulation, but also to
understand fundamental questions in the economics of privacy.
        is paper empirically studies the e ects of the EU's General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR), in particular, its requirement that consumers be allowed to make an informed, speci c,
and unambiguous consent to the processing of their data. e consent requirement constitutes the
front-line of privacy protection for consumers and potentially threatens the data-driven business
model of rms. e consent option provides a simple but e ective means of protecting privacy:
by denying consent, a consumer can block a website from collecting personal data and sharing
it with third-party a liates. At the same time, consent denial inhibits rms from tracking con-
sumers across time and across websites, thereby building historical pro les of consumers. Hence,
consumers exercising their consent right can signi cantly hamper these rms' ability to learn and
predict consumer behavior and target their services and advertising accordingly.
    Our investigation focuses on three broad questions. First, to what extent do consumers exercise
    1
       Several popular press outlets have gone as far as stating that "data is the new oil" meaning that the
world's most valuable resource is now data, not oil (e.g.            e world's most valuable resource is no longer
oil, but data https://www.economist.com/leaders/2017/05/06/the-worlds-most-valuable-resource-
is-no-longer-oil-but-data. Retrieved on January 9th, 2020.).
     2
         ere have been many but among the most prominent are the Cambridge Analytica and Equifax data breaches.
Cambridge Analytica harvested the personal data of millions of people's Facebook pro les without their consent
and used it for political advertising purposes. e Equifax data breach exposed the names, dates of birth, and social
security numbers of 147 million individuals.
     3
       We Hate Data Collection.       at Doesn't Mean We Can Stop it. https://www.nytimes.com/2019/11/15/
opinion/privacy-facebook-pew-survey.html. Retrieved on January 3rd, 2020.
     4
       While such regulation is not entirely novel, the scope and robustness of previous regulation pales in comparison
to that of GDPR. Several states in the United States and countries around the world are debating and implementing
their own privacy regulations with similar scope and stipulations as GDPR. For more information on the speci cs
of the various laws and how they relate to GDPR: 6 New Privacy Laws Around e Globe You Should Pay A ention
To. https://piwik.pro/blog/privacy-laws-around-globe/. Retrieved on March 10th, 2020.


                                                          1
the consent right enabled by GDPR? Anecdotal and survey evidence suggests that consumers
value their privacy, but are they willing to take action to protect it when presented with a simple
e ective means? Or, do they simply ignore the option and give away their personal data even at
li le cost?5 We do not yet have clear empirical answers to these questions.
    Second, how does GDPR change the composition of consumers observed by rms? Even prior to
GDPR, consumers were able to protect their privacy by utilizing browser-based privacy protection
means. However, utilizing these privacy means would result in the underlying data still being
sent to the website, but it would be associated with di erent identi ers so that the website could
not link this data to the same consumer.         ese "spurious" consumer footprints are di cult to
distinguish from genuine consumer footprints le by consumers who do not adopt these privacy
means. is process creates noise in the data observed by rms that could make it di cult for
them to track consumers and predict their behavior. Under the GDPR regime, however, the same
consumers may simply opt out, in which case they do not leave any footprints, and this could
in principle make the remaining consumers more easily trackable and identi able.             is raises
an interesting question of externalities created by privacy tools on the other consumers and for
the rms. To the best of our knowledge, these forms of privacy externalities not only di er from
those recognized in the theoretical literature (Choi, Jeon and Kim, 2019; Acemoglu et al., 2019;
Bergemann, Bona i and Gan, 2019) but more importantly have never been empirically identi ed.
       ird, how does the GDPR privacy protection impact rms that rely crucially on consumer data?
Speci cally, how does consumer opt out a ect rms' abilities to learn and predict consumer be-
havior and to provide targeted advertising? And how do advertisers react to such a change? Do
they bid more or less for reaching consumers made available for them as a result? Evidently, opt
outs will reduce the scale of data available to rms which may lead to rms' prediction capabili-
ties to su er as result. But at the same time, the possible change in the composition of consumers
could presumably change the quality of data. If the remaining consumers are more easily tracked
and a ributed to purchase, this could possibly increase the value of consumers to advertisers and
thus can make up for the possible loss in scale.
    To answer these questions, we use the data provided by an anonymous intermediary that
operates in more than 40 countries and contracts with many of the largest online travel agencies
and travel meta-search engines. e dataset is uniquely suited for the current inquiries in several
respects. An integral part of the intermediary's business is to predict the likelihood of purchase of
each consumer upon every visit, based on the identi able history of past behavior, which it uses
to personalize the experience of consumers on the website. e data links consumers' behavior
    5
     A prevalent theme in the economics of privacy literature consistently nds a privacy paradox - the apparent
inconsistency between individual's strong stated preferences for privacy and their willingness to give away personal
information at li le cost (Acquisti, Taylor and Wagman, 2016). is directly implies that a natural hypothesis is that
consumers may ask legislators for such privacy means but, ultimately, make li le use of them.


                                                         2
across time and across websites using cookies (set by the intermediary), small les stored a ached
to a consumer's web browser that allow the intermediary to identify consumers. We observe (in
anonymized and aggregated form) the same rich consumer information as the intermediary and
link them just as the intermediary can. If a consumer does not consent to data storage using GDPR
opt-out, then it immediately implies that certain types of cookies cannot be stored, thereby shut-
ting the intermediary out. We can directly infer consumer privacy choices from the number of
consumer visits as seen by this (third-party) intermediary and the change in composition, nec-
essary to answer the rst two questions. We also observe revenues from keyword-based online
advertising, and observe the output of a proprietary machine learning algorithm that predicts the
purchase likelihood, which will help us to address the third question.
    Our empirical design exploits the fact that the intermediary contracts with many di erent
platforms all around the world who were di erentially impacted by the introduction of GDPR.
Furthermore, the machine learning algorithm is trained and employed separately for each online
travel website. is means that changes in data on one website, due to GDPR or other factors, do
not impact the performance of the algorithm on other websites. We exploit these features of our
data and the geographic reach of GDPR to utilize a di erence-in-di erences design for several
outcome variables across major European countries and other countries where GDPR was not
implemented.
    We nd that GDPR resulted in approximately a 12.5% reduction in total cookies, which pro-
vides evidence that consumers are making use of the increased opt-out capabilities mandated by
GDPR. However, we nd that the remaining set of consumers who do not opt out are more per-
sistently trackable. We de ne trackability as the fraction of consumers whose identi er a website
repeatedly observes in its data over some time period. We nd that trackability has increased by
8% under GDPR.
    We explore the mechanisms behind the increased trackability and argue that the most plausi-
ble explanation is that the individuals who make use of GDPR opt-out are primarily substituting
away from other browser-based privacy means, such as cookie blockers, cookie deletion, and pri-
vate browsing. However, GDPR opt-out and these other privacy means lead to a very di erent
data generating process. Browser-provided privacy means assign a new ID to a consumer, thus
making her appear as a new user, every time she visits the site. is results in many arti cially
short-lived consumers whereas GDPR privacy means simply remove these individuals from the
data. As a result, those consumers that remain in the data a er the implementation of GDPR are
more persistently identi able. We illustrate this di erence in Figure 2.
    Given this change in consumer composition, we explore the extent to which this a ects ad-
vertising revenues. In our se ing the revenues that we observe come from keyword-based adver-
tising and, further, when consumers opt-out they are no longer exposed to advertisements. We


                                                3
  nd that there is an immediate drop in the total number of advertisements clicked and a corre-
sponding immediate decline in revenue. Over time, though, advertisers on average increase their
bids for the remaining consumers, leading to a smaller overall decline in revenue. is indicates
that the remaining set of consumers are higher value consumers compared to the pre-GDPR set
of consumers. One possible mechanism for this is that the increased identi ability of consumers
allows for advertisers to be er a ribute purchases to advertisements than before. is increased
a ribution ability leads to an increase in perceived overall value of consumers by advertisers.
    Finally, we study the e ect that GDPR had on the intermediary's ability to predict consumer
behavior. In particular, we study the performance of the classi er used by the intermediary, which
is a crucial element of its business. e classi er provides a prediction of the probability that a
consumer will purchase on the website where she is currently searching. We nd that there is
evidence that the classi er did not immediately adjust to the post-GDPR distribution. However,
despite this, we still nd that the ability of the classi er to separate between purchasers and
non-purchasers did not signi cantly worsen a er GDPR and that, if anything, the changes to the
data observed by the intermediary should lead to improvement in its ability to separate between
purchasers and non-purchasers.


Related Work
   e protection of consumer privacy and its consequences has been studied by economists, legal
scholars, and computer scientists for several decades. We contribute to three strands of literature
in the economics of privacy.

Consequences of Data Privacy Regulation: To the best of our knowledge Goldberg, Johnson
and Shriver (2019) is the rst paper to examine the economic impact of GDPR on European web-
sites. ey similarly adopt a di erence-in-di erences approach to study the e ect of GDPR on the
tra c and purchase volume of European websites. However, the scope of our data allows us to tie
together the consequences of the opt out decisions of individuals with consumer identi ability,
advertising revenues, and e ectiveness of prediction technologies. is allows us to go beyond
direct measurement of the impact of GDPR and further understand the externalities associated
with individual privacy decisions and their indirect economic impact.
    Several other papers have studied the impact of the GDPR in other domains. Jia, Jin and
Wagman (2018) show that GDPR had adverse impacts on venture capital investment. Zhuo et al.
(2019) studies the impact of GDPR on Internet connection agreements. Johnson and Shriver (2019)
studies changes in market concentration of web technology vendors as a result of GDPR. Degeling
et al. (2018) show that a signi cant number of websites responded to GDPR by updating their
privacy policy statements and adding cookie consent, as was mandated by the policy. Utz et al.

                                                4
(2019) showed that there was heterogeneity in the implementation of GDPR across websites that
led to meaningful di erences in whether consumers consented to data collection.
    Further, several other papers study the e ectiveness of previous data privacy regulations on
online advertising. e rst is the EU's 2009 ePrivacy Directive, also known as the Cookie Law, a
previous European regulation aimed at increasing the transparency and control of consumer data.
Goldfarb and Tucker (2011) use a survey-based methodology to study the e ectiveness of online
advertising in the EU a er this law and nd that advertising e ectiveness dropped. e second
is the self-regulated Ad-Choices program that allowed consumers to opt out of behavioral online
advertising. Individuals who opt out under this program still see advertisements, but they are no
longer targeted based on their personal histories. Johnson, Shriver and Du (2020) examine this
policy and nd that consumers that opt out generate 52% less revenue compared to consumers
that do not, but that only less than a quarter of a percent of advertising impressions are from opt
out consumers. Goldfarb and Tucker (2012a) argue that privacy regulations may hamper data-
based innovation across a number of industries, including targeted advertising. Finally, Johnson
(2013) estimates a structural model of advertising auctions and explores the e ect of di erent
hypothetical opt-in and opt-out data consent policies through counterfactual calculations. He
  nds that advertisement revenue would drop by 34.6% under an opt-in policy and by 3.9% under
an opt-out policy.

Information Externalities: An important consequence of a consumer's privacy decision is the
informational externality generated by that decision, as information revealed by one consumer
can be used to predict the behavior of another consumer.6 , 7 Several recent theoretical studies ar-
gue how such externalities can lead to the underpricing of data, and results in socially excessive
data collection (Fair eld and Engel, 2015; Choi, Jeon and Kim, 2019; Acemoglu et al., 2019; Berge-
mann, Bona i and Gan, 2019; Liang and Madsen, 2019). Braghieri (2019) theoretically studies how
privacy choices by consumers can have pecuniary externalities on other consumers by a ecting
  rms' incentives for price discrimination. e current paper identi es a novel form of informa-
tional externalities. While the existing research focuses on how a consumer's decision to reveal
     6
       Implicit in the study of the e ect on consumer predictability is the notion that privacy is not simply about
the revelation of a consumer's information but also the ability of a rm to predict the behavior of a consumer.
   e idea that privacy is additionally a statistical notion is a common thread in the literature on di erential privacy
(Dwork, 2011; Dwork, Roth et al., 2014). Di erential privacy studies the marginal value of an individual's data for the
accuracy of a statistical query and gives a mathematical framework for trading o the privacy loss of an individual
revealing her information and the marginal change in the accuracy of a statistical query. For a discussion of the
economic mechanisms at play in di erential privacy based methods, see Abowd and Schmu e (2019). While the
intuition behind di erential privacy is similar to what we study, we do not explore the design of algorithmic privacy
tools. Rather, we empirically document the statistical consequences of privacy choices made by individuals on the
predictability of others.
     7
         ere is also an emerging, broadly related, literature that studies implications of a more data-driven economy
(Chiou and Tucker, 2017; Kehoe, Larsen and Pastorino, 2018; Aridor et al., 2019; Bajari et al., 2019)


                                                          5
her private data can predict the behavior of, and thus can in ict externalities on, those who do not
reveal their data, we recognize externalites that run in the opposite direction. Namely, we show
that the decision by a privacy-concerned consumer to switch from obfuscation to a more e ective
GDPR-enabled opt-out may increase the trackability of, and thus exert extenalities on, the opt-in
consumers who choose to reveal their data. More importantly, to the best of our knowledge, this
is the rst paper that identi es privacy externalities empirically.

Preferences for Privacy: e broader literature on the economics of privacy, recently surveyed
in Acquisti, Taylor and Wagman (2016), has studied the privacy preferences of individuals. One
prevalent research strand is understanding the privacy paradox, which is the apparent dispar-
ity between stated and revealed preference for privacy. In particular, consumers state a strong
preference for privacy, but are willing to give up their personal information for small incentives
(Berendt, G¨unther and Spiekermann, 2005; Norberg, Horne and Horne, 2007; Athey, Catalini and
Tucker, 2017). Acquisti, John and Loewenstein (2013) use a eld experiment to evaluate indi-
vidual preferences for privacy and nd evidence of context-dependence in how individuals value
privacy. Using stated preferences via a survey Goldfarb and Tucker (2012b) show that consumer's
privacy concerns have been increasing over time. Lin (2019) shows via a lab experiment that con-
sumer privacy preferences can be broken down into instrumental and non-instrumental compo-
nents. Our study contributes to this literature by analyzing consumer privacy choices made in
a consequential se ing, instead of only looking at stated preferences. We nd that a signi cant
fraction of consumers utilize the privacy means provided by GDPR, giving suggestive evidence
that consumers do value their privacy in consequential se ings and not only say that they do.
       e paper is structured as follows. Section 2 overviews the relevant details from European
privacy law and consumer tracking technology. Section 3 describes the data and empirical strat-
egy that is used for this study. Section 4 provides evidence on the degree to which consumers
make use of the privacy tools provided by GDPR. Sections 5 and 6 analyze the extent to which
this a ects online advertising revenues and prediction, respectively. Section 7 concludes.


2    Institutional Details
In this section we discuss European privacy laws and the relevant details of the General Data
Protection Regulation. We will then describe how websites track consumers online and how
GDPR can a ect such tracking.




                                                 6
2.1     European Data Privacy Regulation
GDPR was adopted by the European Parliament in April 2016. Companies were expected to
comply with the new regulations by May 25th, 2018.8 It required substantial changes in how
  rms store and process consumer data. Firms are required to be more explicit about their data
retention policy, obligating them to justify the length of time that they retain information on
consumers and delete any data that is no longer used for its original purposes. Furthermore,
it required rms to increase the transparency around consumer data collection and to provide
consumers with additional means to control the storage of personal data.
       e primary component of GDPR that we focus on is the new data processing consent re-
quirement. Under the regulation rms need informed, speci c, and unambiguous consent from
consumers in order to process their personal data, which requires consumers to explicitly opt
into data collection. Recital 32 of the regulation spells out what consent means:

        Consent should be given by a clear a rmative act establishing a freely given, speci c,
        informed and unambiguous indication of the data subject's agreement to the processing
        of personal data relating to him or her, such as by a wri en statement, including by
        electronic means, or an oral statement. is could include ticking a box when visiting an
        internet website, choosing technical se ings for information society services or another
        statement or conduct which clearly indicates in this context the data subject's accep-
        tance of the proposed processing of his or her personal data. Silence, pre-ticked boxes or
        inactivity should not therefore constitute consent.

    Panel (a) of Figure 1 shows an example of a post-GDPR cookie policy from the BBC, a news
organization based in the United Kingdom, and panel (b) of Figure 1 shows a cookie policy of
a rm in the United States. e former highlights the speci cations of the law, specifying what
type of cookies are stored for what purposes and giving consumers the opportunity to opt out
from them individually.      e la er has no explicit option for the consumers to opt out of data
collection. Instead, it directs consumers to use browser-based privacy means, which allow to
control the website's cookies.
       e consent requirement is an important component of the law, though there were many
other stipulations of the law that enhanced consumer privacy protection and required substantial
changes by rms in order to be in compliance. e nes for non-compliance with the legislation
are large - the maximum of 20 million, or 4% of total global annual sales for the preceding
    8
     GDPR was intended to overhaul and replace the Data Protection Directive which was enacted in 1995. GDPR
further complements the other major European Privacy Regulation, e Privacy and Electronic Communications
Directive, also known as the "Cookie Law". Relative to this law, GDPR strengthened the territorial scope to include
data generated by EU consumers, no ma er the location of the rm processing the data, and strengthened the degree
of rm transparency and stipulations on consumer consent.

                                                        7
                                Figure 1: Example Consent Noti cations
                                        (a) Post-GDPR consent dialog




                                     (b) Standard opt-out on US websites




Notes: e top panel shows a GDPR opt in consent dialog for the BBC. e dialog is explicit about the data that the
website collects and requires the consumer to opt into all non-essential data collection. Each separate purpose of
data processing is consented to individually. e bo om panel shows an "opt out" dialog for a website in the US that
is not required to be GDPR compliant. e website directs consumers to manage their browser cookies and does not
have any direct options for the consumer to opt out of data collection.



 nancial year - giving strong incentives for rms to comply with the regulation. According to
PricewaterhouseCoopers, many rms are spending millions of dollars in order to comply with
the regulation.9 However, despite this observation, there was still considerable non-compliance
around the onset of the law and in the next section we will discuss how this non-compliance
a ects the interpretation of our estimates.
    9
        Pulse Survey: GDPR budgets top $10 million for 40% of surveyed companies.        https://www.pwc.com/
us/en/services/consulting/library/general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr-budgets.html.                       Re-
trieved on December 15th, 2019.




                                                        8
2.2     Consumer-Tracking Technology
   e primary consumer tracking method that we focus on in this study are web cookies.10 Cookies
are small text les that are placed on consumer's computers or mobile phones. e a achment of
a cookie gives websites, in principle, a persistent identi er. As long as the same cookie persists,
they can a ribute di erent sessions to the same consumer and, as a result, track them across time
and di erent websites. However, privacy-conscious consumers can make use of various privacy
means to control the degree of persistence of this identi er. e primary means available to them
are browser-based tools, such as manually deletion of cookies, "private browsing" mode,11 or
cookie blockers.12    ese browser-based privacy means regenerate the cookie identi er but the
data that is generated on the website is still sent and stored.     e data is a ributed to di erent
consumers, even though they originate from the same consumer.
       e GDPR opt-in rule provides another way for consumers to protect their privacy. e stip-
ulations of GDPR, properly implemented and utilized by consumers, arguably provide a stronger
protection than the aforementioned means since they block all non-essential information from
being sent to the third-party website.13 In our context, consumers should always have the op-
tion to opt out of having their data sent to the intermediary since it provides a non-essential,
third-party service.
    An important distinction for our purposes is, therefore, that browser-based privacy means do
not prevent a consumer's data from being sent to the website and only give consumers control
over the website's identi er. e consent requirement of GDPR goes one step beyond that and
enables consumers to deny any data to be sent to the website. As a result, substitution between
these two can lead to a di erent data generating process. Browser-based privacy means lead
to many arti cially short consumer histories, whereas GDPR opt-out simply removes the data
completely.14
   10
       Common alternatives are other forms of storage in the browser as well as device ngerprinting, which use
Internet Protocol (IP) addresses combined with device speci c information to identify individuals. However, these
are less commonly utilized and importantly not utilized by the intermediary.
    11
       Private browsing modes create "sandbox" browser environments where cookies are only set and used for the
duration of the private browsing session. As a result, the website cannot link together data from the same consumer
both before and a er the private browsing section.
    12
           ere also exist industry opt-out services, such as the Ad Choices program, but these are relatively hard to
use and have li le usage (Johnson, Shriver and Du, 2020). Survey-based evidence informs us that the most utilized
privacy means by consumers is manual cookie deletion (Boerman, Kruikemeier and Zuiderveen Borgesius, 2018)
    13
       It is important to note that GDPR does not prevent "essential" information from being sent to a website. For
instance, the ability to store consumer session cookies that allow them to provide a consistent consumer experience
for the consumer may be considered "essential" information. e intermediary that we partner with, however, is a
third-party service that provides complementary services to the primary functioning of the websites and so is not
an "essential" service on any website where we observe data. As a result, any usage of GDPR opt-out shuts out data
from being sent to the intermediary.
    14
       It's important to point out that consumers can still make use of both privacy means and do not necessarily
need to substitute from exclusively using browser-based privacy means towards exclusively using GDPR-provided


                                                         9
           Figure 2: Illustration of E ects of Di erent Privacy Means on Data Observed

                                  Full Visibility       Obfuscation            GDPR
          = Purchase          t                     t                  t
          = No Purchase            1         2          1        2         1          2
                Identifier
                   1

                     2

                     3

                     4                                                                    Data from privacy
                                                                                          conscious consumer
                     5

Notes: e le most column displays the identi er observed by the intermediary. e le panel represents the sce-
nario where the behavior of each consumer is fully observable.      e middle panel shows how, before GDPR, the
privacy conscious consumer 4 has her identi er partitioned into two separate identi ers from the perspective of the
intermediary. e right panel shows how, under GDPR, the data of the privacy conscious consumer, is not directly
sent to the intermediary.




      is is illustrated in Figure 2.     e gure shows the data that is generated by four di erent
consumers. "Full Visibility Baseline" shows a hypothetical scenario where each of the four con-
sumers is fully identi able. ey generate spells of browsing sessions where each dot corresponds
to one session and the color of the dot indicates whether or not the consumer purchased a good
on the website as a result of that search. Suppose that only consumer four is privacy-conscious.
Before GDPR, consumer four can protect her privacy by deleting her cookies and regenerating
her identi er. is is illustrated in the second panel of the gure where the two sessions for this
consumer are associated with two separate identi ers from the perspective of the intermediary.
However, the third panel shows that, when GDPR opt-out is available, this consumer opts out
and their data completely disappears.
      e gure also illustrates how the di erent data scenarios impact consumer predictability
and how the privacy choices of individuals lead to informational externalities. e intermediary's
objective is to predict the probability that an identi er will purchase the next time that she appears
on the website.       e intermediary has available the full history associated with the identi er
so that she can design a prediction rule that depends on how many times this identi er has
appeared on the website and how o en this has resulted in purchase. Under full visibility, each
consumer has a distinct search and purchase history so that the intermediary gets a distinct
privacy means. However, from the perspective of the intermediary and websites in general, once a consumer utilizes
GDPR opt-out then, since they no longer see any data from this consumer, the browser-based privacy means become
irrelevant. As a result, from their perspective, it appears as a direct substitution.


                                                            10
signal and can adjust its prediction rule accordingly. However, under obfuscation, consumer four
deletes her cookies and gets partitioned into two separate identi ers. Now the consumer history
associated with identi er 4 is identical to that of identi er 1 and the consumer history associated
with identi er 5 is identical to that of identi er 2. us, the ability of the intermediary to predict
the behavior of consumers 1 and 2 is a ected by the privacy protection employed by consumer
4 as, even though their histories are not the same, they appear so to the intermediary. Under
GDPR, on the other hand, consumer 4's data is not observed at all. While this leads to a loss
in the amount of data, it removes the externality that consumer 4 imposed on consumer 1 and
2 that occurred under obfuscation and improves the ability of the intermediary to predict their
behavior.


3     Data and Empirical Strategy
We obtained access to a new and comprehensive dataset from an anonymous intermediary that
records the entirety of consumer search queries and purchases across most major online travel
agencies (OTAs) in the United States and Europe as well as most prominent travel meta-search
engines from January 1st, 2018 until July 31st, 2018. We observe consumer searches, online ad-
vertising, the intermediary's prediction of consumer behavior, and consumer purchases.


3.1    Data Description
   e disaggregated data contains each search query and purchase made on these platforms as well
as the associated advertising auction for each query. In a single search query the data contains: the
identi er of the consumer, the time of the query, the details of the query (i.e. travel information),
an identi er for the platform, the browser, the operating system, and the estimated probability
of purchase on the website according to the predictive machine learning algorithm employed by
the intermediary. For a subset of the websites, we observe purchase information containing the
consumer identi er and time of purchase.
    Each query can trigger an advertising auction. In that case, the data contains: the number of
bidders in the auction, the values of the winning bids, and an identi er for the winning bidders.
Furthermore, if a consumer clicks on the resulting advertisement, the click itself and the resulting
transfer between the advertiser and the intermediary are recorded.
    Our analysis utilizes an aggregation of this dataset by week, operating system, web browser,
website identi er, and country. e data was aggregated on a weekly level to remove unimportant
day-of-the-week uctuations. Further, the GDPR compliance date was May 25th, 2018, which was
on a Friday and, as a result, our data was aggregated on a Friday-to-Friday level. Note that the


                                                 11
GDPR compliance date corresponds to the beginning of the 22nd week in the year according to
our labeling.15


3.2     Empirical Strategy
To understand the causal e ect of GDPR we rely on a di erence-in-di erences design that exploits
the geographic reach of the EU GDPR regulation.          e regulation stipulates that websites that
transact with EU consumers were required to ask consumers for explicit consent to use their
data through an opt-in procedure, while those who processed non-EU consumers data were not
obligated to do so. Even though many online travel companies transact with consumers in several
countries around the world this speci cation works well in our se ing since it is common for
online travel websites to have separate, country-speci c, versions of their websites and only the
websites intended for EU countries are made GDPR compliant.
    Our analysis focuses on the e ect of the overall policy and not the e ect of speci c implemen-
tations of the policy. us, the treatment date of the policy corresponds to the GDPR compliance
date, which was May 25th, 2018 (or the beginning of week 22). Our treatment group consists of
nearly the universe of travel websites in major EU countries (at the time): Italy, the United King-
dom, France, Germany, and Spain. Our control group consists of nearly the universe of travel
platforms in the United States, Canada, and Russia.         ese countries were chosen as controls
since EU laws do not directly apply to them, but their seasonal travel pa erns are similar to those
in the EU countries as a result of similar weather and vacation pa erns throughout the year.
    Our primary regression speci cation is the following for the outcome variables of interest
where c denotes country, j denotes the website, o denotes operating system, b denotes web
browser, p denotes product type (hotels or ights), and t denotes the week in the year:

               ytcjobp = t + jc + c + j + o + b + p +  (EUj × af ter) +                          tcjobp            (1)

   EUj denotes a website subject to the regulation, af ter denotes whether the current week is
a er the GDPR compliance date (i.e. week 22 or later), t denotes time xed e ects, jc denotes
country-speci c website xed e ects, c denote country xed-e ects, j denotes website xed
e ects, p denotes product type xed e ects, o denotes operating system xed e ects, and b
denotes browser xed e ects. Our standard errors are clustered at the website-country level.
   In order to validate parallel trends and to understand the persistence of the treatment e ect,
   15
      Note that we further enforce a balanced panel by dropping any observation that has zero logged searches in
any period during our sample period. We do this in order to ensure that our results are not biased from entry / exit of
websites into our data during the sample period, which would bias our estimates. To our knowledge, this entry and
exit is usually a result of varying contractual relations between the intermediary and the websites and so is largely
orthogonal to our variables of interest.


                                                          12
we further utilize a regression speci cation that captures the potentially time-varying nature of
the treatment:
                                                                            ¯
                                                                            T
                   ytcjobp = t + jc + c + j + o + b + p +                         k EUj +    tcjobp               (2)
                                                                           k =T
                                                                              ¯

       e variable de nitions are the same as before and we similarly cluster our standard errors
at the website-country level.
    We run our regressions over the time period between weeks 16 and 29 of 2018, which is
between April 13th and July 20th. e GDPR compliance date aligns with the beginning of week
22. Further, week 20 is consistently the baseline week in our regressions since there are some
  rms that began to implement GDPR near the end of week 21 and so week 20 is the last week
where there should be no direct impact from GDPR as a result of website implementation.16
    Our empirical strategy centers around the o cial GDPR implementation date. However, each
website had to individually implement the changes stipulated by GDPR and there is evidence that
there was considerable heterogeneity in compliance among rms. Further, even within the subset
of rms that complied with the regulation, the degree to which consumers responded varied
considerably based on the nature of implementation (Utz et al., 2019). As a result, we would want
to include information on the timing and degree of implementation across the various websites
in our sample. However, due to technical limitations, we cannot directly observe the timing and
degree of GDPR implementation during the time period we study.17
       us, any e ects that we observe with our empirical speci cation are a combination of the
explicit consequences as a result of implementing the stipulations of GDPR for the subset of
websites that implemented it and any changes in advertiser and consumer behavior in response to
the increased saliency of privacy considerations on the Internet.18 us, since we do not observe
the full extent of non-compliance, our estimates can be viewed as a lower bound on the true
impact of the policy had websites all fully complied with it.
   16
       Our dataset ends on July 31st, 2018, which is a Tuesday, and an important measure that we want to track is
the amount of consumer persistence on a weekly level, which looks at the fraction of observed cookies that remain
observable in the data a er some number of weeks. Since this measure requires a complete week of data to compute
properly, we drop the incomplete week at the end of July as well as the full last week in July so that we can have
consistency between the regressions on aggregate consumer response and those on consumer persistence.
    17
       We a empted to utilize tools such as the Wayback Machine, which takes snapshots of websites across the entire
Internet frequently. However, the coverage of relevant websites on the Wayback Machine is spo y and, given that
many of the consent dialogs for GDPR consent are dynamically generated, are not always picked up by the snapshot
taken of the website.
    18
       It would be interesting to isolate the e ects of each possible channel, though our data limitations prohibit us
from doing so. We were able to verify that several websites in our sample implemented GDPR consent guidelines
around the time of the policy and that several websites in our sample did not, though there are a considerable number
for which we are uncertain when they implemented the policy.



                                                         13
4        Consumer Response to GDPR
In this section we quantify the extent to which consumers utilize the GDPR-mandated ability to
opt out. We measure how GDPR opt-out impacts the total number of cookies and searches ob-
served by the intermediary. We then explore whether there were any changes in the composition
of the remaining, opted-in consumers.


4.1      Opt-Out Usage
Recall that we do not directly observe opt-out in our dataset because consumers who opt out are
no longer part of our dataset. As a result, at time t, the total number of consumers on a website
j is given by the true number of consumers subtracted by the number of consumers who have
opted out.

                                        OBS    T RU E    OP T -OU T
                                       Ujt  = Ujt     - Ujt

In the control group, Ujt OP T -OU T
                                     = 0, whereas post-GDPR Ujt   OP T -OU T
                                                                              0. We assume parallel
                                                                                     OP T -OU T 19 , 20
trends in UjtT RU E
                    , which means that any change in Ujt OBS
                                                              allows us to identify Ujt        .
    Figure 3 displays the total unique cookies over our sample period for a single multi-national
website close to the implementation date and shows a clear drop at the onset of GDPR. Columns
(1) and (2) of Table 1 report the result of regression (1) with total number of observed unique
cookies as the outcome variable. We consider the speci cation in both levels and logs. e es-
timates show that, in aggregate, GDPR reduced the total number of unique cookies by around
12.5%.
    It is important to note that this result does not imply that 12.5% of consumers made use of the
opt-out features. is is because the unit of observation is a cookie, rather than a consumer. A
single consumer can appear under multiple cookie identi ers if they make use of the aforemen-
tioned browser-based privacy means. Nonetheless, the results point to a relatively large usage of
the opt-out features by consumers.

    19
       As noted in Goldberg, Johnson and Shriver (2019), another possible complication is that this could be a result
of rms changing the type of data that they send to third party services. To our knowledge there is no change in
the data the websites send to the intermediary as a result of GDPR since the intermediary and the data are crucial
for generating advertising revenue for these websites. Further, if a website decided to stop using the intermediary
altogether then, as noted previously, they would not be part of our sample.
    20
       Another possible confounding factor is the sales activity of the intermediary. For instance, it's possible for
the intermediary to sell additional advertising units to a website that can appear on pages of the website where the
intermediary previously was not tracking before. If there was a di erential e ect from this around the date of the
treatment then this could systematically bias the number of unique cookies and searches that we observe. To test the
plausibility of this hypothesis, we run our di erence-in-di erences speci cation with these outcome variables with
the results in Table 5 showing that there was no signi cant change. us, we rule out this as a possible explanation.


                                                         14
          Figure 3: Total Number of Unique Cookies for a Single Multi-National Website.

                                                     0.4




                                                     0.2        q
                                                                     q
                                                           q




                            Total Users Deviation
                                                                     q
                                                                           q
                                                                     q
                                                           q    q          q
                                                     0.0   q    q
                                                                q               q
                                                           q         q
                                                                     q     q
                                                                           q         q                                    q
                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                     q                                         q
                                                           q                                                     q
                                                                                     q
                                                    -0.2                                                   q
                                                                                     q
                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                      q   q    q
                                                                                     q                     q              q
                                                                                                      q               q        q
                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                 q               q    q   q    q
                                                                                           q          q    q              q
                                                                                           q     q               q
                                                                                                                 q
                                                    -0.4                                   q
                                                                                                 q    q
                                                                                           q
                                                                                                 q         q     q
                                                                                           q


                                                    -0.6
                                                           16   17   18    19   20   21    22   23    24   25   26   27   28   29
                                                                                     Week of Year
                                                                          Website Location       q   EU     non-EU

Notes: A single point on the graph represents the total number of unique cookies for a single country.                                         e reported
value on the y-axis is percent deviation relative to week 20, or UtU
                                                                   -Ut=20
                                                                    t=20
                                                                          t = 20




                Table 1: Di erence-in-Di erences Estimates for Cookies and Searches

                                                                         (1)      (2)                                (3)               (4)
                                                                     log(Unique Unique                          log(Recorded        Recorded
                                                                      Cookies) Cookies                            Searches)         Searches
            DiD Coe cient                                                 -0.125               -1378.1               -0.107         -9618.3
                                                                           (-2.43)              (-1.71)              (-1.87)         (-2.24)
            Product Type Controls
            OS + Browser Controls
            Week FE
            Website × Country FE
            Observations                                                   63840                63840                63840            63840
             
                p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
            Notes: t-statistics are reported in parentheses.      e standard errors for every regression
            are clustered at the website-country level. We aggregate every dependent variable to the
            website-country-product type-week level between weeks 16 and 29, including both weeks
            16 and 29 (April 13th - July 20th).     e dependent variables in the regression reported in
            the rst and second column are the log and overall level of the number of unique cookies
            observed. e dependent variables in the regression reported in the third and fourth column
            are the log and overall level of the number of total recorded searches.



                                                                                          15
    Another measure of consumer response is the total number of searches that is recorded by the
intermediary. We re-run the same speci cation with recorded searches as the dependent variable
and report the results in columns (3) and (4) of Table 1. We nd that there's a 10.7% drop in the
overall recorded searches which is qualitatively consistent with the e ect size of the speci cation
using the number of unique cookies.
    In order to demonstrate the validity of the di erence-in-di erences estimates for both of these
outcome variables, we provide evidence that the parallel trends assumption holds in our se ing
by estimating the time-varying treatment speci cation (2). Figure 8 shows the resulting treatment
e ect over time and points to parallel trends being satis ed as well as a consistent treatment e ect
size over our sample period.


4.2     Persistence of Identi er
A natural question is whether there were any changes in the composition of the remaining con-
sumers who did not opt out. Our primary measure for investigating this is by tracking the aver-
age persistence of a consumer identi er before and a er GDPR. We de ne an identi er persistence
measure that tracks how o en cookies that we see in a given week return a er k weeks, where
we explore di erent values for k (1,2,3, and 4 weeks). Let Cjt be the set of cookies seen in week
t on website j , the measure is then given by:

                                                             |Cj,t  Cj,t+k |
                                      persistencekt =
                                                                  |Cj,t |

    In Figure 4 we set k = 1 and display the persistence measure for a single multi-national
website with country-speci c versions of the website over time. At the onset of GDPR there is a
clear increase in persistence on the EU-based websites, but no noticeable di erence in the non-
EU websites. We further validate this increase by running our baseline di erence-in-di erences
speci cation using the persistence outcome variable for k  {1, 2, 3, 4}.21




   21
    Note that in order to run speci cation (1) we drop the last 4 weeks of our sample so that we are utilizing the
same sample as we vary k . However, our results are qualitatively robust to including these weeks when the data for
them is available.


                                                        16
                Figure 4: One Week Persistence for a Single Multi-National Website



                                                                                         q
                                                                                              q

                                                                                                    q    q    q
                                                    0.8                                                                      q
                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                              q



                            Persistence Deviation
                                                                                              q
                                                                                                         q              q
                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                              q               q     q
                                                                                         q          q
                                                                                                    q                   q
                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                         q    q     q        q
                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                              q
                                                                                              q     q    q
                                                    0.4        q                         q
                                                                                                         q                   q
                                                                                                                             q
                                                          q                              q          q
                                                                    q
                                                          q    q          q
                                                               q    q     q                                             q
                                                                                    q
                                                          q         q
                                                               q          q
                                                          q         q
                                                               q    q     q         q
                                                    0.0                        q



                                                                                    q
                                                                                    q
                                                                                    q


                                                          16   17   18    19   20   21   22   23    24   25   26   27   28   29
                                                                                    Week of Year
                                                                         Website Location     q    EU    non-EU

Notes: A single point on the graph represents the one week persistence fraction for a single country. e reported
                                                                 persistence1,t -persistence1,t=20
value on the y-axis is percent deviation relative to week 20, or         persistence1,t=20         t = 20




                   Table 2: Di erence-in-Di erences Estimates for Consumer Persistence

                                                                        (1)                  (2)                  (3)                 (4)
                                                                      1 Week              2 Weeks              3 Weeks             4 Weeks
                                                                    Persistence          Persistence          Persistence         Persistence
              DiD Coe cient                                              0.00308          0.00416             0.00382              0.00505
                                                                           (1.96)            (3.40)              (3.10)               (3.50)
              Product Type Controls
              OS + Browser Controls
              Week FE
              Website × Country FE
              Observations                                                50160               50160                50160             50160
               
                  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
               Notes: t-statistics are reported in parentheses.   e standard errors for every regression are
              clustered at the website-country level. We aggregate every dependent variable to the website-
              country-product type-week level between weeks 16 and 26, including both weeks 16 and 26
              (April 13th - June 29th). e dependent variables in the regression are the consumer persistence
              measures for k = 1, 2, 3, 4, respectively.




                                                                                         17
    Table 2 shows the results of this regression, which indicate that there is a statistically signi -
cant and meaningful increase in consumer persistence and that this e ect gets more pronounced
as k increases.22 We further run the time-varying treatment speci cation (2) in order to validate
that parallel trends holds and to understand the consistency of the e ect over time. Figure 9
shows that while for k = 1 the time dependent treatment e ects are more noisy, for all k  2
parallel trends hold and the treatment e ect is stable over time.23     e treatment e ect remains
roughly the same as k grows, even though Table 6 shows that the mean persistence declines as
k increases. For instance, in the pre-treatment period, the mean persistence for EU websites was
0.0597 and the estimated treatment e ect is 0.005 indicating a roughly 8% increase in persistence
as a result of GDPR.
        e economic implications of the increase in persistence depend on the mechanisms that drive
this e ect for which we have two plausible hypothesis. e rst is a selective consent hypothesis
where consumers only consent to data processing by websites that they frequently use. Under
this hypothesis, if infrequent users of a website are those who deny consent to data storage
more-so than frequent users, then the remaining set of consumers will naturally appear to be
more persistent. e second is a privacy means substitution hypothesis where privacy conscious
consumers who were previously making use of brower-based privacy means now utilize GDPR
opt-in to protect their privacy. Recall that the utilization of these privacy means would result
in many arti cially short-lived consumers. If these same consumers utilize GDPR opt-in instead
they would no longer show up in the intermediary's dataset and the remaining set of consumers
would appear to be more persistent even though their true search and purchase behavior may
not have changed.
    If the selective consent hypothesis is the predominant explanation for the increased persis-
tence, then privacy regulation may favor rms with more established reputations or o er a wider
variety of services.24 e hypothesis would imply that in the long run consent for data collection
can serve as a barrier to entry for newer rms with less established reputations and a smaller
variety of services.
    If the privacy means substitution hypothesis is the predominant explanation for the increased
   22
       It is important to note that the persistence measure may have some noise when k = 1 due to consumer activity
near the end of the week that spills over into the next week and falsely appears as persistence. As a result, the most
reliable measures of consumer persistence are for k  2, but we report k = 1 for completeness.
    23
       Further, Figure 10 in the appendix shows the overall distributions of consumer persistence for the EU vs. non-
EU and note that there are some outliers. In particular, there is a large mass of high persistence observations and
persistence measures close to 0. Our results are qualitatively robust to running our speci cations winsorizing and
dropping these observations as well.
    24
           ere is a connection of this hypothesis to the theoretical predictions in Campbell, Goldfarb and Tucker (2015),
who argue that consent-based data collection practices would allow larger rms to collect more data than smaller
 rms since they o er a wider scope of services. As a result, consumers may utilize these websites more and trust the
website with their data more.



                                                           18
                                                               Figure 5: Change in Search Distribution for One Site

                                     0.2                                                                                         0.55




                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                        q       q       q
       Change in Probability Mass




                                     0.1                                                                                         0.50
                                                                                                                                                    q




                                                                                                           Single Search Share
                                                                                                                                                             q


                                                               q   q   q
                                                     q                       q   q         q
                                     0.0                                                       q    q                            0.45




                                    -0.1                                                                                         0.40
                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                      q   q   q
                                                                                                                                                                 q       q
                                                                                                                                                                     q       q    q


                                    -0.2                                                                                         0.35

                                           0.0           2.5           5.0           7.5           10.0                                                 20                   25
                                                               Number of Searches                                                                            Week In Year

Notes: e gure on the le shows the di erence in the share of consumers with x searches in the full sample a er
GDPR compared to before GDPR. For instance, the le most point indicates that there was a roughly 12.8% decrease
in the share of cookies associated with a single search.  e gure on the right breaks down the share of cookies
associated with only one search week by week, as opposed to pooling the full sample periods before and a er GDPR.




persistence, then there are several economically relevant consequences. First, the bene t of GDPR
would be the marginal e ect over existing privacy protection. Second, the usage of GDPR opt-out
would lead to an externality on the opt-in consumers and, as a result, their privacy protection may
be weakened. is would directly mean that rms relying on prediction may not su er as much
as the number of opt out indicates since this would enhance their prediction capabilities. Finally,
it would allow for be er advertisement a ribution and measurement of advertising e ectiveness
which would directly in uence the price advertisers are willing to pay for advertising.
    We provide suggestive evidence that the privacy means substitution hypothesis is the more
plausible of the two. We focus on one large hotels website in Germany and study the distribution
of number of searches per cookie on this website. While both hypotheses imply that the drop
in relative probability mass should be concentrated towards the lower end of the support, one
predominant signature of browser-based privacy protection is a large mass of "single search"
consumers. is comes from consumers who utilize cookie blockers, which results in continual
regeneration of cookies a er every request and leads to a large number of arti cially short-lived
consumers with only one logged search. us, we track the overall share of consumers with one
search over a week in Figure 5. Consistent with the privacy means substitution hypothesis, we
observe a discontinuous drop in the share of single-search consumers at the advent of GDPR
suggesting that these consumers substituted towards utilizing GDPR opt-out.
    We further study the overall distribution of consumer searches before and a er GDPR. Fig-

                                                                                                          19
ure 5 shows that only the probability mass of single searchers seems to have dropped and the
shi in probability mass seems to be roughly evenly distributed across the di erent number of
searches. is provides strong evidence that, at least for this site, the increase in persistence is
largely driven by the drop in the "single searchers" which is consistent with what we would ex-
pect under the privacy means substitution hypothesis. Under the selective consent hypothesis we
would expect that the loss in probability mass would be more evenly distributed across searches.
    Finally, in order to provide additional evidence for the privacy means substitution hypothesis,
we estimate heterogeneous treatment e ects across web browsers and operating systems. While
the selective consent hypothesis should imply no di erences across these dimensions, the privacy
means substitution hypothesis is more plausible for web browsers and operating systems with
more technically sophisticated users and weaker existing privacy protections. us, we should
expect a larger increase in persistence on these web browsers and operating systems, which is
consistent with the results we nd. e results and a full discussion are deferred to Appendix B.


5        GDPR and Online Advertising
We now study the e ect of GDPR on the market for online advertising. Speci cally, we inves-
tigate the extent to which the consumer opt-out and increase in average trackability a ected
advertiser's average value of consumers and overall revenue for both advertisers and websites.
Advertisements are sold via real-time auctions.25 Bidding does not occur at the level of individual
consumer pro les but instead at the keyword segment level. An example of a keyword segement
is the collection of searches for ights from JFK to LAX. us, any changes in advertiser behavior
would result from changes in their overall estimate of the value of consumers. Bids are submit-
ted per click and a payment from the advertiser to the intermediary only occurs if the consumer
clicks on the advertisement.
     First, we use a di erence-in-di erences speci cation to investigate whether the drop in unique
identi ers and searches was associated with a similar drop in the total number of advertisements
served.26 Table 9 shows a drop in the number of advertisements, but the drop is not statistically
signi cant. Figure 11 shows the time varying treatment e ect, which con rms this pa ern. is
shows that the drop in advertisements shown is not as stark as the drop in unique cookies and
recorded searches.



    25
        e auction format is a linear combination of a generalized rst and second price auction where there are N
advertisers and k slots.
   26
        is relationship is not necessarily mechanical since the individuals who opt out may di er on other dimensions,
such as their propensity to click on advertisement and purchase.


                                                         20
                                  Table 3: Di erence-in-Di erences Estimates for Advertising Outcome Variables

                                             (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)          (7)           (8)
                                        asinh(Total       Total     asinh(Distinct      Distinct                                       Average      Average
                                           Clicks)       Clicks         Clicks)          Clicks     asinh(Revenue)        Revenue      Transfer        Bid

     DiD Coe cient                        -0.135        -251.9          -0.133          -214.9            -0.168          -32972.3      28.97        15.41
                                           (-2.32)       (-1.91)        (-2.33)          (-1.84)          (-1.54)          (-0.75)       (2.12)        (2.90)

     OS + Browser Controls
     Product Category Controls
21




     Website× Country FE
     Week FE

     Observations                          62328         62328           62328           62328            62328            62328         62328        62328
      
         p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
      Notes: t-statistics are reported in parentheses.   e standard errors for every regression are clustered at the website-country level. We aggregate every
     dependent variable to the website-country-product type-week level between weeks 16 and 29, including both weeks 16 and 29 (April 13th - July 20th). e
     dependent variable in the regression reported in the rst column is the total number of clicks associated with each observation and the second column is
     the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of this value. Likewise, the dependent variables in the third and fourth columns are the total number and inverse
     hyperbolic sine transform of the total number of unique cookies who interacted with advertisements. e dependent variables in the h and sixth column
     are the total number and inverse hyperbolic sine transform of the total revenue.      e dependent variable in the seventh column is the average transfer
     between the intermediary and advertisers and in the eighth column it is the average bid by advertisers. Since some of the outcome variables can take zero
     values, in order to preserve these observations we utilize a common transformation in the applied microeconomics literature and use the inverse hyperbolic
     sine transform instead of the natural logarithm of the outcome variables (Bellemare and Wichman, 2019). e resulting transformed outcome variable, y   ¯, is
     given by y¯ = arcsinh(y ) = ln(y + y 2 + 1)
    We next examine the e ect on overall revenues earned by websites and advertisers. Revenues
depend both on the number of clicks as well as the price per click. Columns (1) - (2) of Table 3
show that there is a statistically signi cant decrease of 13.5% in the total number of clicks, with
an e ect size commensurate with the drop in total cookies and searches. Furthermore, we look
for changes in the number of distinct cookies associated with a click to see if any changes were
driven by some small set of consumers who drive advertising revenues. Columns (3) - (4) show
that the number of distinct clicks also decreases signi cantly. Finally, Figure 6 displays the time-
varying speci cation for these outcome variable and shows that the e ect on the number of clicks
is relatively constant a er the GDPR implementation date.
    Columns (5) and (6) of Table 3 provide the estimate of the impact on revenue, which is negative
though not statistically signi cant. e time-varying treatment e ect displayed in Figure 6 shows
that revenue initially falls sharply a er the implementation of GDPR and then begins to increase.
Importantly, columns (7) and (8) of Table 3 show that bids and average transfers from advertisers
to the intermediary increase. We interpret this as an increase in the perceived average value that
advertisers place on remaining consumers a er GDPR.
    Figure 6 displays the time-varying coe cient for the average transfer for a consumer and
shows that the transfer does not change initially a er the policy and then increases gradually.
As a result, the immediate drop in clicks following GDPR leads to an immediate drop in revenue,
but the increase in the average transfer for consumers a er GDPR leads to a recovery of some of
the lost revenue for the intermediary and advertisers.
    We now explore the mechanisms behind the increase in bids for consumers. One possibility
is that just as GDPR was implemented there was also a change in the composition of advertisers.
Advertisers could have have entered or exited from the European market as a result of GDPR
or for other unrelated reasons. In order to explore whether this was the case we compute the
share of winning bids for each advertiser and track any changes in market concentration. We
compute the two most commonly utilized market concentration measures: Concentration Ra-
tio and the Her ndahl-Hirschman Index. We utilize our previously de ned speci cations to see
whether there was any change in market concentration. e details of this exercise are described
in Appendix D. We nd a statistically signi cant but economically small increase in bidder con-
centration. Increased concentration in advertisers should have decreased the prices, not increased
them. erefore, we conclude that changes on the demand side are likely not the reason for the
observed price increase.




                                                22
Figure 6: Week by Week Treatment E ect for Total Clicks, Revenue, and Average Transfer

                                                                   asinh(Total Clicks)
                            0.50


            DiD Estimate    0.25

                                       q       q
                            0.00                       q
                                                               q
                                                                       q
                                                                                q

                                                                                                        q
                                                                                         q    q                             q
                                                                                                                  q    q
                                                                                                   q         q

                           -0.25

                           -0.50
                                   16      17      18      19      20       21       22      23   24   25   26   27   28   29
                                                                            Week Number
                                                                           asinh(Revenue)
                            0.50
            DiD Estimate




                            0.25

                            0.00       q
                                               q
                                                               q
                                                                       q
                                                                                q
                                                       q
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                         q    q                             q
                                                                                                                  q    q
                                                                                                   q         q

                           -0.25

                           -0.50
                                   16      17      18      19      20       21       22      23   24   25   26   27   28   29
                                                                            Week Number
                                                                    Average Transfer

                            100
           DiD Estimate




                                                                                                                           q

                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                 q

                                                           q                                                q
                                                                            q        q                 q
                                                                                                  q
                              0    q       q       q               q                         q




                           -100


                                   16      17      18      19      20       21       22      23   24   25   26   27   28   29
                                                                            Week Number




                                                                                    23
     A more plausible explanation relates directly to the result that remaining consumers are now
more trackable and therefore advertisers are be er able to a ribute purchases to advertisements.
Advertisers assess the value of a consumer based on the conversion rate of an advertisement,
which is the fraction of consumers that end up purchasing a good a er clicking on an adver-
tisement. However, e ective measurement requires that the advertiser and intermediary can
a ribute purchases to advertisements, which relies on their capability to track consumers across
time and websites. For instance, if a consumer deletes her cookies a er clicking the advertisement
and then subsequently purchases a good, the advertiser and intermediary will not be able to at-
tribute the advertisement to a purchase. An implication of this is that consumers that are utilizing
browser-based privacy means bias the perceived value advertisers have of consumers downwards.
If the consumers that are utilizing these privacy means alternatively utilize the privacy means of-
fered by GDPR instead, they will not appear in the sample of the advertisers whatsoever, which
will lead the advertisers to gradually increase their perceived value of consumers.
     As an illustrative example, suppose that there are ve consumers who click on an advertise-
ment. Suppose one of them (from hereon consumer A) deletes her cookies but ends up purchasing
and, from the remaining four, suppose two of them end up purchasing. us, regardless of the
behavior of consumer A, the advertiser's estimated conversion rate is 0.4, which is only correct
in the case where consumer A never purchases. Suppose, instead, that GDPR opt-out is available
and consumer A is removed from the sample of the advertiser and therefore never clicks on an
advertisement. e advertiser's estimated conversion rate is 0.5 now, as opposed to 0.4 and so the
perceived value of consumers weakly increases irregardless of consumer A's true behavior. More
generally, dropping individuals similar consumer A from the observed sample can only weakly
increase the advertiser's perceived value.
       e changes that we observe in the advertising market are, therefore, consistent with the
observation in Section 4. ese results strongly suggest that GDPR has made it easier for adver-
tisers to assess the value of consumers by improving their ability to track them and measure the
e ectiveness of advertisements.


6    GDPR and Prediction of Consumer Behavior
In this section we investigate whether the changes due to GDPR have a ected the intermedi-
ary's ability to predict consumer behavior. Based on our analysis we expect there to be three
predominant reasons why we might observe a change in the ability to predict. First, GDPR has
signi cantly reduced the overall amount of data. Second, remaining consumers have longer his-
tories and are more trackable. ird, in line with our illustration in Figure 2, GDPR might reveal
correlation structures between between consumer behavior and the length of consumer histories

                                                24
that were previously obfuscated by the use of alternative privacy tools. We would expect the
 rst e ect to decrease predictive performance and the second and third to increase predictive
performance.
    We take as given both the setup of the prediction problem and the algorithm that the inter-
mediary uses.     is allows us to understand the e ects of GDPR on the prediction problem "in
the eld." Its problem is to predict whether a consumer will purchase from a site she visits based on
history that the intermediary observes about this consumer. Speci cally, its algorithm classi es
a search by a consumer into two categories: purchasers and non-purchasers, based on whether
the consumer will purchase a product on the current website within some time window. Formally,
each query is classi ed into
                             
                             1,     if i is a purchaser on website j a er search k
                    yijk =
                             0,     if i is not a purchaser on website j a er search k,

for a cookie i on website j on the k th query observed by the intermediary. For every cookie i
we observe a series of searches on website j , Xij 1 , Xij 2 , ..., Xijn and, if the consumer ended up
making a purchase on this website, the time-stamp of when consumer i purchased on website j .
For every Xijk that we observe, yijk = 1 if the purchase occurs within N days of the query and
yijk = 0 otherwise. While in practice the value of N is platform-dependent, for our analysis we
restrict focus to N = 2.27 We will denote the class proportion as the proportion of searches that
are associated with the purchaser class.
    For each search, the intermediary produces a probability estimate that the consumer is a
purchaser:

                                 pijk = Pr(yijk = 1 | Xij 1 , ..., Xijk ), i, j, k                                (3)

We observe the intermediary's predicted p ^ijk for every search.
    In practice, for its own operation, the intermediary classi es each consumer into the two
groups in real time during each search. is determination is based on whether the consumer's
"score" p
        ^ijk is above or below a chosen threshold P ^ .28
   27
       For the majority of websites in our sample the intermediary sets N = 1 or N = 2. Further, from our preliminary
analysis, the results do not qualitatively di er between N = 1 and N = 2.
    28
         e value of this threshold is determined by revenue considerations and other factors irrelevant to the quality
of predictions. As a result, we restrict focus on the probabilistic estimate p
                                                                             ^ijk and not the actual classi cation.




                                                         25
6.1     Prediction Evaluation Measures
To evaluate the performance of the classi er deployed by the intermediary, we use two standard
measures from the machine learning literature: the Mean Squared Error (MSE) and Area under the
ROC Curve (AUC).29
       e MSE computes the mean of the squared errors associated with the predicted estimate p  ^ijk
relative to the realized binary event. Speci cally, let Ij be the set of all consumers on website j
and let Kij be the set of all events for consumer i on website j .      en, the MSE of website j is
given by,

                                                    1
                                 M SEj =                                    pijk - yijk )2 ,
                                                                           (^                                      (4)
                                                    |Kij | iI       kKij
                                                                j
                                              iIj


with a low MSE indicating a good prediction performance.
     Although commonly used, the MSE has a couple of drawbacks for the current purpose. First,
the measure is sensitive to the skewness of, and the change in, the class distribution. In the
current context, about 90% of the searches result in non-purchase, which means that the estimate
^ijk tends to be low; intuitively, the estimate would tolerate more errors associated with the
p
"infrequent" event (purchase) in order to minimize the errors associated with the more "frequent"
event (non-purchase). Suppose now the class distribution changes so that more searches result in
purchases. is is indeed what happens in our data a er GDPR. en, even though the consumer
may not have become less predictable, MSE would rise arti cially, due to the convexity associated
with the formula, especially if the prediction algorithm does not adjust to the change in the
distribution. Second, perhaps not unrelated to the rst issue, the MSE is not the measure that the
intermediary focuses on for its operation as well as for communicating with its partners. Instead,
it focuses on AUC (the area under the curve), which we now turn to.
        e AUC measures the area under the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve.30 e
ROC curve in turn measures how well the classi er trades o Type I ("false positive") with Type
II ("false negative") errors. To begin, x the classi cation threshold at any P   ^ . en, a consumer
with score p ^ijk is classi ed as a purchaser if p      ^ and a non-purchaser if p
                                                 ^ijk > P                               ^ . is would
                                                                                 ^ijk < P
   29
       Ferri, Hern´
                  andez-Orallo and Modroiu (2009) and Hern´    andez-Orallo, Flach and Ferri (2012) provide a compre-
hensive analysis of classi cation evaluation metrics and di erentiate between three classes of evaluation metrics. (1)
Metrics based on a threshold that provide an error rate on actual classi cations as opposed to predicted probabilities.
(2) Metrics based on a probabilistic interpretation of error, which capture the di erence between the estimated and
true probabilities. (3) Metrics based on how the classi er ranks the samples in terms of likelihood to be a purchaser
as opposed to a non-purchaser. As mentioned previously, we ignore the rst class of metrics since there are idiosyn-
crasies in how the threshold is set across websites and so do not analyze the actual classi cations. We select the
most commonly utilized metrics from the la er two classes. From the second class of evaluation metrics we choose
the MSE and from the third class we choose the Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) metric.
    30
       For an extended discussion of ROC analysis, see Fawce (2006).


                                                          26
                                       Figure 7: Sample ROC Curve



                                            ROC




                               TPR


                                                                AUC




                                                         FPR


Notes: is gure depicts an ROC curve, which maps out the trade-o between type I and type II errors for a classi er
as the classi cation threshold varies. e area under the ROC curve is denoted by AUC and provides a scalar measure
of prediction performance.




result in a false positive rate--a rate at which a non-purchaser is misclassi ed into a purchaser:

                              False Positive                               |{p
                                                                             ^ijk > P,^ yijk = 0}|
                                                                     ijk
              F P R :=                                =                                            .
                       True Negative + False Positive                        ijk |{yijk = 0}|


At the same time, it would result in a true positive rate--or a rate at which a purchaser is correctly
classi ed as a purchaser:

                                 True Positive                             |{p
                                                                             ^ijk > P,^ yijk = 1}|
                                                                     ijk
              T P R :=                                  =                                          .
                         True Positive + False Negative                      ijk |{yijk = 1}|


   e ROC then depicts the level of T P R a prediction machine achieves for each level of F P R it
tolerates.
       e ROC is obtained by tracing the locus of (F P R, T P R) by varying the classi cation thresh-
old P .31 e slope of the ROC corresponds to the additional power (in rate) the prediction gains
     ^
for an additional unit of type I error (in rate) it tolerates. For a random predictor, this slope would
be one, and the ROC will be a 45 degrees line. A be er than random predictor would produce an
ROC which lies above that 45 degrees line. Figure 7 depicts a typical ROC curve.
   31                         ^ = 1, all consumers are classi ed as non-purchasers, which yields (F P R, T P R) =
      For extreme cases, with P
                 ^ = 0 all consumers are classi ed as purchasers, which yields (F P R, T P R) = (1, 1).
(0, 0), and with P



                                                       27
       e AUC, which measures the area under the ROC, provides a simple scalar measure of the
prediction performance. If either the prediction technology improves or the consumer becomes
more predictable, then the ROC will shi up and AUC will increase. Aside from the fact that the
intermediary focuses on this measure, the AUC is invariant to the change in class distribution
(Fawce , 2006). Suppose for instance the proportion of purchasers increases, as long as the pre-
diction technology remains unchanged, this does not alter FPR and TPR, so the ROC and AUC
remain unchanged.
       ese two measures capture di erent aspects: AUC captures the ability for the classi er to
separate the two di erent classes whereas MSE captures the accuracy of the estimated proba-
bilities. Hence, we will report the e ect on both since they provide two qualitatively di erent
measures of prediction performance.


6.2     Prediction Performance
In this section we investigate the impact of GDPR on predictability at the immediate onset of its
implementation. We utilize the same empirical strategy that we described in section 3. e same
empirical design is valid because the intermediary trains separate models for each website using
only the data from the respective website. As a result, any changes to the collected data from
EU websites due to GDPR should not impact non-EU websites. However, there are two limiting
factors in our analysis. e rst is the restriction on the data; unlike the search and advertising
data, the prediction performance requires additional purchase data, which is limited for only a
subset of websites.32 e second is that the models are trained utilizing a sliding window of the
data, which means that, even if there is a sudden change to the underlying data distribution, there
may be a slow adjustment period that would vary across the di erent websites.
    Table 4 displays the di erence-in-di erences estimates for all of the relevant prediction re-
lated outcome variables. First, column (1) shows that GDPR results in a small but signi cant
increase in the proportion of purchasers. Meanwhile, the insigni cant coe cient for average
predictive probability in column (2) shows that li le adjustment by the classi er of the rm to
this change. Figure 14 displays the time-varying speci cation for these outcome variables in-
dicating that the average predicted probability remains constant whereas the class proportion
  uctuates but appears to increase.
   32
     We drop websites that either have no purchase data or where the class proportion is degenerate so that
yijk = 0 or yijk = 1 for all cookies i on website j .       ere are also two websites that we know had a report-
ing error for purchase data during our sample period and we drop them from our analysis. Further, we drop any
(browser, OS, product, website, country ) tuple that, on average, has fewer than 50 consumers a week since these
observations are very noisy due to low sample sizes and the performance of the prediction problem is less interesting
in these cases.




                                                         28
                    Table 4: Di erence-in-Di erences Estimates for Prediction Outcome Variables

                                    (1)                   (2)                  (3)         (4)          (5)               (6)
                                  Class                Average                                      Purchaser      Non-Purchaser
                               Proportion      Predicted Probability          MSE         AUC          MSE               MSE

DiD Coe cient                   0.00915                0.00129             0.0130        0.0124      -0.00579           -0.00126
                                  (1.77)                (0.17)               (3.74)       (1.12)      (-0.43)            (-0.45)

Product Type Controls
OS + Browser Controls
Week FE
Website × Country FE

Observations                      15470                 15470                15470       15470        14298              15470
  
     p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
 Notes: t-statistics are reported in parentheses. e standard errors for every regression are clustered at the website-country level. We
aggregate every dependent variable to the website-country-product type-week level between weeks 16 and 29, including both weeks
16 and 29 (April 13th - July 20th). e dependent variable in the regression reported in the rst column is the proportion of purchasers
associated with each observation and the second column is the average predicted probability.         e dependent variables in the third
and fourth column are the MSE and AUC, respectively. Finally, in the h and sixth columns the dependent variables are the MSE
conditional on the true class of the observation.




    Columns (3) and (4) show the impact of GDPR on the prediction performance of the interme-
diary as measured in MSE and AUC, respectively. Column (3) shows a signi cant increase in MSE
a er GDPR. However, rather than indicating the worsened prediction performance, this is likely
to be an artifact of the change in class proportion and the lack of adjustment by the classi er.33
Indeed, columns (5) and (6) show that MSE conditional on true class has not gone up; if anything,
they have gone down albeit statistically insigni cantly. As mentioned above, given the skewed
distribution, an increase in the proportion of purchasers will raise the MSE. In fact, column (4)
shows a positive estimate for the treatment e ect on AUC indicating a marginal improvement in
prediction, though it is not statistically signi cant. e marginal improvement in AUC indicates
that, even in spite of the decreased accuracy of the estimated probabilities, the ability of the in-
termediary to separate the two classes has increased. is observation is consistent with what
we would expect from the aforementioned hypothesis of privacy means substitution.
    Finally, Figure 15 displays the results from the time-varying speci cation for MSE and AUC,
indicating that there was an initial increase in MSE followed by an eventual decline.          is is
consistent with the claim that much of the increase in MSE was a result of the lack of rapid
     33
     Appendix F decomposes the change of MSE to accounts for the extent to which the increase may have resulted
from the classi er's lack of rapid adjustment to the post-GDPR consumer distribution leading the estimated class
probabilities to no longer as closely match the empirical class probabilities.


                                                                 29
adjustment. Further, the increases in AUC do not occur directly a er GDPR but rather also occur
gradually.
    Overall, our results suggest that GDPR has not negatively impacted the ability to predict
consumer behavior and if at all, the sign of the treatment e ect suggests the opposite.        is is
further validated by the exercise in Appendix G which identi es the expected "long run" changes
in prediction performance as a result of the changes to the data observed in section 4. is exercise
shows that the increase in trackability ought to lead to improvements to prediction performance,
whereas the change in the overall size of data as a result of GDPR should not adversely impact
prediction performance signi cantly.


7    Conclusion
In this paper we empirically study the e ects of data privacy regulation by exploiting the intro-
duction of GDPR as a natural experiment. We use data from an intermediary that contracts with
many online travel agencies worldwide, which allows us to investigate the e ect of GDPR on a
comprehensive set of outcomes. Our analysis focuses on the stipulation of GDPR that requires
  rms to ask consumers for explicit consent to store and process their data.
    Our results paint a novel and interesting picture of how a consumer's privacy decision-- par-
ticularly the means by which she protects her privacy--may impact the rest of the economy,
including other consumers, and the rms and advertisers relying on consumer data. e strong
and e ective means of privacy protection made available by laws such as GDPR and the recent
CCPA (California Consumer Privacy Act) should help the privacy-concerned consumers to pro-
tect their privacy by eliminating their digital footprints. ese consumers are thus clear winners
of the laws. However, the impacts on the others are less clear. Our results suggest the possibility
that a consumer's switching of the means of privacy protection makes the opt-in consumers who
share their data more trackable and possibly more predictable to the rms with which they share
data. If this increased identi ability makes up for decreased data (resulting from opt-outs), as
indicated by Appendix G, then the rms using consumer data could also come out as winners.
What about those consumers who opt in? eir welfare will depend on how their data is used by
the rms. If their data is used to target advertising and services to their needs, they too could very
well be winners of privacy laws, even if their decision to opt in may not have accounted for the
externality. However, if their data is used for extracting consumer surplus, e.g., via personalized
pricing, the externalities could harm them.
    While these qualitative implications are clear, our reduced-form approach does not allow us
to quantify the welfare implications for both consumers and advertisers. We leave for future work
a structural analysis of the interactions that we identify in order to be er understand the mag-

                                                 30
nitude of each of the channels by which consumers and advertisers are a ected. Given the large
compliance costs associated with data privacy regulation, decomposing the welfare e ects in this
manner is a fruitful direction for research and important for further building on our insights in
order to guide the design and understanding the value of such regulation.
    Finally, our paper has broader implications beyond the online travel industry and keyword-
based advertising markets. Firms in this industry, as with many markets in the digital economy,
increasingly compete with the large technology rms such as Google whose reach expands across
many di erent online markets and for whom consumers have li le choice but to accept data
processing. As a result, while our results highlight that increased consent requirements may
not be wholly negative for rms, if consumers are similarly using such opt-out capabilities at
our estimated rates in other markets (such as behaviorally-targeted advertising markets) then
another important direction for future work is understanding the extent to which such regulation
puts rms in these markets at a disadvantage relative to these larger rms. We believe that these
insights and directions for future work are useful for the design of the many proposed regulations
in the US and around the world that follow in the footsteps of GDPR.




                                               31
References
Abowd, John M, and Ian M Schmutte. 2019. "An economic analysis of privacy protection and
  statistical accuracy as social choices." American Economic Review, 109(1): 171­202.
Acemoglu, Daron, Ali Makhdoumi, Azarakhsh Malekian, and Asuman Ozdaglar. 2019.
  "Too Much Data: Prices and Ine ciencies in Data Markets." National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Acquisti, Alessandro, Curtis Taylor, and Liad Wagman. 2016. " e economics of privacy."
  Journal of Economic Literature, 54(2): 442­92.
Acquisti, Alessandro, Leslie K John, and George Loewenstein. 2013. "What is privacy
  worth?" e Journal of Legal Studies, 42(2): 249­274.
Aridor, Guy, Kevin Liu, Aleksandrs Slivkins, and Zhiwei Steven Wu. 2019. " e perils of
  exploration under competition: A computational modeling approach." 171­172.
Athey, Susan, Christian Catalini, and Catherine Tucker. 2017. " e digital privacy paradox:
  Small money, small costs, small talk." National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bajari, Patrick, Victor Chernozhukov, Ali Hortac      ¸su, and Junichi Suzuki. 2019. " e impact
  of big data on rm performance: An empirical investigation." Vol. 109, 33­37.
Bellemare, Marc F, and Casey J Wichman. 2019. "Elasticities and the inverse hyperbolic sine
  transformation." Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics.
Berendt, Bettina, Oliver G¨   unther, and Sarah Spiekermann. 2005. "Privacy in e-commerce:
  stated preferences vs. actual behavior." Communications of the ACM, 48(4): 101­106.
Bergemann, Dirk, Alessandro Bonatti, and Tan Gan. 2019. " e Economics of Social Data."
Boerman, Sophie C, Sanne Kruikemeier, and Frederik J Zuiderveen Borgesius. 2018. "Ex-
  ploring motivations for online privacy protection behavior: Insights from panel data." Commu-
  nication Research, 0093650218800915.
Braghieri, Luca. 2019. "Targeted advertising and price discrimination in intermediated online
  markets." Available at SSRN 3072692.
Campbell, James, Avi Goldfarb, and Catherine Tucker. 2015. "Privacy regulation and market
  structure." Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 24(1): 47­73.
Chiou, Lesley, and Catherine Tucker. 2017. "Search engines and data retention: Implications
  for privacy and antitrust." National Bureau of Economic Research.
Choi, Jay Pil, Doh-Shin Jeon, and Byung-Cheol Kim. 2019. "Privacy and personal data col-
  lection with information externalities." Journal of Public Economics, 173: 113­124.
Degeling, Martin, Christine Utz, Christopher Lentzsch, Henry Hosseini, Florian Schaub,
  and orsten Holz. 2018. "We Value Your Privacy... Now Take Some Cookies: Measuring the
  GDPR's Impact on Web Privacy." arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.05096.


                                              32
DeGroot, Morris H, and Stephen E Fienberg. 1983. " e comparison and evaluation of fore-
   casters." Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series D ( e Statistician), 32(1-2): 12­22.
Dwork, Cynthia. 2011. "Di erential privacy." Encyclopedia of Cryptography and Security, 338­
   340.
Dwork, Cynthia, Aaron Roth, et al. 2014. " e algorithmic foundations of di erential privacy."
   Foundations and Trends® in eoretical Computer Science, 9(3­4): 211­407.
Fair eld, Joshua AT, and Christoph Engel. 2015. "Privacy as a public good." Duke LJ, 65: 385.
Fawcett, Tom. 2006. "An introduction to ROC analysis." Pa ern recognition le ers, 27(8): 861­874.
Ferri, C´esar, Jos´e Hern´ andez-Orallo, and R Modroiu. 2009. "An experimental comparison of
   performance measures for classi cation." Pa ern Recognition Le ers, 30(1): 27­38.
Goldberg, Samuel, Garrett Johnson, and Scott Shriver. 2019. "Regulating Privacy Online:
      e Early Impact of the GDPR on European Web Tra c & E-Commerce Outcomes." Available
   at SSRN 3421731.
Goldfarb, Avi, and Catherine E Tucker. 2011. "Privacy regulation and online advertising."
   Management science, 57(1): 57­71.
Goldfarb, Avi, and Catherine Tucker. 2012a. "Privacy and innovation." Innovation policy and
   the economy, 12(1): 65­90.
Goldfarb, Avi, and Catherine Tucker. 2012b. "Shi s in privacy concerns." American Economic
   Review, 102(3): 349­53.
Hern´  andez-Orallo, Jos´  e, Peter Flach, and C`   esar Ferri. 2012. "A uni ed view of performance
   metrics: translating threshold choice into expected classi cation loss." Journal of Machine
   Learning Research, 13(Oct): 2813­2869.
Jia, Jian, Ginger Zhe Jin, and Liad Wagman. 2018. " e short-run e ects of GDPR on tech-
   nology venture investment." National Bureau of Economic Research.
Johnson, Garrett. 2013. " e impact of privacy policy on the auction market for online display
   advertising."
Johnson, Garrett, and Scott Shriver. 2019. "Privacy & market concentration: Intended & un-
   intended consequences of the GDPR." Available at SSRN.
Johnson, Garrett A, Scott K Shriver, and Shaoyin Du. 2020. "Consumer privacy choice in
   online advertising: Who opts out and at what cost to industry?" Marketing Science.
Kehoe, Patrick J, Bradley J Larsen, and Elena Pastorino. 2018. "Dynamic Competition in the
   Era of Big Data." Working paper, Stanford University and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Liang, Annie, and Erik Madsen. 2019. "Data Sharing and Incentives." Available at SSRN 3485776.
Lin, Tesary. 2019. "Valuing Intrinsic and Instrumental Preferences for Privacy." Available at SSRN
   3406412.
Norberg, Patricia A, Daniel R Horne, and David A Horne. 2007. " e privacy paradox:


                                                33
  Personal information disclosure intentions versus behaviors." Journal of consumer a airs,
  41(1): 100­126.
Utz, Christine, Martin Degeling, Sascha Fahl, Florian Schaub, and orsten Holz. 2019.
  "(Un) informed Consent: Studying GDPR Consent Notices in the Field." 973­990, ACM.
Zhuo, Ran, Bradley Hu aker, Shane Greenstein, et al. 2019. " e Impact of the General Data
  Protection Regulation on Internet Interconnection." National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                            34
Appendix

A   Additional Consumer Response Figures

      Figure 8: Week by Week Treatment E ect (Cookies and Recorded Searches)

                                                      log(Unique Cookies)
                           0.4
           DiD Estimate




                           0.2

                                       q
                           0.0              q
                                                 q
                                                       q
                                                             q
                                  q
                                                                                            q
                                                                   q                                  q
                                                                        q    q    q              q
                                                                                       q
                          -0.2

                          -0.4
                                 16   17   18   19     20   21    22   23   24   25   26   27   28   29
                                                            Week Number
                                                     log(Recorded Searches)
                           0.4
          DiD Estimate




                           0.2

                                      q
                           0.0   q
                                           q           q
                                                            q
                                                q
                                                                                           q         q
                                                                  q    q
                                                                            q                   q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                      q
                          -0.2

                          -0.4
                                 16   17   18   19    20    21    22   23   24   25   26   27   28   29
                                                            Week Number




                                                                 35
    Table 5: Di erence-in-Di erences Estimates for Sales Activity

                                       (1)                    (2)
                                   Total Pages      Total Advertising Units
DiD Coe cient                         -0.0387                   0.0837
                                       (-0.58)                  (1.11)
Product Category Controls
Week FE
Website × Country FE
Observations                            3731                     3731
 
    p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
 Notes: t-statistics are reported in parentheses. e standard errors for every re-
gression are clustered at the website-country level. We aggregate every dependent
variable to the website-country-product type-week level between weeks 16 and 29,
including both weeks 16 and 29 (April 13th - July 20th). e dependent variable in
the rst regression is the total number of pages where the intermediary is present.
   e dependent variable in the second regression is the total number of advertising
units associated with the intermediary.




                                        36
                                                       Figure 9: Week by Week Treatment E ect (Consumer Persistence)

                                      Consumer Persistence (1 Week)                                                     Consumer Persistence (2 Weeks)
                     0.02                                                                              0.02
     DiD Estimate




                                                                                       DiD Estimate
                     0.01                                                         q                    0.01                                                  q    q

                                                                   q                                                      q                   q    q
                            q                                  q             q                                                                          q
                                             q
                                 q                                      q                                     q                          q
                                        q                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                   q
                     0.00                          q      q                                            0.00                          q




                    -0.01                                                                             -0.01

                    -0.02                                                                             -0.02
                            16   17     18   19   20     21   22   23   24   25   26                          16   17     18   19   20   21   22   23   24   25   26
37




                                                  Week Number                                                                       Week Number
                                      Consumer Persistence (3 Weeks)                                                    Consumer Persistence (4 Weeks)
                     0.02                                                                              0.02
     DiD Estimate




                                                                                       DiD Estimate
                     0.01                                                         q                    0.01                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                        q    q
                                                                        q    q
                                                                   q                                                                               q
                                 q                             q                                                                              q
                            q                             q                                                   q                          q
                                        q
                                             q                                                                     q      q
                     0.00                          q
                                                                                                       0.00                    q     q




                    -0.01                                                                             -0.01

                    -0.02                                                                             -0.02
                            16   17     18   19   20     21   22   23   24   25   26                          16   17     18   19   20   21   22   23   24   25   26
                                                  Week Number                                                                       Week Number
                Table 6: Summary Statistics of Consumer Persistence


Treatment Group               1 Week        2 Weeks    3 Weeks     4 Weeks
non-EU                         .0640          .0417      .0330       .0282
EU                             .0962          .0730      .0644       .0597
Notes: e summary statistics are computed on the sample period before GDPR
and show the mean consumer persistence values across the EU and the non-EU
for k = 1, 2, 3, 4.



            Figure 10: Distribution of Consumer Persistence (1 Week)


            8




            6
  Density




            4




            2




            0
                0.00        0.25            0.50            0.75     1.00
                            One Week Consumer Persistence
                                   region    EU    non-EU




                                            38
B     Consumer Persistence Heterogeneous Treatment E ects
We further investigate the mechanisms behind the increased consumer persistence by estimating
heterogeneous treatment e ects across web browsers and operating systems. We exploit the fact
that di erent browsers and operating systems a ract di erent types of individuals with di erent
levels of technical sophistication as well as provide di erent levels of privacy protection.    is
exercise provides additional evidence to disentangle the selective consent and privacy means
substitution hypotheses since the selective consent hypothesis would predict that there should be
no heterogeneity in persistence across these dimensions whereas the privacy means substitution
hypothesis would predict the opposite.
    First, we study heterogeneous treatment e ects across web browsers and restrict a ention
to the most popular web browsers: Google Chrome, Microso Edge, Mozilla Firefox, Internet
Explorer, Opera, and Apple Safari. We consider the following speci cation:

       ytcjobp = t + jc + c + j + o + b + p +  (EUj × af ter × browser) +              tcjobp   (5)

       ere are two dimensions on which we could think that the di erential change in persistence
would vary across web browsers. e rst is that there is a demographic selection into browsers
and the ability to substitute between various privacy means requires technical sophistication (i.e.
consumers need to know how to manage cookies). For instance, Internet Explorer (IE) is a web
browser primarily used on older computers and is known to a ract older, less technologically
sophisticated, users. us, the privacy means substitution hypothesis seems more plausible if the
e ects are stronger on browsers with more technologically sophisticated consumers. e second
is that there is di erent levels of privacy protection among browsers. For instance, Apple Safari
at the time of the GDPR had a broad set of privacy protection means built into it, whereas Google
Chrome had laxer privacy controls. As a result, we might expect that Safari users would value the
privacy protection means o ered by GDPR less and thus lead to a smaller increase in persistence.
    Table 8 displays the regression results for this speci cation with Chrome as the omi ed
browser.      e treatment e ect is consistent across browsers with the exception of Internet Ex-
plorer which has almost no change in persistence.        e estimated treatment e ect is lower in
Safari relative to Chrome, but not signi cantly so. is provides further evidence for the privacy
means substitution hypothesis.
    Next, we study heterogeneous treatment e ects across operating systems and narrow down
the sample to only look at the most popular operating systems: Android, Chrome OS, iOS, Linux,
Mac OS X, and Windows. We consider the following speci cation:

         ytcjobp = t + jc + c + j + o + b + p +  (EUj × af ter × OS ) +             tcjobp      (6)


                                                39
    An important distinction is between mobile operating systems and desktop operating sys-
tems. ere are less readily available privacy means for cookie management on the mobile web
compared to desktop and consumer behavior in general tends to be di erent on mobile compared
to desktop. For consistency with the privacy means substitution hypothesis, we would expect a
larger di erence in persistence on desktop compared to mobile whereas for consistency with the
selective consent hypothesis we should expect no di erences.
    Table 7 displays the regression results with Windows as the omi ed operating system that
indicates that Android and iOS have no or weak increases in persistence for k = 1, 2 but appear
to have an increase in persistence for k = 3, 4. is e ect is signi cant and strongest for Android.
Otherwise, the treatment e ect is approximately the same across the di erent operating systems.
Since there seems to be a weak di erence between persistence on mobile and desktop this appears
to favor the privacy means substitution e ect, but does not provide conclusive evidence.




                                               40
    Table 7: Consumer Persistence by Week - OS Heterogeneous Treatment E ects

                                                (1)          (2)             (3)            (4)
                                              1 Week      2 Weeks         3 Weeks        4 Weeks
Treated                                      0.00603      0.00462        0.00460         0.00476
                                                (2.70)       (2.76)         (2.65)          (2.91)
Treated × (OS =ANDROID)                      -0.00886     -0.00429        -0.00256        0.000311
                                                (-3.19)     (-1.96)        (-1.26)          (0.17)
Treated × (OS = CHROME OS)                    -0.00384    -0.00592        -0.00593        0.00176
                                               (-0.67)     (-1.24)         (-1.44)         (0.52)
Treated × (OS =iOS)                           -0.00367    -0.00184        0.000438        0.00132
                                               (-1.29)     (-0.77)          (0.19)         (0.70)
Treated × (OS = LINUX)                       -0.000856     0.00326       -0.000188        0.000463
                                               (-0.18)      (0.77)         (-0.06)          (0.12)
Treated × (OS = MAC OS X)                     -0.00291    -0.000367       -0.00209        -0.00184
                                               (-1.08)      (-0.19)        (-1.26)         (-1.10)
OS = ANDROID                                 0.0105       0.00565         0.00335         0.00296
                                               (3.56)       (2.01)         (1.20)          (1.18)
OS = CHROME OS                                0.00307      0.00221       -0.000749        -0.00117
                                               (0.89)       (0.59)         (-0.27)         (-0.45)
OS = iOS                                     0.00712      0.000500      -0.0000303      -0.0000989
                                                (2.66)      (0.22)        (-0.01)         (-0.05)
OS = LINUX                                   -0.0164      -0.0119        -0.0105        -0.00732
                                               (-4.37)      (-3.46)        (-4.17)         (-2.87)
OS = MAC OS X                                -0.000548    -0.00115       -0.00299       -0.00297
                                               (-0.24)     (-0.58)         (-1.96)         (-2.68)
Constant                                     0.0835       0.0619         0.0557          0.0497
                                              (33.88)      (29.13)        (31.75)         (29.66)
Product Type Controls
OS × Week, OS × EU Controls
Week FE
Website × Country FE
Browser Controls
Observations                                   48301        48301          48301           48301
 
    p < 0.10,   
                   p < 0.05,   
                                  p < 0.01
 Notes: t-statistics are reported in parentheses. e standard errors for every regression are clustered
at the website-country level. We aggregate every dependent variable to the website-country-product
type-week level between weeks 16 and 26, including both weeks 16 and 26 (April 13th - June 29th). We
restrict focus only to the most popular operating systems. e dependent variables in the regression
are the consumer persistence measures for k = 1, 2, 3, 4, respectively. treated indicates whether the
observation is associated with an EU website and past the GDPR implementation date. treated × os
indicates the heterogeneous treatment e ect for the speci ed os. e coe cients on os indicate the
estimated values for the os xed e ect. e held-out operating system is Windows.




                                                   41
      Table 8: Consumer Persistence - Browser Heterogeneous Treatment E ects

                                                (1)          (2)             (3)            (4)
                                              1 Week      2 Weeks         3 Weeks        4 Weeks
Treated                                      0.00615     0.00645         0.00519         0.00628
                                                (2.99)      (3.51)          (3.29)          (3.49)
Treated × (Browser = EDGE)                   -0.00134     -0.00169        0.00230         0.000132
                                              (-0.35)      (-0.61)         (0.74)           (0.04)
Treated × (Browser = FIREFOX)                -0.00413     -0.00214        -0.00260        -0.00166
                                              (-1.60)      (-0.89)         (-1.43)         (-0.84)
Treated × (Browser = IE)                     -0.0101     -0.00838         -0.00375       -0.00497
                                              (-2.53)       (-2.67)        (-1.54)         (-2.03)
Treated × (Browser = OPERA)                  -0.00935     -0.00396        -0.00344        -0.00335
                                               (-1.95)     (-0.83)         (-0.94)         (-0.86)
Treated × (Browser = SAFARI)                 -0.00185     -0.00332        -0.00280        -0.00225
                                              (-0.69)      (-1.43)         (-1.44)         (-1.12)
Browser = EDGE                                0.00125     -0.00226        -0.00144       -0.000568
                                               (0.36)      (-0.78)         (-0.42)         (-0.18)
Browser = FIREFOX                            -0.00503    -0.00381       -0.00465        -0.00409
                                               (-2.29)     (-1.96)         (-3.13)         (-2.92)
Browser = IE                                 -0.0164     -0.0113        -0.00801        -0.00764
                                               (-6.73)     (-5.15)         (-3.29)         (-4.18)
Browser = OPERA                              -0.00151     -0.00337       -0.00665        -0.00596
                                              (-0.39)      (-1.00)         (-2.22)         (-2.15)
Browser = SAFARI                             -0.00315     -0.00229       -0.00309         -0.00211
                                              (-1.22)      (-1.06)         (-1.80)         (-1.20)
Constant                                     0.0861       0.0647          0.0575          0.0568
                                              (32.30)      (29.30)         (34.48)         (12.53)
Product Type Controls
OS × Week, OS × EU Controls
Week FE
Website × Country FE
OS Controls
Observations                                  40810        40810            40810           40810
 
    p < 0.10,   
                   p < 0.05,   
                                  p < 0.01
 Notes: t-statistics are reported in parentheses. e standard errors for every regression are clustered
at the website-country level. We aggregate every dependent variable to the website-country-product
type-week level between weeks 16 and 26, including both weeks 16 and 26 (April 13th - June 29th).
We restrict focus only to the most popular web browsers.      e dependent variables in the regression
are the consumer persistence measures for k = 1, 2, 3, 4, respectively. treated indicates whether the
observation is associated with an EU website and past the GDPR implementation date. treated ×
browser indicates the heterogeneous treatment e ect for the speci ed browser.         e coe cients on
browser indicate the estimated values for the browser xed e ect.         e held-out browser is Google
Chrome.




                                                  42
C      Advertisement and Auction Figures

                    Table 9: Di erence-in-Di erences Estimates for Advertisements Delivered

                                                                (1)                                                  (2)
                                                  Total Advertisements Delivered                    asinh(Total Advertisements Delivered)
DiD Coe cient                                                     -2627.2                                                -0.145
                                                                   (-1.61)                                               (-1.52)
OS + Browser Controls
Product Category Controls
Week FE
Website × Country FE
Observations                                                         62328                                               62328
 
    p < 0.10,   
                   p < 0.05,            
                                            p < 0.01
Notes: t-statistics are reported in parentheses. e standard errors for every regression are clustered at the website-country
level. We aggregate every dependent variable to the website-country-product type-week level between weeks 16 and 29,
including both weeks 16 and 29 (April 13th - July 20th). e dependent variables are the log and overall level of total adver-
tisements delivered to consumers.

            Figure 11: Week by Week Treatment E ect (Total Advertisements Delivered)


                                                 asinh(Total Advertisements Delivered)
                                     0.50
                     DiD Estimate




                                     0.25

                                     0.00        q
                                                                 q
                                                                       q
                                            q               q
                                                       q                             q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                          q
                                                                                          q    q               q
                                    -0.25                                                             q




                                    -0.50
                                            16   17    18   19   20    21    22      23   24   25    26   27   28   29
                                                                      Week Number




                                                                            43
                               Figure 12: Week by Week Treatment E ect (Average Bid)

                                                                 Average Bid
                             100
             DiD Estimate
                              50                                                                                q

                                                                                                           q

                                                                                                      q
                                                   q                                             q
                                                                                            q
                               0   q      q
                                                             q
                                                                     q        q   q
                                                                                        q
                                              q




                            -50

                            -100
                                   16    17   18   19       20   21       22      23   24   25   26   27   28   29
                                                                 Week Number



                                       Table 10: Summary Statistics, Bids and Transfers


                               Treatment Group               Average Bid               Average Transfer
                               non-EU                          394.053                      539.652
                               EU                              126.947                      174.990

                               Notes: e table reports the means of the averages bids and average
                               transfer across observations in the pre-GDPR time period for the EU
                               and non-EU respectively.


D     Advertisement and Bidder Concentration
In this section we explore whether GDPR resulted in any changes in market concentration among
advertisers. We utilize the standard de nition for the concentration ratio and the HHI. CR-Ijt
is the concentration of impressions for the top I out of K advertisers on website j at time t.
Let impkjt be the impressions of the k -th largest advertiser (according to impression share) on
                                                        I
                                                            impkjt
website j at time t.               en, CR-Ijt =     k=1
                                                     K               . For a website j and time t, the share of advertiser
                                                            impkjt
                                                    k=1
                                                                                                                     K
k  {1, 2, ..., K } is denoted by sk . HHI is therefore de ned as follows: HHIjt =                                         k.
                                                                                                                         s2
                                                                                                                 k=1
    It is important to note that these measures rule out some demand driven changes but not all
of them. In particular, advertisers could have churned without any changes in overall concen-
tration and our exercise would not pick this up. However, this is the most plausible and easily
measurable channel by which there could be demand-driven changes and so is our primary focus
in determining whether the observed results are demand-driven. Table 12 shows the results of

                                                                         44
our main speci cation for CR-1, CR-3, CR-5, and HHI as the outcome variables.               ere is a
statistically signi cant increase in market concentration across each of these measures, though
the e ect size is not economically signi cant. Table 11 displays summary statistics for the various
concentration measures and implies that the e ect size, for instance, of the increase in market
concentration for CR-5 is roughly 3%.
    Figure 13 shows the time-varying treatment e ect for the various market concentration mea-
sures, which all qualitatively follow the same pa ern. e increase in market concentration oc-
curs largely leading up until week 20 and remains relatively constant a erwards. However, the
increase in average value of a consumer does not occur until week 25 and is a gradual, as opposed
to a sudden, increase. Since the change in market concentration does not appear economically
signi cant and the timing of the increase in concentration does not coincide with the increase
in the value of a consumer, this provides evidence that the increasing value of consumers is not
driven by a change in the composition of advertisers.


                      Table 11: Summary Statistics, Market Concentration


                      Treatment Group           CR-1      CR-3      CR-5      HHI
                      Non-EU                    .0744      .216      .340     .0546
                      EU                        .0689      .204      .331     .0542

                      Notes: e table reports the means of several market concen-
                      tration measures in the pre-GDPR period for both the EU and
                      the non-EU. e rst three columns display the mean market
                      share concentrations of the top 1, top 3, and top 5 advertis-
                      ers according to share of advertisements delivered to consumers
                      (concentration ratio 1, 3, and 5 respectively). e fourth column
                      displays the mean Her ndahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) using the
                      same market share de nition.




                                                    45
Table 12: Di erence-in-Di erences Estimates for Market Concentration

                                      (1)           (2)           (3)        (4)
                                     CR 1          CR 3          CR 5        HHI
DiD Coe cient                      0.00233      0.00826        0.0138      0.00227
                                     (1.78)       (2.17)        (2.24)       (1.95)
OS + Browser Controls
Product Category Controls
Week FE
Website × Country FE
Observations                         62328         62328        62328        62328
 
    p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
Notes: t-statistics are reported in parentheses. e standard errors for every regres-
sion are clustered at the website-country level. We aggregate every dependent variable
to the website-country-product type-week level between weeks 16 and 29, including
both weeks 16 and 29 (April 13th -July 20th). e dependent variables in the regres-
sions reported in the rst three columns are the market share concentrations of the
top 1, top 3, and top 5 advertisers according to share of advertisements delivered to
consumers (concentration ratio 1, 3, and 5 respectively).      e dependent variable in
the fourth column is the Her ndahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) using the same market
share de nition.




                                         46
                                                                           Figure 13: Week by Week Treatment E ect (Market Concentration)

                                                             Concentration Ratio 1                                                                                          Concentration Ratio 3
                     0.02                                                                                                           0.050
     DiD Estimate




                                                                                                                    DiD Estimate
                     0.01                                                                                                           0.025
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                          q                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                     q
                     0.00                                     q       q
                                                                             q
                                                                                 q    q
                                                                                           q    q              q                    0.000                                        q    q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                q    q    q   q              q

                                                     q                                                                                                                  q
                                             q                                                                                                                  q
                             q
                                     q                                                                                                          q       q


                    -0.01                                                                                                          -0.025

                    -0.02                                                                                                          -0.050
                             16      17      18      19       20      21    22   23   24   25   26   27   28   29                           16      17      18      19       20      21   22   23   24   25   26   27   28   29
47




                                                                      Week Number                                                                                                    Week Number
                                                             Concentration Ratio 5                                                                                                        HHI
                     0.050                                                                                                          0.02
     DiD Estimate




                                                                                                                    DiD Estimate
                     0.025                                                                                                          0.01
                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                  q         q   q                                                                                              q                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                     0.000                                        q    q     q         q                       q                    0.00                                     q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                          q              q    q              q
                                                                                                                                                            q       q
                                                         q                                                                                  q       q

                                                 q
                                 q
                    -0.025               q
                                                                                                                                   -0.01

                    -0.050                                                                                                         -0.02
                             16      17      18      19       20      21    22   23   24   25   26   27   28   29                           16      17      18      19      20       21   22   23   24   25   26   27   28   29
                                                                      Week Number                                                                                                    Week Number
E    Prediction Figures

Figure 14: Week by Week Treatment E ect (Average Predicted Probability and Class Proportion)


                                                    Average Predicted Probability
                              0.050
              DiD Estimate




                              0.025

                                                                                                  q         q
                                                      q                                                q
                              0.000        q
                                                q          q
                                                                q
                                                                         q    q
                                                                                        q
                                                                                             q

                                      q                                            q




                             -0.025

                             -0.050
                                      16   17   18    19   20   21       22   23   24   25   26   27   28   29
                                                                Week Number
                                                            Class Proportion
                              0.050
              DiD Estimate




                              0.025
                                                                                        q    q    q
                                                                         q    q    q
                                                                                                       q
                              0.000   q
                                                      q
                                                           q    q
                                                                                                            q
                                           q
                                                q



                             -0.025

                             -0.050
                                      16   17   18    19   20   21       22   23   24   25   26   27   28   29
                                                                Week Number




                                                                    48
                                Figure 15: Week by Week Treatment E ect (MSE and AUC)


                                                                       MSE
                                 0.04
                 DiD Estimate
                                 0.02                                                         q
                                                                                                   q
                                                                                         q

                                                                           q   q    q                   q
                                                                 q

                                 0.00   q              q
                                                            q                                                q


                                             q
                                                  q



                                -0.02

                                -0.04
                                        16   17   18   19   20   21    22      23   24   25   26   27   28   29
                                                                 Week Number
                                                                       AUC
                                 0.10
                 DiD Estimate




                                 0.05                                                    q

                                                                                              q
                                                                                                   q    q
                                                                                                             q
                                 0.00   q    q    q         q
                                                                 q
                                                                               q
                                                                                    q
                                                                           q
                                                       q




                                -0.05

                                -0.10
                                        16   17   18   19   20   21    22      23   24   25   26   27   28   29
                                                                 Week Number



F        Breakdown of MSE
In this section we further investigate the cause of the increase in MSE in our di erence-in-
di erences analysis in section 6. In order to do so we utilize a standard decomposition for the
MSE in the classi cation context and study the e ects of GDPR on each component of the de-
composition. e MSE for binary classi cation problems can be decomposed into a calibration
and re nement component (DeGroot and Fienberg, 1983).               e calibration component indicates
the degree to which the estimated probabilities match the true class proportion. e re nement
component indicates the usefulness of the prediction where a more re ned prediction is one that
is closer to certainty (i.e. closer to 0 or 1 with 0.5 being the most uncertain). us, a classi er with
a good MSE is well-calibrated and more re ned. is decomposition requires a discretization of
the estimated probabilities into a series of K bins.34 For notation, pk denotes the k th estimated
    34
        roughout this paper, when calculating the decomposed MSE we will primarily utilize equally spaced bins of
size 0.01. Note that since the decomposition requires this discretization, the decomposed MSE and the standard MSE
are not precisely the same quantities but are approximately the same.

                                                                      49
probability bin, nk denotes the number of probability estimates falling into the k th bin and o¯k
denotes the true class proportion in the k th bin in the data. is allows us to rewrite (4) as:

                                            K                                            K
                                  1                                             1
                M SEj =                          nk (pk - o
                                                          ¯k ) +    2
                                                                                                  ¯k (1 - o
                                                                                               nk o       ¯k )   (7)
                                  |Kij |   k=1
                                                                                |Kij |   k=1
                            iIj                                          iIj

                                        calibration error                           re nement error


    We run the same speci cation utilizing each component of the decomposition of the MSE
as the outcome variable.         ese results are reported in Table 13.    ey indicate that both the
re nement and calibration components increased a er GDPR. Both of the components are ap-
proximately equally responsible for the increase in MSE with the calibration component being
only slightly larger.      e increase in calibration error is driven by the classi er's lack of rapid
adjustment to the post-GDPR consumer distribution leading the estimated class probabilities to
no longer as closely match the empirical class probabilities. However, the increase in re nement
error points to a partial adjustment since this increase is a result of the increased uncertainty in
the predicted class (i.e. the class proportion moving closer to 0.5.).


                     Table 13: Di erence-in-Di erences Estimates for Rele-
                     vance and Calibration

                                                                       (1)                  (2)
                                                                   Calibration           Re nement
                     DiD Coe cient                                 0.00735                0.00576
                                                                      (2.84)                (2.64)
                     OS + Browser Controls
                     Product Category Controls
                     Week FE
                     Website × Country FE
                     Observations                                       15470                15470
                      
                         p < 0.10,   
                                        p < 0.05,    
                                                            p < 0.01
                     Notes: t-statistics are reported in parentheses. e standard errors
                     for every regression are clustered at the website-country level. We
                     aggregate every dependent variable to the website-country-product
                     type-week level between weeks 16 and 29, including both weeks
                     16 and 29 (April 13th - July 20th).     e dependent variable in the
                     regression reported in the rst column is the calibration component
                     of the MSE. e dependent variable in the regression reported in the
                     second column is the re nement component of the MSE.




                                                              50
G          e Impact of Consumer Persistence and Data Scale on
         Prediction
   e analysis in section 6 on the e ect of GDPR on the rm's ability to predict is limited by the
data restrictions and the apparent lack of adjustment by its prediction algorithm to the post-
GDPR environment. To fully understand the implications for prediction, therefore, we now take
a di erent approach. Instead of asking how the rm's prediction was actually impacted in the
immediate a ermath, we now ask what would happen to predictive performance in the long run
when the algorithm were fully adjusted.
    As observed in section 4, GDPR reduces the number of consumers that the intermediary ob-
serves but remaining consumers are more persistently trackable. Our approach is to study how
these two features--number of observed consumers and the persistence of observed consumers--
impact the two measures of prediction performance cross-sectionally by comparing across web-
sites di ering in these two dimensions. We use a dataset aggregated at the website-product type-
week level. We restrict a ention to the pre-GDPR period between January 19th and April 6th. We
rely again on the fact that the intermediary only utilizes the data from each individual website in
order to train the model for that website. is ensures that predictions for each website are only
responsive to the data size and persistence of that website.
    We run the following regressions where the dependent variable, predtcjp represents the pre-
diction error of website j in country c for product type p at time t. e xed e ects are the same
as in the primary empirical speci cation and the standard errors are clustered at the website-
country level, the same as with the previous speci cations:

            predtcjp =  · log(Recorded Searches) + t + jc + c + j + p +                          tcjobp         (8)
            predtcjp =  · Consumer P ersistence + t + jc + c + j + p +                          tcjobp          (9)

    Table 14 displays the OLS estimates of the regression relating total recorded searches on pre-
diction error, using both the MSE and AUC as the dependent variables. We report the results of
running the regressions with and without the website and website-country xed e ects, but our
preferred speci cation is the one without the website and website-country xed e ects.35          is
corresponds to the regression results in Columns (1) and (3) of Table 14. As expected, an increase
in the total recorded searches increases AUC signi cantly and decreases MSE, albeit insigni -
cantly. Recall that our point estimate of the magnitude of lost data from the GDPR was 10.7%.
With this data loss, the magnitude of the predicted decline in prediction error is relatively small
    35
         e reason is that the website-country xed e ects soak up the variation in di erent dataset sizes across web-
sites, even though understanding how this variation impacts prediction error is our main interest.



                                                        51
with a 10.7% decrease in recorded searches only leading to a 0.0007 decrease in AUC.36
    Table 16 displays the OLS estimates of the regression relating four week consumer persistence
to prediction error, using both the MSE and AUC as the dependent variable. As before, we have
regressions with and without website and website-country xed e ects, and focus primarily on
the regressions without them. Recall that we previously found a 0.00505 increase in the four week
persistence as a result of GDPR. Combined with the point estimates from Table 16, this implies
an increase of 0.013 for AUC and a decrease of 0.007 for MSE.
    Pu ing these two results together point to the fact that the decline in the overall scale of data
should have li le impact on predictability, but the change in the nature of the data towards more
identi able consumers should marginally improve prediction according to both AUC and MSE.
However, this does not imply that the scale of data is unimportant which would run counter
to standard statistical intuition; on the contrary, prediction ability improves substantially as the
scale of data increases. Rather, the change in the scale of the data as a result of GDPR is not large
enough to cause meaningful changes in prediction error in the long run. However, the increase
in persistence as a result of GDPR should lead to an improvement in prediction capabilities in the
long run.
    36
       In reality the intermediary does not train its models only on data from the current week, but rather utilizing a
sliding window of data that includes previous weeks. Table 15 shows the results for the same speci cation, but uses
a sliding window total of recorded searches instead of the weekly total number of recorded searches, and shows that
the point estimates do not change much when taking this into account.




                                                          52
               Table 14: Prediction Error and Scale of Data

                                      (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)
                                     AUC          AUC         MSE          MSE
log(Recorded Searches)              0.0154      0.0178      -0.00435     0.000937
                                     (1.84)      (0.98)      (-0.88)       (0.15)
Constant                            0.505       0.510       0.191         0.0987
                                     (4.60)      (2.45)       (2.82)       (1.31)
Product Category Controls
Week FE
Country FE
Website × Country FE
Observations                          874         874          874          874
R2                                   0.129       0.699        0.138        0.936
 
    p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
Notes: t-statistics are reported in parentheses.     e standard errors for every re-
gression are clustered at the website-country level. We aggregate every dependent
variable to the website-country-product type-week level between weeks 4 and 14,
including both weeks 4 and 14 (January 9th - April 5th). e dependent variable in
the regression reported in the rst and second column is AUC. e dependent vari-
ables in the third and fourth column is the MSE. e regression results reported in
column (1) and (3) do not include website or website-country xed e ects, whereas
those reported in column (2) and (4) include these xed e ects.




                                        53
 Table 15: Sliding Window Data Scale and Aggregate Prediction Error

                                         (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)
                                        AUC          AUC          MSE         MSE
log(Two Week Search Total)             0.0158                  -0.00439
                                        (1.88)                  (-0.87)
log(   ree Week Search Total)                      0.0161                   -0.00440
                                                    (1.92)                   (-0.86)
Constant                              0.651        0.479         0.0942      0.192
                                       (5.34)       (4.05)       (1.28)       (2.56)
Product Category Controls
Week FE
Country FE
Website × Country FE
Observations                             868          861         868          861
R2                                      0.129        0.129       0.140        0.142
 
    p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
Notes: t-statistics are reported in parentheses. e standard errors for every regression
are clustered at the website-country level. We aggregate every dependent variable to
the website-country-product type-week level between weeks 4 and 14, including both
weeks 4 and 14 (January 9th - April 5th).       e dependent variable in the regression
reported in the rst and second column is AUC. e dependent variables in the third
and fourth column is the MSE. e regression results reported in column (1) and (3)
do not include website or website-country xed e ects, whereas those reported in
column (2) and (4) include these xed e ects. e Two Week Search Total and ree
Week Search Total variables are computed by summing the total number of searches
observed for each observation over a sliding window of two weeks and three weeks,
respectively.




                                          54
         Table 16: Consumer Persistence and Prediction Error

                                      (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)
                                     AUC         AUC          MSE          MSE
Four Week Persistence              2.621         0.758      -1.401        0.611
                                    (4.55)       (0.95)      (-2.58)      (1.67)
Constant                           0.542        0.686       0.221        0.0852
                                    (11.35)      (20.17)     (4.91)        (5.30)
Product Category Controls
Week FE
Country FE
Website × Country FE
Observations                          874         874          874          874
R2                                   0.230       0.691        0.223        0.938
 
    p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
Notes: t-statistics are reported in parentheses.     e standard errors for every re-
gression are clustered at the website-country level. We aggregate every dependent
variable to the website-country-product type-week level between weeks 4 and 14,
including both weeks 4 and 14 (January 9th - April 5th). e dependent variable in
the regression reported in the rst and second column is AUC. e dependent vari-
ables in the third and fourth column is the MSE. e regression results reported in
column (1) and (3) do not include website or website-country xed e ects, whereas
those reported in column (2) and (4) include these xed e ects.




                                        55
