                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        LEARNING ABOUT THE NEIGHBORHOOD

                                         Zhenyu Gao
                                        Michael Sockin
                                         Wei Xiong

                                      Working Paper 26907
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26907


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020




We are grateful to Itay Goldstein, Laura Veldkamp and seminar participants of 2018 AEA
Meetings, 2018 NBER Asset Pricing Meeting, Fordham University, McGill University and UC
Berkeley for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Zhenyu Gao, Michael Sockin, and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Learning about the Neighborhood
Zhenyu Gao, Michael Sockin, and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 26907
March 2020
JEL No. E22,E44,G1,R3,R31

                                        ABSTRACT

We develop a model to analyze information aggregation and learning in housing markets. In the
presence of pervasive informational frictions, housing prices serve as important signals to
households and capital producers about the economic strength of a neighborhood. Our model
provides a novel mechanism for amplification through learning in which noise from the housing
market can propagate to the local economy, distorting not only migration into the neighborhood,
but also the supply of capital and labor. We provide consistent evidence of our model
implications for housing price volatility and new construction using data from the recent U.S.
housing cycle.

Zhenyu Gao                                     Wei Xiong
Chinese University of Hong Kong                Princeton University
Hong Kong                                      Department of Economics
gaozhenyu@baf.cuhk.edu.hk                      Bendheim Center for Finance
                                               Princeton, NJ 08450
Michael Sockin                                 and NBER
Department of Finance                          wxiong@princeton.edu
UT Austin McCombs School of Business
Austin, TX 78712
michael.sockin@mccombs.utexas.edu
       Economists have long been puzzled by the substantial price uctuations experienced in
housing markets. The recent U.S. housing cycle in the 2000s has renewed attention on
this important issue as it has proved di¢ cult to provide fundamental-based explanations
for housing boom-bust cycles both in the aggregate and across regions (Glaeser, Gyourko,
Morales, and Nathanson 2014, Glaeser and Nathanson 2015). While a growing literature
has emphasized the role of expectations, such as extrapolative beliefs, in shaping housing
dynamics, e.g., Case and Shiller (2003), and Glaeser, Gyourko, and Saiz (2008), it remains
a challenge to link the formation of these expectations to the excessive volatility in housing
prices observed in recent housing boom and bust cycles.1
       In this paper, we address this challenge by developing a model to analyze how infor-
mational frictions a¤ect the learning and beliefs of households and capital producers about
a neighborhood, which, in turn, inuence both local housing markets and investment de-
cisions. We extend the coordination problem with dispersed information to investigate its
role in amplifying the agglomeration e¤ects that underpin the formation of neighborhoods
and cities. In contrast to conventional models of learning, in which noise often dampens real
activity, our model provides a novel ampli...cation mechanism in which learning can amplify
and propagate noise in housing markets and local real investment. In addition, it is able
to generate rich non-monotonic patterns in housing cycles with respect to supply elasticity,
as well as the degree of local consumption complementarity, another dimension in which
neighborhoods di¤er.
       Our model features a continuum of households, each of which has the choice of whether
to move into an open neighborhood, which can be viewed as a Metropolitan Statistical Area
(MSA) or city, by buying a house. To capture the idea that productive households prefer to
live with other productive households, we assume that each household has a Cobb-Douglas
utility function over consumption of its own good and goods produced by other households
in the neighborhood. This complementarity in households' consumption motivates each
household to learn about an unobservable economic strength of the neighborhood, which
determines the common productivity of all households and which leads to complementarity
in their housing demand. To produce its good, each household requires both labor, which
   1
    Intuitively, by amplifying housing price   uctuations, extrapolation makes housing cycles monotonic with
respect to the supply elasticity of land. This prediction, however, does not fully capture the cross-section of
the recent U.S. housing cycle. Many researchers, including Glaeser (2013), Davido¤ (2013), and Nathanson
and Zwick (2018), have noted that the housing price boom and bust were most pronounced in areas that
were not particularly constrained by the supply of land, including Las Vegas and Phoenix.


                                                      1
it supplies, and local capital, such as o¢ ce space and warehouse. Since the price of local
capital depends on its marginal product across households in the neighborhood, competitive
capital producers must also form expectations about the neighborhood'
                                                                    s economic strength
when determining how much local capital to develop, providing a channel to amplify the
economic e¤ects of housing market noise.
   Although previously unexplored in the housing literature, it is intuitive that local housing
markets provide a useful platform for aggregating private information about the economic
strength of a neighborhood. The traded housing price reects the net e¤ect of demand and
supply-side factors, in a similar spirit to the classic models of Grossman and Stiglitz (1980)
and Hellwig (1980) for information aggregation in asset markets. In contrast to conventional
security markets, in which who owns the asset does not a¤ect asset cash ows, which house-
holds own houses determines the convenience yield of living in the neighborhood, through
the quality of services and social interactions the neighborhood provides, which, in turn,
determines the value of housing. Which households buy houses also guides the investment
decisions of capital producers, who must predict future neighborhood demographics when
deciding how much capital to supply. As a result of the complementarity and informational
frictions, noise in the housing market can impact the local economy because households and
capital producers use housing market signals when forecasting each other'
                                                                        s housing and real
investment decisions. This gives rise to a feedback loop, through which the extrapolative-like
behavior of households and capital producers, induced by learning, leads to not only a more
pronounced housing cycle but also an oversupply of new housing and local capital, consistent
with the empirical ...ndings of Gao, Sockin, and Xiong (2019). Through this feedback loop,
learning can amplify housing price movements and contribute to excessive price volatility.
   Our analysis illustrates how the transmission of noise in housing markets to real estate
and production outcomes varies across di¤erent neighborhoods by the elasticity of local
housing supply-- in a hump-shaped pattern. At intermediate supply elasticities, the housing
price has balanced weights on the demand-side and supply-side fundamentals. In the pres-
ence of informational frictions, the balanced weights make learning from the housing price
particularly noisy. In contrast, at one extreme when housing supply is in...nitely inelastic,
the housing price is fully determined by housing demand, and perfectly reveals the strength
of the neighborhood; at the other extreme, when housing supply is perfectly elastic, housing
prices are fully determined by housing supply. At both extremes, learning does not distort



                                              2
the housing price. As a result, the noise e¤ects induced by informational frictions on housing
prices are strongest at intermediate supply elasticities.
   Our analysis also examines this transmission across the degree of households'consump-
tion complementarity, which one can interpret as the share of consumption from local non-
tradable industries. The distortionary e¤ects of learning on the housing market tend to
increase with complementarity, since greater complementarity makes learning about the
neighborhood strength a more important part of each household'
                                                             s decisions. As such, our
analysis predicts a monotonically increasing pattern in the magnitudes of housing price boom
and bust with respect to the degree of complementarity.
   To illustrate empirical relevance of our model, we sort the cross-section of MSAs in the
U.S. by their supply elasticity and the degree of complementarity. We systematically docu-
ment that the non­monotonic pattern with respect to supply elasticity was more ubiquitous
during the recent U.S. housing bubble than previously appreciated-- in not only the mag-
nitude of the housing price cycle, which serves as a proxy of the volatility ampli...cation
illustrated by our model, but also in new housing construction. Moreover, the magnitude
of the housing price cycle appears to be monotonically increasing across the degree of com-
plementarity. Taken together, these cross-sectional patterns of recent housing boom-bust
cycles con...rm our model implications, further validating the necessity for our new economic
mechanism in which expectations interact with housing cycles beyond extrapolative beliefs.
   Also di¤erent from the conventional linear equilibria in asset market models, each house-
hold'
    s neighborhood selection makes our model inherently nonlinear. Nevertheless, we are
able to derive the equilibrium analytically, building on and contributing to the growing litera-
ture that analyzes information aggregation in nonlinear settings. Goldstein, Ozdenoren, and
Yuan (2013) investigate the feedback to the investment decisions of a single ...rm when man-
agers, but not investors, learn from prices. Albagli, Hellwig, and Tsyvinski (2015, 2017) focus
on the role of asymmetry in security payo¤s in distorting asset prices and ...rm investment
incentives when future shareholders learn from prices to determine their valuations. These
models commonly employ risk-neutral agents, normally distributed asset fundamentals, and
position limits to deliver tractable nonlinear equilibria. In contrast, we focus on the feedback
induced by learning from housing prices to households'moving and consumption decisions
and capital producers'investment decisions. By showing that the cuto¤ equilibrium frame-
work can be adopted to analyze these richer learning e¤ects, our model substantially expands



                                               3
the scope of this framework to a general equilibrium real business cycle environment. In this
regard, our model also adds to the literature, e.g., Bond, Edmans and Goldstein (2012), on
the real e¤ects of learning from trading prices.
       While long appreciated as important explanation for housing market behavior, such as
in Garmaise and Moskowitz (2004), Kurlat and Stroebel (2014), Favara and Song (2014),
and Bailey et al. (2017), informational frictions have yet to be applied to understanding the
recent U.S. housing cycle and its real e¤ects. The literature has instead focused on other
causes ranging from credit expansion and fraudulent lending practices to speculation and
optimistic, often extrapolative, expectations.2 By anchoring household expectations to local
economic conditions, our theory provides guidance as to where optimism and overreaction
had the most pronounced impact on housing and local economic outcomes during the boom,
and o¤ers novel empirical predictions on non-monotonic patterns in housing cycles and new
construction with respect to supply elasticity and the degree of complementarity. In addi-
tion, our mechanism can rationalize the synchronized boom and bust cycles in commercial
real estate markets, in which prices and new construction rose across the U.S. despite the
bubble in housing (e.g., Gyourko (2009) and Levitin and Wachter (2013)). By impacting
the demand curve for housing, informational frictions complement the credit expansion and
fraud channels and, by facilitating heterogeneous beliefs, can give rise to speculative demand.
       Our model adds to the literature on the theoretical modeling of housing cycles. Burnside,
Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2016) o¤er a model of housing market booms and busts based on
the epidemic spreading of optimistic or pessimistic beliefs among home buyers through their
social interactions. Nathanson and Zwick (2018) study the hoarding of land by home builders
with heterogeneous beliefs in intermediate elastic areas as a mechanism to amplify price
volatility in the recent U.S. housing cycle. Piazzesi and Schneider (2009) investigate how
a small population of optimists can inate housing prices by driving transaction volume.
Glaeser and Nathanson (2017) presents a model of biased learning in housing markets in
which the incorrect inference by home buyers gives rise to correlated errors in housing demand
forecasts over time, which, in turn, generate excess volatility, momentum, and mean-reversion
   2
    For credit expansion, see, for instance, Mian and Su... (2009, 2011) and Albanesi et al. (2017). For
fraudulent lending practices, see Keys et al. (2009) and Gri¢ n and Maturana (2015). For speculation, see
Chinco and Mayer (2015), Nathanson and Zwick (2018), DeFusco, Nathanson, and Zwick (2017), and Gao,
Sockin and Xiong (2019). For extrapolative expectations, see Case and Shiller (2003), Glaeser, Gyourko,
and Saiz (2008), Piazzesi and Schneider (2009), Cheng, Raina and Xiong (2014), and Glaeser and Nathanson
(2017).



                                                   4
in housing prices. Guren (2016) develops a model of housing price momentum, building on
the incentive of individual sellers not to set a unilaterally high or low list price because
the demand curve they face is concave in the relative price. In contrast to these models,
informational frictions in our framework anchor on the interaction between the demand and
supply sides of the housing market (rather than treating them as mutually independent),
and feed back to both housing prices and real outcomes. This key feature is also distinct
from the ampli...cation of price volatility induced by dispersed information and short-sale
constraints featured in Favara and Song (2014).


1       The Model
The model has two periods t 2 f1; 2g and a single neighborhood.3 We interpret a neighbor-
hood conceptually as a physical location in which households locate close to each other to
bene...t from their physical proximity, which could, in principle, be as broad as a Metropolitan
Statistical Area (MSA) or a city. There are three types of agents in the economy: households
looking to buy homes in the neighborhood, home builders, and capital producers. Suppose
that this neighborhood is new and that all households purchase houses from home builders
in a centralized market at t = 1 after choosing whether to live in it. Households choose
their labor supply and demand for capital, such as o¢ ce space and warehouses, to complete
production, and trade and consume consumption goods at t = 2: Our intention is to capture
the decision of a generation of home owners to move into a neighborhood. While static,
our two period setting can represent a long period in which they live together and share
amenities, as well as exchange their goods and services.

1.1     Households
We consider a pool of households, indexed by i 2 [0; 1], each of which can choose either
to live in or outside the neighborhood. Similar to Glaeser, Gyourko, and Saiz (2008), we
consider only a single neighborhood and model this decision as a one-time option, with the
reservation utility of living outside the neighborhood normalized for all households to zero.
One can interpret the reservation utility as the expected value of paying a search cost to get
a draw of productivity from another potential neighborhood. We can divide the unit interval
    3
    For simplicity and tractability, our model features only a single neighborhood with a ...xed outside option.
In doing so, we abstract from the rich cross-sectional implications that arise in spatial equilibrium models
such as Rosen (1979), Roback (1982), and Van Nieuwerburgh and Weill (2010).

                                                       5
into the partition fN ; Og ; with N \ O = ? and N [ O = [0; 1] : Let Hi = 1 if household i
chooses to live in the neighborhood, i.e., i 2 N , and Hi = 0 if it chooses to live elsewhere.
If household i at t = 1 chooses to live in the neighborhood, it must purchase one house at
price P: This reects, in part, that housing is an indivisible asset and a discrete purchase,
consistent with the insights of Piazzesi and Schneider (2009).
    A key feature of housing markets is that households who locate near each other bene...t
from each other'
               s goods and services, for instance, by patronizing each other'
                                                                            s restaurants,
shopping at each other'
                      s groceries, attending each other'
                                                       s schools, and seeking each other'
                                                                                        s
medical and legal services. These goods and services from "non-tradable" industries rely
on local demand and represent the social interactions underpinning the complementarity in
housing choice that leads households of similar income, ideology, and/or socioeconomic status
to live in the same neighborhood. Such complementarity also captures the agglomeration
and spillover e¤ects from households and ...rms locating near each other.
    To incorporate this complementarity, we adopt a particular structure for their goods
consumption and trading. Each household in the neighborhood produces a distinct good from
the other households. Household i has a Cobb-Douglas utility function over consumption of
its own good Ci (i) and its consumption of the goods produced by all other households in the
neighborhood fCj (i)gj 2N =i :
                                                                     R                      !   c
                                                             1                  Cj (i) dj
                                                   Ci (i)        c
                                                                         N =i
                     U fCj (i)gj 2N ; N       =                                                     :       (1)
                                                   1     c                        c

The parameter       c   2 (0; 1) measures the weights of di¤erent consumption components in the
utility function. A higher         c   indicates a stronger complementarity between household i0 s
consumption of its own good and its consumption of the composite good produced by the
other households in the neighborhood.4 This utility speci...cation implies that each household
cares about the strength of the neighborhood, i.e., the productivity of other households in the
neighborhood. This assumption leads to strategic complementarity in households'housing
demand, an important feature emphasized by the empirical literature, such as in Ioannides
and Zabel (2003).5
   4
     Alternatively, this complementarity could re   ect that households and ...rms require each other'  s inter-
mediate goods and services as inputs to their own production. Similar speci...cations of this utility function
are employed, for instance, in Dixit and Stiglitz (1977) and Long and Plosser (1987) to give rise to input and
                                                                    1  c      R              c
output linkages in sectoral production. One can view 1 1 Ci (i)            1
                                                                                   C (i) dj
                                                                               N =i j
                                                                                               as a ...nal good
                                                             c              c
produced by household i given intermediate goods fCj (i)gi2N :
   5
     While our model builds on complementarity in household consumption, other types of social interac-

                                                       6
    The production function of household i is also Cobb-Douglas:

                                                         1
                                                 eAi Ki li        ;

where Ai is its productivity, li is the household'
                                                 s labor choice, and Ki is its choice of capital
with a share of      2 (0; 1) in the production function. We broadly interpret capital as both
public and private investment in the neighborhood, which can include o¢ ce, warehouses,
and other equipment and infrastructure households can use for their productive activities.6
As we describe later, households buy capital from capital producers. When households are
more productive in the neighborhood, the marginal productivity of capital is higher, and
consequently capital producers are able to sell more capital at higher prices. Introducing
capital allows us to discuss how learning a¤ects the price and supply of not only residential
housing, but also of local investment in the neighborhood.
    Household i'
               s productivity Ai is comprised of a component A; common to all households
in the neighborhood, and an idiosyncratic component "i :

                                                A i = A + "i ;

                           1                         1
where A s N A;         A       and "i s N (0;
                                       ) are both normally distributed and independent
                                                 "
                                            R
of each other. Furthermore, we assume that "i d ("i ) = 0 by the Strong Law of Large
Numbers. The common productivity, A, represents the strength of the neighborhood, as
a higher A implies a more productive neighborhood. As A determines the households'
aggregate demand for housing, it also represents the demand-side fundamental.
    As a result of realistic informational frictions, A is not observable to households at t = 1
when they need to make the decision of whether to live in the neighborhood. Instead, each
household observes its own productivity Ai ; after examining what it can do if it chooses to live
in the neighborhood. Intuitively, Ai combines the strength of the neighborhood A and the
household'
         s own attribute "i . Thus, Ai also serves as a noisy private signal about A at t = 1;
as the household cannot fully separate its own attribute from the opportunity provided by the
neighborhood. The parameter            "   governs both the household diversity in the neighborhood
and the precision of this private signal. As             "   ! 1, the households'signals become in...nitely
tions between households in a neighborhood may also lead to complementarity in their housing demand, as
discussed in Durlauf (2004) and Glaeser, Sacerdote, and Scheinkman (2003).
   6
     In the case that K is a public good, its price can be interpreted as the tax a local government that faces
a balanced budget can raise to o¤set the cost of construction. Our model then has implications for how
housing markets impact the ...scal policy of local governments.


                                                             7
precise and the informational frictions about A vanish. Households care about the strength
of the neighborhood because of complementarity in their demand for consumption. While a
household may have a fairly good understanding of its own productivity when moving into
a neighborhood, complementarity in consumption demand motivates it to pay attention to
housing prices to learn about the average level of productivity A for the neighborhood.
       We start with each household'
                                   s problem at t = 2 and then work backward to describe its
problem at t = 1: At t = 2; A is revealed to all agents and we assume that each household
                                           1+
experiences a disutility for supply labor li  = (1 + ) : A household in the neighborhood (i.e.,
i 2 N ) maximizes its utility at t = 2 by choosing labor li ; capital Ki ; and its consumption
demand fCj (i)gj 2N :
                                                                             1+
                                                                            li
                Ui =           max               U fCj (i)gj 2N ; N                                        (2)
                        ffCj (i)gj2N ;li ;Ki g                              1+
                                                      Z
                        such that pi Ci (i) +                                                 1
                                                              pj Cj (i) dj + RKi = pi eAi Ki li   ;
                                                       N =i

where pi is the price of the good it produces and R is the unit price of capital. Households
behave competitively and take the prices of their goods as given.
       At t = 1; each household needs to decide whether to live in the neighborhood. In addition
to their private signals, all households and capital producers observe a noisy public signal Q
about the strength of the neighborhood A:
                                                                1=2
                                                  Q=A+         Q    "Q ;

where "Q s N (0; 1) is independent of all other shocks. As                    Q   becomes arbitrarily large, A
becomes common knowledge to all agents. This public signal could, for instance, be news
reports or published statistics on local economic conditions.
       In addition to the utility ow Ui at t = 2 from goods consumption and labor disutility, we
assume that households have quasi-linear expected utility at t = 1 and, similar to Glaeser,
Gyourko, and Saiz (2008), incur a linear utility penalty equal to the housing price P if they
choose to buy a house in the neighborhood.7 All housing units are homogenous and have the
same price. Given that households have Cobb-Douglas preferences over their consumption,
they are e¤ectively risk-neutral at t = 1; and their utility ow is their expected payo¤, or the
   7
    For simplicity, our model does not incorporate resale of housing after t = 2. As a result, we do not
include the housing price P into the household'    s budget constraint at t = 2. Instead, we treat the housing
as a separate linear utility cost at t = 1 following Glaeser, Gyourko, and Saiz (2008).

                                                          8
value of their ...nal consumption bundle less the cost of housing.8 Each household is subject
to a participation constraint that its expected utility from moving into the neighborhood
E [Ui jIi ]   P must (weakly) exceed its reservation utility, which we normalize to 0:

                                          max fE [Ui jIi ]   P; 0g :                                     (3)

The moving decision is made at t = 1 subject to each household'
                                                              s information set Ii =
fAi ; P; Qg ; which includes its private productivity signal Ai ; the public signal Q, and the
housing price P:9

1.2       Capital Producers
In addition to households, there is a continuum of risk-neutral capital producers that de-
velop capital at t = 1; and sells this capital to households for their production at t = 2:
Similar to many macroeconomic models, such as Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999), we
model capital producers as a separate sector in the neighborhood, although we match their
population with households to simplify aggregation. This introduces a market-wide supply
curve for capital, and consequently a market-wide price, at t = 2; while avoiding introducing
a speculative retrade motive into households'capital accumulation decisions.
       The representative producer cares about the price of capital at t = 2, R; which depends on
capital'
       s marginal productivity. This, in turn, depends on the strength of the neighborhood,
and which households choose to live in the neighborhood. As a consequence, the housing
price in the neighborhood serves as a useful signal to the producer when deciding how much
capital to develop at t = 1: We assume that each capital producer can develop K units of
capital by incurring a convex e¤ort cost 1 K ; where                 > 1.
       While households buy capital from capital producers at t = 2; capital producers must
forecast this demand when choosing how much capital K to develop at t = 1; in order to
maximize its expected pro...t:
                                                             1
                                      c   = sup E RK             K    Ic                                 (4)
                                             K
   8
     While we focus on a static setting, introducing dynamics would reinforce our ampli...cation mechanism
stemming from learning. Since future housing prices are related to aggregate productivity growth in the
neighborhood, households most optimistic about moving into the neighborhood because of trading opportu-
nities today would also be the most optimistic in speculating about the value of selling their house to other
households in the future.
   9
     We do not include the volume of housing transactions in the information set as a result of a realistic
consideration that, in practice, people observe only delayed reports of total housing transactions at highly
aggregated levels, such as national or metropolitan levels.

                                                      9
where I c = fP; Qg is the public information set, which includes the housing price P and the
public signal Q. It then follows that the optimal choice of capital sets the marginal cost,
       1
K          ; equal to the expected price, E [ Rj I c ]:
                                                                     1
                                              K = E [ Rj I c ]           1   :

The realized housing price a¤ects the expectation of capital producers about the neighbor-
hood'
    s strength A; which, in turn, impacts their choice of how much capital to develop. As
a consequence, in addition to altering the moving decision of potential household entrants,
informational frictions in the housing market also distort investment in the neighborhood.
       Introducing capital plays a key role in amplifying the e¤ects of informational frictions
in the neighborhood. While, in principle, we could characterize learning in housing markets
without introducing capital (as the special case when                            = 0), the inability of the capital
supply to adjust at t = 2; when the strength of the neighborhood A is publicly known,
introduces an important, persistent distortion to each household'
                                                                s production decision. At
t = 2; while households can adjust their labor choice to mitigate the rational mistake that
either too many or too few households entered the neighborhood ex post, the inability for
capital to adjust nevertheless distorts the marginal product of labor for households as a
result of the informational frictions. Such overhang from the excessive production of capital
is important for understanding the recent U.S. housing boom and bust cycle, as areas such
as Las Vegas and Phoenix saw overbuilding of commercial real estate in addition to housing.
This capital misallocation also protracts the reversal after the bust: even if learning occurs
quickly, the limited reversibility of housing and capital delays the subsequent correction.10

1.3          Home Builders
There is a population of home builders, indexed on a continuum [0; 1] ; in the neighborhood.
Builder i 2 [0; 1] builds a single house subject to a disutility from labor
                                                       1
                                                         !
                                                  e   1+k i   Si ;

where Si 2 f0; 1g is the builder'
                                s decision to build and

                                                  ! i = + ei
  10
    Such reversals are also, in fact, likely to be asymmetric depending on whether the local economy over or
under-reacted to the true demand fundamental: it is likely easier to adjust upward the level of housing and
capital than to adjust downward since housing and capital often entail costly reversibility.

                                                       10
is the builder'
              s productivity, which is correlated across builders in the neighborhood through
 : We assume that          = k ; where k > 0 is a constant parameter, and                    represents an
unobserved, common shock to building costs in the neighborhood. From the perspective of
                                                1
households and builders,         s N       ;         : Then,       = k can be interpreted as a common
supply shock with normal distribution s N ; k 2 1 with = k : Furthermore, ei s
                     R
N (0; e 1 ) such that ei d (ei ) = 0 by the Strong Law of Large Numbers.
       At t = 1; each builder maximizes his pro...t
                                                                    1
                                                                      !
                                    s   (Si ) = max       P    e   1+k i       Si :                       (5)
                                                    Si

Since builders are risk-neutral, each builder'
                                             s optimal supply curve is
                                                                   k +ei
                                                1 if P         e    1+k
                                         Si =                      k +ei   :                              (6)
                                                0 if P < e          1+k


The parameter k measures the supply elasticity of the neighborhood, which can arise, for
instance, from structural limitations to building or zoning regulation. In the housing market
equilibrium, the supply shock           not only a¤ects the supply side of the housing market but
also demand, as it acts as informational noise in the price signal when households use the
price to learn about the common productivity A: The elasticity parameter k determines the
amount of this informational noise in the price signal.11

1.4       Noisy Rational Expectations Cuto¤ Equilibrium
Our model features a noisy rational expectations cuto¤ equilibrium, which requires clearing of
the real estate and capital markets that is consistent with the optimal behavior of households,
home builders, and capital producers:

         Household optimization: each household chooses Hi at t = 1 to solve its maximization
         problem in (3), and then chooses fCj (i)gi2N ; li ; Ki at t = 2 to solve its maximization
         problem in (2).
  11
    Although convenient for tractability, our speci...cation of the housing supply curve is not essential for
our key insight. We could instead have considered a setting with three neighborhoods: one with a perfectly
inelastic housing supply, one with a perfectly elastic housing supply, and one in which housing supply is
price-elastic and subject to noisy supply shocks. As supply is ...xed in the perfectly inelastic area, housing
price re  ects only demand fundamental, and fully reveals the neighborhood strength A: In the perfectly
elastic area, housing price always equals the marginal cost of building, and contains no information about
A: It is in the intermediate elasticity area, where housing price is driven by both demand and supply-side
factors, households and capital producers face the most severe ...ltering problem in inferring A from housing
price, a key feature captured by our more stylized model of housing supply.

                                                         11
     Capital producer optimization: the representative producer chooses K at t = 1 to solve
     its maximization problem in (4).

     Builder optimization: each builder chooses Si at t = 1 to solve his maximization
     problem in (5).

     At t = 1; the housing price P clears the housing market:
                      Z 1                          Z 1
                          Hi (Ai ; P; Q) d ("i ) =     Si (! i ; P; Q) d (ei ) ;
                              1                          1

     where each household'
                         s housing demand Hi (Ai ; P; Q) depends on its productivity
     Ai , the housing price P; and the public signal Q, and each builder'
                                                                        s housing supply
     Si (! i ; P; Q) depends on its productivity ! i ; the housing price P; and the public sig-
     nal Q: The demand from households and supply from builders are integrated over the
     idiosyncratic components of their productivity f"i gi2[0;1] and fei gi2[0;1] ; respectively.

     At t = 2; the consumption good price clears the market for each household'
                                                                              s good:
                                 Z
                        Ci (i) +                         1
                                    Ci (j ) dj = eAi Ki li ; 8 i 2 N;
                                        N =i

     and the capital price R clears the market for capital:
                                       Z            Z
                                         Ki di = K     di;                                     (7)
                                               N           N
             R
     where       N
                     di represents the population of households that live in the neighborhood.


2    Equilibrium
In this section, we analyze the housing market equilibrium. We ...rst analyze each household'
                                                                                            s
optimization problem given in (2), by conjecturing that only households with productivity
higher than a cuto¤ A enter the neighborhood. We then derive a unique equilibrium cuto¤
A that satis...es the clearing condition of the housing market. Finally, we verify at the
end of the section that the derived cuto¤ equilibrium is the unique rational expectations
equilibrium, in which the choice of each household to live in the neighborhood is monotonic
with respect to its own productivity Ai :




                                                   12
2.1    Choices of Households and Capital Producers
We ...rst analyze the choices of households living in the neighborhood at t = 2; after its
strength A has been revealed to the public and capital producers and home builders have
chosen their supply of capital and housing at t = 1. The following proposition describes
the household'
             s optimal consumption, labor, and capital choices at t = 1. All proofs are
relegated to the Appendix.

                                     1+
Proposition 1 Let ' =       (1     ) +(1+    )
                                                     ; then at t = 2; households i's optimal goods con-
                                                 c

sumption is
                                                                             1
   Ci (i) = (1     c ) (1
                                         1
                               ) eAi Ki li   ; Cj (i) =               p                             c   (1             1
                                                                                                             ) eAj Kj lj   ;
                                                                          " (A         A)

and the price of its good is

                                 pi = E e'(Aj          Ai )
                                                              j A; Aj      A       c
                                                                                       :

Its optimal labor and capital choices are
                                                          1      c
        log li = lA A + ls Ai + lR log R +                           log E e'(Aj           A)
                                                                                                j A; Aj      A    + l0 ;
                                                      1
                                                                 +
      log Ki = (1 + ) lA A + (1 + ) ls Ai +                             lR log R
                   + (1 + ) l log E e'(Aj              A)
                                                              j A; Aj     A      + h0 ;

                                 dlA             dlA
where lA ; ls > 0 > lR and       d c
                                       > 0 >     d c
                                                     ;    and all coe¢ cients are given in the Appendix.
Furthermore, the expected utility of household i at t = 1 is given by
         "                                   #
                                      1+
                                     li
        E U fCj (i)gj 2N ; N               Ii = (1      )                     1
                                                                 E pi eAi Ki li                                  Ii :
                                    1+                    1+

   Proposition 1 shows that each household spends a fraction 1                                  c   of its wealth (excluding
housing wealth) on consuming its own good Ci (i) and a fraction c on goods produced by its
         R
neighbors N =i Cj (i) dj . Households value each other'
                                                      s goods as a result of the complemen-
tarity in their utility functions, and the price of a household'
                                                               s good is inversely determined
by the level of its output relative to that of the rest of the neighborhood. A household'
                                                                                        s
good is thus more valuable when the rest of the neighborhood is more productive.
   Proposition 1 also reveals that each household'
                                                 s optimal choices of labor and capital are
both log-linear in the strength of the neighborhood, the household'
                                                                  s own productivity, and

                                                          13
the logarithm of the capital price. The ...nal (nonconstant) term is the average idiosyncratic
productivity of households above the cuto¤ A ; reecting that only the households that are
most productive choose to live in the neighborhood. The optimal labor choice and demand
for capital are both increasing in the strength of the neighborhood, because a stronger
neighborhood represents improved trading opportunities with its neighbors, while they are
both decreasing in the price of capital.
   We now discuss each household'
                                s decision on whether to live in the neighborhood at t = 1
when it still faces uncertainty about A. As a result of its Cobb-Douglas utility, the household
is e¤ectively risk-neutral over its aggregate consumption, and its optimal choice reects the
di¤erence between its expected utility from living in the neighborhood and the cost P of
buying a house in the neighborhood. Then, household i'
                                                     s neighborhood decision is given by
                                                                       1
                                   1 if (1           ) 1+ E pi eAi Ki li           Ii     P
                      Hi =                                             1
                                                                                              :
                                   0 if (1           ) 1+ E pi eAi Ki li           Ii < P
This decision rule supports our conjecture to search for a cuto¤ strategy for each household,
in which only households with productivity above a critical level A enter the neighborhood.
This cuto¤ is eventually solved as a ...xed point in the equilibrium.
   Given each household'
                       s equilibrium cuto¤ A at t = 1 and optimal choices at t = 2 from
Proposition 1, we impose market-clearing in the market for capital to derive its price R at
t = 2: Capital producers forecast this price to choose how much capital to develop at t = 1.
These observations are summarized in the following proposition.

Proposition 2 Given K units of capital developed by capital producers at t = 1, the price
of capital at t = 2 takes the log-linear form:
              1+          (1   )          1+
   log R =          A            log K +           log E e'(Aj A) j A; Aj                              A                 (8)
                +           +               + c
                 (1   )                                              1
              +         log E e(1 c )'(Aj A) j A; Aj A + log +                                         log (1       ):
                   +                                                    +
The optimal supply of capital by capital producers at t = 1 is given by
                      1+                                          1+                                                (1     )
                           A
            log E e    +       E e'(Aj   A)
                                                 j A; Aj     A     +   c
                                                                           E e(1    c )'(Aj   A)
                                                                                                   j A; Aj      A     +
                                                                                                                               Ic
log K =                                                                    1+
                                                                            +
                                         1
                           + log    +              log (1        );                                                            (9)
                                             +
             1+
where         +
                  > 0:

                                                            14
       Proposition 2 reveals that the capital price at t = 2 is increasing in the strength of the
neighborhood and in the average idiosyncratic productivity of the households that choose to
live in the neighborhood, i.e., the last two (nonconstant) terms of (8). As one would expect,
it is also decreasing in the supply of capital chosen at t = 1: Importantly, equation (9) shows
that the optimal supply of capital at t = 1 reects the expectations of capital builders not
only over the strength of the neighborhood, but also the impact on the pool of households
that select into the neighborhood. Intuitively, a higher productivity cuto¤ for households
to join the neighborhood raises both the price at which households charge each other for
their goods, pi ; and the average marginal product of capital compared to that of the full
population.

2.2       Perfect-Information Benchmark
In this subsection, we characterize a positive benchmark. With perfect information, all
households, home builders, and capital producers observe the strength of the neighborhood A
at t = 1 when making their respective decisions.12 Households will sort into the neighborhood
according to a cuto¤ equilibrium determined by the net bene...t of living in the neighborhood,
which trades o¤ the opportunity of trading with other households in the neighborhood with
the price of housing. Despite the inherent nonlinearity of our framework, the following
proposition summarizes a tractable, unique rational expectations cuto¤ equilibrium that is
characterized by the solution to a ...xed-point problem over the endogenous cuto¤ of entry
into the neighborhood, A :

Proposition 3 In the absence of informational frictions, there exists a unique rational ex-
pectations cuto¤ equilibrium, in which the following hold:

   1. Given that other households follow a cuto¤ strategy, household i also follows a cuto¤
         strategy in its moving decision such that
                                                 1 if Ai A (A; )
                                         Hi =                      ;
                                                 0 if Ai < A (A; )

         where A (A; ) solves equation (23) in the Appendix.
  12
     This perfect-information setting may not be a normative benchmark. It is not obvious that the perfect-
information setting is the "...rst-best"outcome, since households may over or under-coordinate their actions,
e.g. Angeletos and Pavan (2007), or overreact to public signals, e.g. Angeletos and Pavan (2004), Amador
and Weill (2010), in the presence of strategic complementarity.


                                                     15
  2. The cuto¤ productivity A (A; ) is monotonically decreasing in ; and is increasing
      in A if   c   <   c   and hump-shaped in A if   c   >   c,   where   c   is given in (24) in the
      Appendix.

  3. The population entering the neighborhood is monotonically increasing in both A and :

  4. The housing price takes the following log-linear form:
                                              r
                                        1         "
                             log P =                (A A )                 :                     (10)
                                      1+k         e


  5. The housing price P and the utility of the household with the cuto¤ productivity A are
      increasing and convex in A:

   Proposition 3 characterizes the unique rational expectations cuto¤ equilibrium in the
perfect-information benchmark, and con...rms the optimality of a cuto¤ strategy for each
household'
         s moving decision when other households adopt a cuto¤ strategy. Households sort
based on their individual productivity into the neighborhood, with the more productive, who
expect more gains from living in the neighborhood, entering and participating in production
at t = 2: This determines the supply of labor at t = 2; and, through this channel, the price
of capital at t = 2:
   The optimal cuto¤ A (A; ) ; determined by equation (23), represents the productivity of
the marginal household who is indi¤erent to entering the neighborhood. The bene...t to the
marginal household, the expected utility gain from producing and trading with other house-
holds, should be equal to the cost, or the housing price. With Cobb-Douglas preferences, this
bene...t is equal to the expected value of the marginal household'
                                                                 s output from production,
which is increasing in the marginal household'
                                             s productivity. The housing price, in contrast,
is decreasing in the marginal household'
                                       s productivity, since the price is increasing in the size
of the population owing into the neighborhood. The upward sloping bene...t and downward
sloping cost gives rise to a unique cuto¤ productivity, and consequently to a unique rational
expectations cuto¤ equilibrium.
   The proposition also provides comparative statics of the equilibrium cuto¤ A (A; ) and
the population that enters the neighborhood. This cuto¤ is decreasing in ; since a lower
housing price incentivizes more households to enter the neighborhood for a given neighbor-
hood strength A: As a result, a higher population enters the neighborhood as                increases.


                                               16
The relation between the cuto¤ and neighborhood strength A; in contrast, reects two o¤-
setting forces. On the one hand, a higher A implies a higher housing price and a higher price
of capital, which raises the cuto¤ productivity since it is now more expensive to live in the
neighborhood; on the other, complementarity lowers the cuto¤ because the gains from trade
for high realizations of A partially o¤set the increase in prices. As a result, the cuto¤ is ei-
ther increasing in A when complementarity is low and hump-shaped when complementarity
is su¢ ciently high. Regardless of whether the cuto¤ increases or is hump-shaped in A; the
population that enters the neighborhood increases with A because a higher A shifts right
the distribution of households more than it moves the cuto¤.
   Given a cuto¤ productivity A (A; ) ; the housing price P positively loads on the strength
of the neighborhood A; since a higher A implies stronger demand for housing, and loads
negatively on the supply shock . As one would expect, the cuto¤ A enters negatively into
the price. The higher the cuto¤, the fewer the households that enter the neighborhood, and
the lower housing demand. Despite its log-linear representation, the housing price is actually
                                 p "
a generalized linear function of   e
                                     A    ; since A is an implicit function of A and log P .

2.3    Equilibrium with Informational Frictions
Having characterized the perfect-information benchmark, we now turn to the equilibrium in
the presence of informational frictions. With informational frictions, at t = 1 households
and capital producers must now forecast the strength of the neighborhood A; and the price
of capital R at t = 2. Each household'
                                     s type Ai serves as a private signal about the strength
of the neighborhood A: The publicly observed housing price serves as a public signal. As
the equilibrium housing price is a nonlinear function of A, it poses a signi...cant challenge
to our derivation of the learning of households and producers. Interestingly, the equilibrium
housing price maintains the same functional form as in (10) for the perfect-information
benchmark. As a result, the information content of the publicly observed housing price can
be summarized by a su¢ cient statistic z (P ) that is linear in A and the supply shock :
                                                 r
                                                      e
                                   z (P ) = A            :                              (11)
                                                         "

In our analysis, we shall ...rst conjecture this linear su¢ cient statistic, and then verify that it
indeed holds in the equilibrium. This conjectured linear statistic helps to ensure tractability
of the equilibrium, despite that the equilibrium housing price is highly nonlinear.


                                                17
   By solving for the learning of households and capital producers based on the conjectured
su¢ cient statistic from the housing price, and by clearing the aggregate housing demand
from the households with the supply from home builders, we derive the housing market
equilibrium. The following proposition summarizes this equilibrium.

Proposition 4 There exists a unique noisy rational expectations cuto¤ equilibrium in the
presence of informational frictions, in which the following hold:

  1. The housing price takes a log-linear form:
                              r                                                          r
                         1         "                                      1                   "
              log P =                (A A )                            =                          (z       A)     :   (12)
                       1+k         e                                     1+k                  e


  2. The posterior of household i after observing housing price P; the public signal Q; and
                                                               ^i and variance ^A given by
     its productivity Ai is Gaussian with the conditional mean A

                             ^i = ^ 1                                            "
                             A     A              AA      +       QQ   +             z+      " Ai      ;
                                                                                 e
                                                              "
                          ^A =           A   +    Q   +            +        ";
                                                              e

     and the posterior of capital producers, after observing housing price P and the public
     signal Q, is also Gaussian with the conditional mean A ^c and variance ^c given by
                                                                             A


                               ^c = ^c            1                                  "
                               A     A                    AA      +    QQ        +        z ;
                                                                                     e
                                                                   "
                               ^c
                                A =           A   +    Q   +            :
                                                                   e


  3. Given that other households follow a cuto¤ strategy, household i also follows a cuto¤
     strategy in its moving decision
                                                  1 if Ai A (z; Q)
                                    Hi =                             ;
                                                  0 if Ai < A (z; Q)
     where A (z; Q) is the unique root to equation (26) in the Appendix.

  4. The supply of capital takes the form:
                                                                                             1+
                                1                  ^c                                         +
                   log K =          1+
                                             log F A              A ; ^c
                                                                       A +                        1+
                                                                                                       A + k0 ;
                                     +                                                             +

             ^c
     where F A        A ; ^c
                           A is given in the Appendix, and log K is increasing in the condi-
                                        ^c :
     tional belief of capital producers A

                                                       18
    5. The cuto¤ productivity A is decreasing, while the population entering the neighborhood
         and the housing price P are increasing, in the noise in the public signal "Q : These prop-
         erties also hold with respect to z under a su¢ cient, although not necessary, condition
                13
         that                                                                           r
                                                              1+
                              1+k                              +    + + (1      ) c          "
                                                            1+
                                                                                                 :
                        1+ " ( A+
                            e
                                            Q) k             +
                                                                    (1  c ) (1 + )           e

    6. The equilibrium converges to the perfect-information benchmark in Proposition 3 as
          Q   % 1:

       Proposition 4 con...rms that, in the presence of informational frictions, each household
will optimally adopt a cuto¤ strategy when other households adopt a cuto¤ strategy. Infor-
mational frictions make the household' s equilibrium cuto¤ A (z; Q) a function of
                                               r
                                                  e
                             z (P ) = (1 + k )      log P + A ;
                                                             "

which is the summary statistic of the publicly observed housing price P; and the public
signal Q; rather than A and            as in the perfect-information benchmark. This equilibrium
cuto¤, determined by equation (26), is the key channel for informational frictions to a¤ect
the housing price, as well as each capital producer'
                                                   s decision to develop capital. We analyze
the economic consequences of informational frictions in the next section.
       We conclude this section by establishing that the cuto¤ equilibria we have character-
ized, both with informational frictions and with perfect information, is the unique rational
expectations equilibria in the economy. Regardless of the housing policies of other house-
holds in the neighborhood, each household will follow a cuto¤ strategy, which establishes the
uniqueness of the cuto¤ equilibrium, as summarized in the following proposition.

Proposition 5 The unique rational expectations cuto¤ equilibrium is the unique rational
expectations equilibrium in the economy.


3        Model Implications
This section analyzes how informational frictions amplify noise through learning to a¤ect
housing markets and local investment. We analyze these learning e¤ects across neighbor-
hoods that di¤er in two dimensions: 1) supply elasticity k; and 2) the degree of consumption
  13
    One may notice that a higher degree of complementarity, c ; tightens the su¢ cient condition, while much
of our analysis suggests that it ampli...es the role of informational frictions. This is because the condition is
not necessary, and is derived by omitting terms for which c is relevant for amplifying the learning e¤ect.

                                                       19
complementarity in household utility            c:   As documented in Glaeser (2013), Davido¤ (2013),
and Nathanson and Zwick (2018), housing price boom and bust were most pronounced in
areas that were not particularly constrained by the supply of land. In our model, supply
elasticity plays an important and nuanced role in the distortionary e¤ects of learning. It
is instructive to consider two polar cases. When supply is in...nitely inelastic (i.e., k ! 0),
housing prices are only determined by the strength of the neighborhood A; and are thus
fully revealing. In this case, there is not any distortion from learning. When supply is in-
...nitely elastic (i.e., k ! 1), prices converge to log P =                       ; which is driven only by the
supply shock.14 In this case, prices contain no information about demand, and there is no
learning from price. These two polar cases determine that the distortions caused by learning
from housing prices are humped-shaped with respect to supply elasticity. We will further
characterize this pattern in this section.
      In our model, households' consumption complementarity reinforces the e¤ects of infor-
mational frictions. Without complementarity, a stronger neighborhood (i.e., higher A) leads
to higher prices of both housing and capital, and thus deter households from entering the
neighborhood. With complementarity, however, a stronger neighborhood can be more at-
tractive to households, because it means that other households in the neighborhood are more
productive and thus provide a better opportunity for trade. In the presence of informational
frictions, complementarity gives each household a stronger incentive to learn about A; and
thus ampli...es the potential distortionary e¤ects from such learning.
      While we have analytical expressions for most equilibrium outcomes, the key equilibrium
cuto¤ A needs to be solved numerically from the ...xed-point condition in equation (26).
We therefore analyze the equilibrium properties of A and other variables through a series
of numerical illustrations, by using the following benchmark parameters:

                          A   = 0:5;     &   = 2:0;    "   = 0:2;    Q   = 1:0;       c   = 0:8;
                              = 2:5; k = 0:5;          = 1:1; A = 0;         = 0:

For the Frisch elasticity of labor supply, we choose                = 2:5; which is within the typical range
found in the literature. We set          to be four-fold larger than              A   to ensure that with perfect
information, the log housing price variance is monotonically declining in supply elasticity,
consistent with conventional wisdom. We set                     = 1:1 to have capital be in elastic supply,
and to avoid having strong convexity in its production function. Finally, we choose the
 14
      Note from equation (26) that A remains ...nite a.s. as k ! 1; allowing us to take the limit.

                                                           20
neighborhood fundamental and the supply-side shock A =          =    0:5; though the qualitative
patterns we show hold more generically for a wide range of values, and we set the baseline
noise in the public signal Q to 0:
   In our analysis, we ...rst examine the e¤ects of learning when household'
                                                                           s production
does not require capital,     = 0; and there is no capital investment. In the latter part of our
analysis, we turn on the role of capital by selecting      = 0:33, a standard value for capital
share in the overall economy, to show that capital investment not only enriches our model'
                                                                                         s
implications but also ampli...es the learning e¤ects in the housing market.

3.1    Equilibrium Cuto¤
The equilibrium cuto¤ productivity A (z; Q) is the key channel for informational frictions
and learning to a¤ect the housing market, as it determines the population ow into the
neighborhood. We analyze this channel by showing how the two determinants z and Q
a¤ects the equilibrium cuto¤.
   We ...rst examine a noise shock to the public signal Q, which can be interpreted as noise
in public information, as in Morris and Shin (2002), or more broadly as housing market
optimism, as in Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante (2017) and Gao, Sockin and Xiong (2019).
In the perfect-information benchmark, the public signal Q has no impact on either the equi-
librium cuto¤ A or the housing price because both the demand-side fundamental A and the
supply-side shock   are publicly observable. In the presence of informational frictions, how-
ever, Q a¤ects the equilibrium as it shapes the beliefs of households and capital producers.
The equilibrium housing price in (12) demonstrates that
                                                r
                               @ log P      1       " @A
                                       =                 :
                                 @Q       1+k       e @Q

By a¤ecting the households'expectations of A; and consequently their cuto¤ productivity
to enter the neighborhood, the noise in the public signal Q a¤ects the population that enters
                                                                @A             @P
the neighborhood and the equilibrium housing price log P :      @Q
                                                                     < 0 and   @Q
                                                                                    > 0, as proved
in Proposition 4. Furthermore, Q also a¤ects the price of capital, as well as each capital
producer'
        s optimal choice of how much capital to develop.
   Figure 1 illustrates how the cuto¤ responds to a noise shock to the public signal Q.
                         @A
The ...rst row depicts   @Q
                              across di¤erent values of supply elasticity k in the left panel
and degree of complementarity        c   in the right panel. A noise shock to Q has no impact


                                                 21
        0                                                         0

                                  Perfect Information
                                                               -0.05
      -0.5                        Information Frictions

                                                                -0.1

        -1
                                                               -0.15


      -1.5                                                      -0.2

       0.2                                                       0.4

                                                                 0.2
       0.1
                                                                  0
        0
                                                                -0.2
      -0.1
                                                                -0.4
      -0.2
                                                                -0.6
             0   1      2         3           4           5            0   0.2         0.4      0.6          0.8   1
                      Supply Elasticity                                          Degree of Complementarity

Figure 1: The response of the equilibrium cuto¤ productivity to a noise shock Q (the ...rst row)
and a fundamental shock z (the second row) across housing supply elasticity (left) and degree of
complementarity (right). The dotted line in each panel is for the perfect-information benchmark,
while the solid line is for the case with informational frictions.


on the equilibrium in the perfect-information benchmark. In the presence of informational
frictions, however, the shock makes households more optimistic about A; and lowers the cuto¤
productivity A for households to enter the neighborhood, as formally shown by Proposition
4, thus inducing a greater population ow into the neighborhood. Interestingly, this learning
e¤ect is stronger when supply elasticity is greater, or when the households' consumption
complementarity is greater. The former results from the fact that a greater supply elasticity
makes the housing price more dependent on supply-side factors, and therefore less informative
about the neighborhood'
                      s strength A: Consequently, households place a greater weight on
the public signal Q in their learning about A, and this ampli...es the e¤ect of the noise
shock to Q. The latter result is driven by the greater role that household learning plays as
consumption complementarity increases, as a higher complementarity makes each household
more concerned about the neighborhood strength.
   In the presence of informational frictions, the demand-side fundamental A and the supply-
side shock are not directly observed by the public and, as a result, do not directly a¤ect the
housing price and other equilibrium variables. Instead, their equilibrium e¤ects are bundled
together in the housing price P through the speci...c functional form of the su¢ cient statistic

                                                          22
z . Consequently, a shock to z may reect a shock to either A or . The equilibrium housing
price in (12) directly implies that the impact of a price shock is determined by its impact on
the equilibrium cuto¤ A :
                                                           r
                                     @ log P    1               "         @A
                                             =                       1          :
                                        @z     1+k              e          @z
                                            @A
That is, depending on the sign of            @z
                                                  ; the equilibrium cuto¤ A may amplify or dampen the
impact of the z shock on the housing price. Proposition 4 provides a su¢ cient (although
                                      @A
not necessary) condition for           @z
                                            < 0. In this case, there is an ampli...cation e¤ect. This
ampli...cation e¤ect makes housing prices more volatile, as highlighted by Albagli, Hellwig,
and Tsyvinski (2015) in their analysis of the cuto¤ equilibrium in an asset market.15
                                                     @A
       The second row of Figure 1 depicts             @z
                                                           across di¤erent values of supply elasticity k in
the left panel and degree of complementarity                    c   in the right panel. Interestingly, the left
                     @A
panel shows that      @z
                             has a U-shape with respect to supply elasticity. It is particularly neg-
ative when supply elasticity is in an intermediate value around 0:5; and turns positive when
supply elasticity rises roughly above 1:4: This U-shape originates from the aforementioned,
non-monotonic learning e¤ect of the housing price. Households use the housing price as a key
source of information in their learning about the neighborhood strength A; and this learning
e¤ect is strongest when supply elasticity has an intermediate value, which makes the equilib-
rium cuto¤ particularly sensitive to the z shock. The negative value of the e¤ect implies that
the cuto¤ productivity falls in response to the better neighborhood fundamental, resulting
in more households entering the neighborhood despite the higher housing price. The right
                                      @A
panel further illustrates that         @z
                                             decreases monotonically with the degree of complemen-
                           @A
tarity. Speci...cally,      @z
                                 is positive when complementarity is low, and becomes negative as
complementarity rises. This pattern con...rms our earlier intuition that the learning e¤ect
from housing price strengthens with complementarity.
       One could, in principle, directly test the e¤ects of learning on population ows across
di¤erent regions with properly designed measures of these non-fundamental shocks. Our
analysis would suggest that non-fundamental shocks, such as the noisy demand shock, have
a greater impact in inducing stronger population inow to areas with greater degree of
  15
    This interesting feature also di¤erentiates our cuto¤ equilibrium from other type of nonlinear equilibrium
with dispersed information, such as the log-linear equilibrium developed by Sockin and Xiong (2015) to
analyze commodity markets. In their equilibrium, prices become less sensitive to their analogue of z in
the presence of informational frictions. This occurs because households, on aggregate, underreact to the
fundamental shock in their private signals because of noise.


                                                           23
        1.5                                                        2.5

                                                                     2
          1
                                                                   1.5

                                                                     1
        0.5
                                   Perfect Inform ation
                                   Inform ation Frictions          0.5

          0                                                          0

       0.03                                                       0.01

                                                                 0.008
       0.02
                                                                 0.006

                                                                 0.004
       0.01
                                                                 0.002

          0                                                          0
              0   1       2          3           4           5           0   0.2         0.4       0.6         0.8   1
                        Supply Elasticity                                          Degree of Complementarity

Figure 2: The responses of housing price P (top row) and housing stock S (bottom row) to a noise
shock to the public signal Q across supply elasticity (left) and degree of complementarity (right).
The dotted line in each panel is for the perfect-information benchmark, while the solid line for the
case with informational frictions.


complementarity and supply elasticity. Our model also implies that fundamental shocks,
stemming either from the demand side or the supply side of the local housing market, have
a greater impact on population ow to areas with greater degree of complementarity and
intermediate supply elasticities. The di¤erences in the cross-sectional patterns between the Q
and z shocks can also help to distinguish between these two sources of optimism empirically.

3.2     Housing Market
We now analyze how informational frictions a¤ect the housing market by examining the
reactions of the housing market to two di¤erent shocks, a noise shock to Q and a shock to
housing supply : We interpret the deviations of the housing price in the presence of infor-
mation frictions from the perfect-information benchmark as a measure of the ampli...cation
of noise because of learning.
   Figure 2 illustrates the impacts of a noise shock to Q on the housing price P and housing
          R
stock S = Si di, by computing their partial derivatives with respect to Q across di¤erent



                                                            24
values of supply elasticity k in the two left panels, and across di¤erent values of the degree
of consumption complementarity     c   in the two right panels. In the absence of informational
frictions, this shock has no e¤ect on the housing market. In the presence of informational
frictions, the noise shock raises both the housing price and housing stock (Proposition 4)
because it boosts agents'expectations about the neighborhood'
                                                            s strength A: Interestingly,
the upper-left panel shows that this e¤ect on the housing price is hump-shaped with respect to
supply elasticity, and peaks at an intermediate value. This results from the non-monotonicity
of the distortionary e¤ect of learning. When housing supply is in...nitely inelastic, the noise
shock has a muted e¤ect on households' expectations because the price is fully revealing.
When housing supply is in...nitely elastic, however, the housing price is fully determined by
supply shock and is immune to households'learning about A: As a result, the price distortion
caused by household learning is strongest when supply elasticity is in an intermediate range.
The lower-left panel further shows that the impact of the noise shock on the housing stock
has a similar hump-shaped pattern with supply elasticity.
   The upper-right panel of Figure 2 shows that the e¤ect of the noise shock on the hous-
ing price is increasing with respect to consumption complementarity. As complementarity
rises, each household cares more about trading goods with other households, which makes
households'expectations of the neighborhood strength a more inuential determinant of the
housing price. Consequently, the noise shock has a greater e¤ect on the housing price. The
pattern in housing stock (lower-right panel) is hump-shaped, reecting that near perfect
complementarity, almost all households choose to enter the neighborhood and the marginal
e¤ect of the increase in the equilibrium cuto¤ on neighborhood population diminishes.
   Next, we analyze the e¤ects of a shock to the housing price, which, as we discussed earlier,
can be from either the demand side or the supply side. To avoid confusion in interpreting
the results, we speci...cally examine a negative shock to the building cost           (a negative
supply shock). Figure 3 displays the responses of housing price P and housing stock S to
this shock across di¤erent values of supply elasticity k in the two left panels, and across
di¤erent degrees of consumption complementarity       c   in the two right panels. In the perfect-
information benchmark, the housing price increases with the negative supply shock, and
the price increase rises with supply elasticity, as shown by the dashed line in the upper-left
panel. In contrast, the lower-left panel shows that the housing stock falls with the negative
supply shock since the higher housing price discourages more households from entering, and



                                               25
             3
                                                                            6
                                          Perfect Inform ation
                                          Inform ation Frictions
             2                                                              4


             1                                                              2


             0                                                              0

         0.02                                                           0.01


                                                                            0
             0

                                                                        -0.01
         -0.02
                                                                        -0.02

         -0.04
                                                                        -0.03
                 0   1     2          3              4              5           0   0.2         0.4       0.6         0.8   1
                         Supply Elasticity                                                Degree of Complementarity

Figure 3: The responses of housing price P (top row) and housing stock S (bottom row) to a
negative supply shock across supply elasticity (left) and degree of complementarity (right). The
dotted line in each panel is for the perfect-information benchmark, while the solid line for the case
with informational frictions.


the supply drop is greater when supply elasticity is larger.
     In the presence of informational frictions, however, the negative supply shock is, in part,
interpreted by households as a positive demand shock (i.e., stronger neighborhood A) when
they observe a higher housing price. This learning e¤ect, in turn, pushes up the housing
price and the housing stock, relative to the perfect-information benchmark, as shown in the
left panels of Figure 3. Across supply elasticity, these distortions are hump-shaped because
the impact of learning from the housing price is most pronounced at intermediate supply
elasticities, and, consequently, the response of the housing price and housing stock also
peak at an intermediate range. As consumption complementarity increases, the learning
e¤ect from the negative supply shock is ampli...ed, since households put more weight on the
neighborhood'
            s strength when determining whether to enter the neighborhood. This is shown
in the upper-right panel of Figure 3. Similar to the Q shock in Figure 2, the impact on the
housing stock is hump-shaped, since most households are already entering the neighborhood
as   c   nears perfect complementarity.
     Although our static model cannot deliver a boom-and-bust housing cycle across periods,

                                                                   26
one may intuitively interpret the deviation of the housing price induced by the positive Q
shock and the negative supply shock from its value in the perfect-information benchmark, as
illustrated in Figures 2 and 3, as a price boom, which would eventually reverse. Then, we have
testable cross-sectional implications for housing cycles-- shocks, such as the noise shock and
the supply shock, can lead to more pronounced housing cycles in areas with intermediate
housing supply elasticities. Our model also implies that the magnitudes of housing price
boom and bust are monotonically increasing with the degree of complementarity, while new
housing supply has a hump-shaped relationship with the degree of complementarity.16
       It is di¢ cult in practice to directly measure volatility ampli...cation and excessive volatility
in housing markets. Nevertheless, these cross-sectional implications of our model are testable,
and indirectly measure the excess volatility induced by learning. The non-monotonicity
in these cross-sectional implications is particularly sharp, which motivates us to further
explore the relationship of housing cycles with respect to supply elasticity and the degree of
complementarity during the recent U.S. housing cycle in Section 4.
       In addition to analyzing housing cycles, one could, in principle, also examine the cross-
sectional patterns we uncover for home buyer sentiment. The literature has suggested several
empirical metrics of home buyer sentiment, such as the housing surveys in Case, Shiller, and
Thompson (2012), Google search volume indices from Google Trends, and textual analysis
of local media reports, as in Soo (2018). Whether informational frictions ampli...ed noise
originating from the demand or supply side of the housing market can, in principle, be
disentangled by sorting these measures along the dimensions of supply elasticity and degree
of complementarity, similar to the tests we propose using economic outcomes.

3.3        Capital Investment
Our analysis until now has abstracted from capital by setting               = 0. We now introduce for a
role for capital by selecting       = 0:33, which allows us not only to extend the implications of
our model to local real investment, such as in commercial real estate, but more importantly to
show that capital investment can further amplify the impact of learning in housing markets.
  16
    Since our model is not dynamic, however, we cannot speak to how informational frictions would impact
the length of the boom or the bust that arises because of these noise or supply shocks. However, even if
the informational frictions that give rise to a boom are short-lived, this does not necessarily imply that the
impact of such frictions on the local economy are also short-lived. Since imperfect learning in our setting
distorts the building of homes and the installation of capital, undoing this misallocation of resources can
take years, such as with the overbuilding of homes in Las Vegas and o¢ ce space in Phoenix during the recent
U.S. housing cycle, as empirically examined by Gao, Sockin and Xiong (2019).


                                                     27
   We illustrate these e¤ects in Figure 4 by building on our earlier analysis of the housing
market'
      s reaction to a negative supply shock. Speci...cally, the two left panels in Figure 4
correspond to the two left panels in Figure 3 with an additional, dotted line in each panel.
This dotted line shows the reactions of the housing price and housing stock to the negative
supply shock in the presence of capital investment (i.e. when         = 0:33). Interestingly, in
the presence of capital investment, both the housing price and the housing stock react more
strongly to the supply shock, while maintaining the same overall humped shapes with respect
to supply elasticity. We also ...nd a similar ampli...cation of the reactions of the housing price
and housing stock to a shock to Q; which we omit for brevity. Capital investment ampli...es
the housing market reactions to these shocks because capital producers make their investment
decisions at t = 1 when their expectations of the neighborhood strength are distorted by
informational frictions. Their capital investment overhangs on the local economy at t = 2;
even though the neighborhood strength A becomes observable to households and households
exibly adjust their labor supply. This capital overhang implies that households have access
to cheap capital at t = 2 when the market'
                                         s expectations are overly optimistic at t = 1. The
anticipation of such access to capital motivates households to be even more aggressive in the
housing market, which further ampli...es the response of the housing price and housing stock
to the shocks at t = 1.
   Figure 4 also shows how the price and stock of capital at t = 1 react to the negative
housing supply shock across di¤erent values of supply elasticity k in the two right panels.
We denote R1 = E [ Rj I c ], the expectation of capital producers at t = 1 regarding R the
price of capital at t = 2. This expectation determines the stock of capital KS they produce
at t = 1. In the perfect-information benchmark, the negative supply shock only impacts the
housing price, and, through this channel, the cuto¤ productivity of the households that enter
the neighborhood. This direct e¤ect has only a modest impact on the market for capital.
In the presence of informational frictions, however, its impact on the market for capital is
substantially larger. This occurs because the negative supply shock is partially interpreted
by capital producers as a positive shock to the strength of the neighborhood. Consequently,
it distorts agents' expectations about A upward, leading to overoptimism about the local
economy. This results in both a higher capital price R1 and a larger supply of capital KS at
t = 1. The magnitudes of these e¤ects are all hump-shaped with respect to housing supply
elasticity, as a result of the hump-shaped distortion to agents'expectations that arises from



                                               28
          5                                                                                   0.12
                                                 Perfect Information
                                                 Informational Frictions    = 0.33             0.1
          4                                      Informational Frictions    =0
                                                                                              0.08
          3
                                                                                              0.06
          2
                                                                                              0.04

          1
                                                                                              0.02

          0                                                                                     0

        0.02                                                                                   15

        0.01

          0
                                                                                               10
       -0.01

       -0.02
                                                                                                5
       -0.03

       -0.04

       -0.05                                                                                    0
               0   0.5   1   1.5   2     2.5     3      3.5        4       4.5       5               0   0.5   1   1.5   2     2.5     3     3.5   4   4.5   5
                                   Supply Elasticity                                                                     Supply Elasticity



Figure 4: The responses of housing price P (upper-left panel), housing stock S (lower-left panel),
capital price R1 (upper-right panel), and capital stock K (lower-right panel) to a negative housing
supply shock : In each panel, the dashed line is for the perfect-information benchmark, the solid
line for the case with informational frictions and = 0; while the dotted line for the case with
informational frictions and = 0:33:


their learning from the housing price.
   Our analysis thus shows that shocks to the housing market can lead not only to a housing
cycle, but also to a boom and bust in local investment. This concurrent boom and bust is
consistent with Gyourko (2009) and Levitin and Wachter (2013), who highlight that the
recent U.S. housing cycle was accompanied by a similar boom and bust in commercial real
estate. It is di¢ cult to simply attribute this commercial real estate boom to the subprime
credit expansion, which was mainly targeted at households. In addition, while a run-up in
the housing market can inate commercial real estate prices if there is scarcity in developable
land, as in Rosen (1979) and Roback (1982), such a boom would crowd out commercial real
estate investment if it is driven by non-fundamental demand. In contrast, both the housing
and commercial real estate markets experienced an expansion in construction along with the
run-up in prices during the mid-2000s. Our model provides a coherent explanation for the
synchronized cycles in both housing and commercial real estate markets. Furthermore, our
analysis shows that these two cycles may amplify each other.



                                                                                         29
4        Empirical Evidence
In this section, we provide several stylized facts to illustrate empirical relevance of our
model from the recent U.S. housing cycle of the 2000s. The national U.S. housing market
underwent a signi...cant boom and bust cycle in the 2000s with the national home price
index increasing over 60 percent from 2000 to 2006, and then falling back to its 2000 level
by 2010. Many factors, such as the Clinton-era initiatives to broaden home ownership, the
low interest rate environment of the late 1990s and early 2000s, the inow of foreign capital,
and the increase in securitization and sub-prime lending, contributed to the initial housing
boom. While a well-known phenomenon at the time, the magnitude of the housing cycle
experienced in the cross-section of U.S. regions reected idiosyncratic uncertainty about
their underlying fundamentals, which is the focus of our analysis.17 We designate the boom
period of the recent U.S. housing cycle as 2001-2006, and the bust period as 2007-2010.18
In what follows, we examine how the magnitude of the housing price cycle, which serves
as a proxy for the ampli...cation of volatility illustrated by our model, and the intensity of
new housing construction vary across MSAs with di¤erent values of supply elasticity and
degree of complementarity. The objective of our empirical analysis is not to formally test
our model, but rather to show that the key implications of our model are consistent with
cross-sectional patterns during the recent U.S. housing cycle.
       Our MSA-level house price data come from the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA)
House Price Index (HPI), which are constructed from repeat home sales. We employ the
commonly used housing supply elasticity measure constructed by Saiz (2010). This elasticity
measure focuses on geographic constraints by de...ning undevelopable land for construction
as terrain with a slope of 15 degrees or more and areas lost to bodies of water including seas,
lakes, and wetlands. This measure provides an exogenous measure of supply elasticity, with
a higher value if an area is less geographically restricted. Saiz'
                                                                 s measure is available for 269
Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs).
       To measure the supply-side activity in local U.S. housing markets, we use building permits
from the U.S. Census Bureau, which conducts a survey in permit-issuing places all over
  17
     The regional uncertainty introduced by this national phenomenon is absent from the local boom and
bust episodes throughout the 1970s and 1980s. While there are other national housing cycles in history, such
as in the roaring 20'
                    s, data limitations restrict our attention to the most recent U.S. housing cycle.
  18
     See Gao, Sockin and Xiong (2019) for another study that uses a similar dating convention for the U.S.
housing cycle in the 2000s.



                                                    30
Figure 5: The U.S. housing cycle in 2000s across MSAs with di¤erent supply elasticities. The solid
and cross dots represent MSAs outside and inside the sand states (Arizona, California, Florida and
Neveda), respectively. The solid line is the spline line for all MSAs, while the dashed is for MSAs
outside the sand states. 95% con...dence intervals are displayed for the full sample. The standard
errors are clustered at the state level.


the U.S. Compared with other construction-related measures, including housing starts and
housing completions, building permits have detailed MSA-level information. In addition,
building permits are issued right before housing starts and therefore can predict price trends
in a timely manner.19 We measure new housing supply during the boom period by the
building permits issued in 2001-2006 relative to the existing housing units in 2000.
       The ...rst two panels of Figure 5 provide scatter plots of the housing price expansion and
contraction experienced by each MSA during the housing boom and bust periods, respec-
tively. To conveniently summarize the data, we include a spline line to ...t each of the scatter
plots (the solid line in the plots), together with 95% con...dence interval (the shaded area
around the spline line). These spline lines clearly indicate that the housing cycle was non-
monotonic with respect to supply elasticity-- a hump-shaped pattern for the housing price
  19
    Authorization to start is a largely irreversible process,                with housing starts be-
ing only 2.5% lower than building permits at the aggregate level according to
https://www.census.gov/construction/nrc/nrcdatarelationships.html, the website of the Census Bu-
reau. Moreover, the delay between authorization and housing start is relatively short, on average less than
one month, according to https://www.census.gov/construction/nrc/lengthoftime.html. These facts suggest
that building permits are an appropriate measure of new housing supply.


                                                    31
appreciation during the boom and a U-shaped pattern for the price drop during the bust.
In particular, the cycle was most pronounced for MSAs with intermediate, rather than the
lowest, supply elasticities.
   One may be concerned that this non-monotonicity might be driven by the so-called
"sand states" (Arizona, California, Florida, and Nevada). These four states experienced
exceptional housing price booms and busts and, as several scholars including Davido¤ (2013)
and Nathanson and Zwick (2018) have noted, were characterized by peculiar speculative
activities, such as land hoarding by real estate developers. In the scatter plots provided by
Figure 5, we di¤erentiate the MSAs in the sand states by "+" and provide a separate spline
line (the dashed line in the plots) for observations excluding the sand-state MSAs. Indeed,
the MSAs in the sand states experienced relatively more pronounced price appreciations
during the boom and more severe price drops during the bust. Despite excluding these sand-
state observations, the hump-shaped pattern for the price appreciation during the boom and
the U-shaped pattern for the price drop during the bust remain signi...cant, albeit with more
attenuated magnitudes.
   In addition to the housing price cycle, the third panel of Figure 5 provides a scatter
plot of housing construction during the boom period, measured by new housing permits,
with respect to supply elasticity. There is noticeably also a hump-shaped pattern with
respect to supply elasticity, with MSAs in the intermediate elasticity range having the most
new construction, instead of areas with the most elastic housing supply. This hump-shaped
pattern is signi...cant and robust to excluding the MSAs from the sand states. This surprising
pattern in new construction has received little attention in the literature, and nicely supports
our model implications.
   Taken together, although common wisdom posits that supply elasticity attenuates hous-
ing cycles, we do not observe monotonic patterns across supply elasticity during the recent
U.S. housing cycle in either the magnitude of the housing price boom and bust or in new
construction. Instead, our analysis uncovers that MSAs with supply elasticities in an inter-
mediate range experienced not only the most dramatic price cycles, but also the most new
construction. While the number of MSAs in our sample is relatively small for a forceful test,
these patterns nevertheless lend support to our key model implication that in the presence
of informational frictions, volatility ampli...cation induced by learning is most severe in areas
with intermediate supply elasticity.



                                               32
       Existing models of housing cycles have di¢ culty explaining these patterns. For example,
Glaeser, Gyourko, and Saiz (2008) shows that, in the presence of housing supply constraints
and extrapolative home buyer expectations, the overhang of housing supply developed during
the boom may cause areas with intermediate supply elasticities to su¤er most dramatic
housing price drops during the subsequent bust. Their analysis, however, shows that housing
price appreciation is decreasing while new construction is increasing across supply elasticity
during the boom when the boom period is synchronized in the cross-section. Furthermore,
while Nathanson and Zwick (2018) identify land speculation by real estate developers as an
important mechanism driving the recent housing boom in intermediate elastic areas such
as Las Vegas, their analysis does not provide a systematic theory for the full spectrum of
housing cycles experienced across areas with di¤erent supply elasticities. In addition, the
hoarding of land by optimistic developers in intermediate elastic areas, while exacerbating
the housing price boom, has ambiguous implications about whether new construction is also
the most pronounced in those MSAs.
       We next provide additional evidence with respect to the cross-MSA relation between
the housing cycle and a proxy for complementarity. Our model highlights complementarity
as another important characteristic that ampli...es the learning e¤ects in housing markets.
Speci...cally, Figures 2 and 3 show that, in the presence of informational frictions, there
are monotonically increasing patterns in the e¤ects of the noise shock and the negative
supply shock on the magnitude of the housing price cycle with respect to complementarity,
and hump-shaped patterns in the e¤ects of these shocks on new housing supply during the
boom. These patterns arise because complementarity, or the bene...t from interacting with
other households, exacerbates the feedback from learning in the presence of informational
frictions.
       We measure the degree of complementarity by non-tradable share of consumption in each
MSA, as non-tradables are driven by local demand and thus reect the complementarity in
consumption of local residents.20 Speci...cally, we follow Mian and Su... (2014) to identify
non-tradable industries. Because non-tradable consumption data are not generally available
across the U.S, we obtain the employment information across industries from County Busi-
ness Pattern (CBP) data in the Census Bureau, aggregate the information to the MSA level,
and calculate the share of employment in non-tradable industries as a proxy for consumption
  20
    In unreported results, we have also used an alternative measure by the diversity of local industries, which
give very similar patterns as those reported in Figure 6.


                                                      33
Figure 6: The U.S. housing cycle in 2000s across MSAs with di¤erent degrees of complementarity.
The solid and cross dots represent MSAs outside and inside the sand states (Arizona, California,
Florida and Neveda), respectively. The solid line is the spline line for all MSAs, while the dashed is
for MSAs outside the sand states. 95% con...dence intervals are displayed for the full sample. The
standard errors are clustered at the state level.


complementarity. The higher is this ratio, local households rely more on local demand and
stronger complementarity from each other.
    The three panels in Figure 6 provide scatter plots of the housing price change during the
boom period, the housing price change during the bust period, and new housing permits
during the boom, respectively, against our measure of complementarity in di¤erent MSAs.
The patterns match nicely with our model implications-- the magnitudes of the price boom
and bust appear to be monotonically increasing across complementarity, while new construc-
tion is hump-shaped. To the extent that these patterns cannot occur in the benchmark case
with perfect information, Figure 6 con...rms the empirical relevance of complementarity for
the impact of learning on housing markets.


5     Conclusion
We introduce a model of information aggregation in housing markets, and examine its conse-
quences for not only housing prices, but also for local economic outcomes such as new housing
construction and real investment in capital. Our framework provides a novel ampli...cation

                                                 34
mechanism through learning in housing markets, and o¤ers rich empirical predictions for
the neighborhood'
                s response across supply elasticity and the degree of complementarity to
shocks originating from both demand and supply side factors in the presence of informational
frictions. Such predictions can help rationalize the puzzling non-monotonic patterns that we
uncover empirically across MSAs in the recent U.S. housing cycle.




   References
 Albagli, Elias, Christian Hellwig, and Aleh Tsyvinski (2015), A Theory of Asset Prices based
     on Heterogeneous Information, mimeo Bank of Chile, Toulouse School of Economics,
     and Yale University.
 Albagli, Elias, Christian Hellwig, and Aleh Tsyvinski (2017), Imperfect Financial Markets
     and Shareholder Incentives in Partial and General Equilibrium, mimeo Bank of Chile,
     Toulouse School of Economics, and Yale University.
 Albanesi, Stefania, Giacomo De Giorgi, and Jaromir Nosal (2017), Credit Growth and the
     Financial Crisis: A New Narrative, mimeo University of Pittsburgh, Geneva School of
     Economics and Management, and Boston College.
 Amador, Manuel, and Pierre-Olivier Weill (2010), Learning from Prices: Public Communi-
    cation and Welfare, Journal of Political Economy 118, 866-907.
 Angeletos, George-Marios and Allesandro Pavan (2004), Transparency of Information and
    Coordination in Economies with Investment Complementarities, AEA Papers and Pro-
    ceedings 94, 91-98.
 Angeletos, George-Marios and Allesandro Pavan (2007), E¢ cient Use of Information and
    Social Value of Information, Econometrica 75, 1103-1142.
 Bailey, Michael, Ruiqing Cao, Joannes Stroebel, and Theresa Kuchler (2017), The Economic
      E¤ects of Social Networks: Evidence from the Housing Market, Journal of Political
      Economy, forthcoming.
 Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1999), The Financial Accelerator in
     a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework, Handbook of Macroeconomics 1, Edited by
     John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, 1341-1393.
 Bond, Philip, Alex Edmans, and Itay Goldstein (2012), The real e¤ects of ...nancial markets,
    Annuual Review of Financial Economics 4, 339-360.
 Boyd, John H. (1990), Recursive Utility and the Ramsey Problem, Journal of Economic
     Theory, 50, 326-345.
 Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo (2016), Understanding Booms and
     Busts in Housing Markets, Journal of Political Economy 124(4): 1088-1147.
 Case, Karl and Robert Shiller (2003), Is there a Bubble in the Housing Market?, Brookings
     Papers on Economic Activity 2003(2): 299-362.


                                             35
Case, Karl, Robert J. Shiller, and Anne Thompson (2012), What Have They Been Think-
    ing? Homebuyer Behavior in Hot and Cold Markets, Brookings Papers on Economic
    Activity, 265-315.
Cheng, Ing-haw, Sahil Raina, and Wei Xiong (2014), Wall Street and the Housing Bubble,
    American Economic Review 104, 2797-2829.
Chinco, Alex, and Christopher Mayer (2015), Misinformed Speculators and Mispricing in
    the Housing Market, The Review of Financial Studies 29(2), 486-522.
Davido¤, Thomas (2013), Supply Elasticity and the Housing Cycle of the 2000s, Real Estate
    Economics 41(4), 793-813.
DeFusco, Anthony, Charles Nathanson, and Eric Zwick (2017), Speculative Dynamics of
   Prices and Volume. No. w23449. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Dixit, Avinash K. and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1977), Monopolistic Competition and Optimum
    Product Diversity, American Economic Review 67(3), 297-308.
Durlauf, Steven (2004), Neighborhood E¤ects, Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics
    4, 2173-2242.
Favara, Giovanni, and Zheng Song (2014), House Price Dynamics with Dispersed Informa-
    tion, Journal of Economic Theory 149, 350-382.
Gao, Zhenyu, Michael Sockin, and Wei Xiong (2019), Economic Consequences of Housing
    Speculation, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Garmaise, Mark and Tobias Moskowitz (2004), Confronting Information Asymmetries: Ev-
   idence from Real Estate Markets, Review of Financial Studies 17, 405-437.
Glaeser, Edward (2013), A Nation of Gamblers: Real Estate Speculation and American
    History, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 103(3), 1-42.
Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko, Eduardo Morales, and Charles G. Nathanson (2014),
    Housing Dynamics: An Urban Approach, Journal of Urban Economics 81, 45-56.
Glaeser, Edward, Joseph Gyourko, and Albert Saiz (2008), Housing Supply and Housing
    Bubbles, Journal of Urban Economics 64, 198-217.
Glaeser, Edward, Bruce Sacerdote, and José Scheinkman (2003), The Social Multiplier,
    Journal of the European Economics Association 1, 345-353.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Charles G. Nathanson (2015), Housing Bubbles, Handbook of
    Regional and Urban Economics. Vol. 5. Elsevier, 701-751.
Glaeser, Edward, and Charles Nathanson (2017), An Extrapolative Model of House Price
    Dynamics, Journal of Financial Economics, 126(1), 147-170
Goldstein, Itay, Emre Ozdenoren and Kathy Yuan (2013), Trading fFenzies and Their
    Impact on Real Investment, Journal of Financial Economics, 109(2), 566-582.
Gri¢ n, John M., and Gonzalo Maturana (2015), Did Dubious Mortgage Origination Prac-
    tices Distort House Prices?, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Grossman, Sanford and Joseph Stiglitz (1980), On the Impossibility of Informationally
    E¢ cient Markets, American Economic Review 70, 393-408.

                                          36
Guren, Adam (2016), House Price Momentum and Strategic Complementarity, Journal of
    Political Economy, forthcoming.
Gyourko, Joseph (2009), Understanding Commercial Real Estate: How Di¤erent from Hous-
   ing Is It?, Journal of Portfolio Management 35, 23-37.
Hellwig, Martin (1980), On the Aggregation of Information in Competitive Markets, Journal
    of Economic Theory 22, 477-498.
Ioannides, Yannis and Je¤rey E. Zabel (2003), Neighborhood E¤ects and Housing Demand,
    Journal of Applied Econometrics 18, 563-584.
Kaplan, Greg, Kurt Mitman, and Gianluca Violante (2017), Consumption and house prices
    in the Great Recession: Model meets evidence, Manuscript, New York University.
Keys, Benjamin J., Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig (2009), Financial
    Regulation and Securitization: Evidence from Subprime Mortgage Loans, Journal of
    Monetary Economics 56 (5), 700­ 720.
Kurlat, Pablo and Johannes Stroebel (2014), Testing for Information Asymmetries in Real
    Estate Markets, mimeo, Stanford University and NYU.
Levitin, Adam J. and Susan M. Wachter (2013), The Commercial Real Estate Bubble,
    Harvard Business Law Review 3, 83-118.
Long, John B. and Jr. Plosser Charles I. (1987), Sectoral vs. Aggregate Shocks in the
    Business Cycle, American Economic Review 77, 333-336.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Su... (2009). The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Ev-
    idence from the US Mortgage Default Crisis, The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    124(4), 1449-1496.
Mian, Atif and Amir Su... (2011), House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the
    US Household Leverage Crisis, American Economic Review 101, 2132-2156.
Mian, Atif and Amir Su... (2014), What Explains the 2007­2009 Drop in Employment?
    Econometrica 82:2197­ 223.
Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin (2002), The Social Value of Public Information,
    American Economic Review 92, 1521-1534.
Nathanson, Charles and Eric Zwick (2018), Arrested Development: Theory and Evidence
    of Supply-side Speculation in the Housing Market, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Piazzesi, Monika and Martin Schneider (2009), Momentum Traders in the Housing Mar-
    ket: Survey Evidence and a Search Model, American Economic Review Papers and
    Proceedings 99(2), 406-411.
Rosen, Sherwin (1979), Wage-Based Indexes of Urban Quality of Life, In Current Issues in
    Urban Economics, edited by Peter Mieszkowski and Mahlon Straszheim. Baltimore:
    Johns Hopkins University Press.
Roback, Jennifer (1982), Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life, Journal of Political Econ-
   omy 90, 1257-1278.
Saiz, Albert (2010), The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply, Quarterly Journal
     of Economics 125(3), 1253-1296.

                                           37
 Sockin, Michael and Wei Xiong (2015), Informational Frictions and Commodity Markets,
     Journal of Finance 70, 2063-2098
 Soo, Cindy K. (2018), Quantifying Sentiment with News Media across Local Housing Mar-
     kets, Review of Financial Studies 31(10), 3689-3719.
 Van Nieuwerburgh, Stijn and Pierre-Olivier Weill (2010), Why Has House Price Dispersion
     Gone up?, Review of Economic Studies 77, 1567-1606.




Appendix              Proofs of Propositions
A.1     Proof of Proposition 1
The ...rst order conditions of household i'
                                          s optimization problem in (2) respect to Ci (i) and
Cj (i) at an interior point are

                                          1     c
                         Ci (i) :                 U fCk (i)gk2N ; N =                     i pi ;           (13)
                                          Ci (i)
                                                  c
                         Cj (i) : R                       U fCk (i)gk2N ; N =                     i pj ;   (14)
                                           N =i
                                                  Cj dj

where   i   is the Lagrange multiplier for the budget constraint. Rewriting (14) as

                            R      c Cj
                                               U fCk (i)gk2N ; N              =        i p j Cj
                                N =i
                                       Cj dj

and integrating over N ; we arrive at
                                                                        Z
                                cU      fCk (i)gk2N ; N =           i              pj Cj dj:
                                                                            N =i
                                                                                   R
                                                                                         pj Cj (i)dj
Dividing equations (13) by this expression leads to 1     = N =i
                                                               pi Ci (i)
                                                                        c
                                                                         , which in a symmetric
                                                        c
                                      1
equilibrium implies pj Cj (i) = (p " (A A )) 1 pi Ci (i) : By substituting this equation back
                                              c
                                                c
to the household's budget constraint in (2), we obtain

                                 Ci (i) = (1              c ) (1
                                                                             1
                                                                   ) eAi Ki li            :

The market-clearing for the household'
                                     s good requires that
                                 Z
                        Ci (i) +    Ci (j ) dj = (1            1
                                                     ) eAi Ki li                                   ;
                                           N =i


                                                            38
                                                              1
which implies that Ci (j ) = (p " (1  A A )) c
                                               (1   ) eAi Ki li  .
    The ...rst order condition in equation (13) also gives the price of the good produced by
household i: Since the household'    s budget constraint in (2) is entirely in nominal terms, the
price system is only identi...ed up to i , the Lagrange multiplier. We therefore normalize i
to 1: It follows that
                                                                   R       Aj        1
                                                                                           !c
               1      c                                              N =i
                                                                          e    K j lj   dj
          pi =          U fCj (i)gj 2N ; N = eAi Ki li 1       c
                                                                       p                      : (15)
                Ci (i)                                                      " (A       A)

The ...rst-order conditions for household i'
                                           s choice of li at an interior point is

                                                                   Ki
                                        li = (1     ) i pi e A i        :                               (16)
                                                                   li

from equation (13). Substituting     = 1 and pi with equation (15), it follows that
                                              i
                                                                                 R      Aj        1
                                                                                                        ! c!
                1                              1                         (1   )   N =i
                                                                                       e    K j lj   dj
log li =                   log(1 )+                       log eAi Ki        c
                                                                                    p                        :
         + + (1        ) c               + + (1       ) c                                " (A       A)
                                                                                             (17)
The optimal labor choice of household i; consequently, represents a ...xed point problem over
the optimal labor strategies of other households in the neighborhood.
                                              1
                                    1
                            pi eAi li     1
    Noting that Ki =            R
                                         from the ...rst-order condition for Ki , we can substitute
in the price function pi to arrive at
                                                                         Z                   ! c!
                     1                        1                 1
  log Ki =                      log eAi li 1     c
                                                          p
                                                                                        1
                                                                                eAj Kj lj dj
              1 (1       c )                                 " ( A A   )   N =i
                       1                        1
                                  log R +                 log ;                                 (18)
                1 (1         c)            1 (1       c)

which is a functional ...xed-point problem for the optimal choice of capital. With some
                                      1 (1 c )
manipulation, by adding a multiple +    +(1    )
                                                 of equation (18) to equation (17), we have
                                                         c


                           log Ki = (1 + ) log li            log (1     )   log R;

and substituting this back into equation (17), we arrive at the functional ...xed-point equation

                                          1+                          (1 +      )
Ai + (1 +     ) log li =                                Ai                                    (log (1      ) + log R)
                             (1         ) + (1 +    ) c       (1      ) + (1 +        )   c
                                           1+                                        p
                            +                             (log(1       )     c log  (     "   (A   A )))
                                (1       ) + (1 +     ) c
                                                                Z
                                         (1 +   ) c                        1+
                            +                             log         eAj lj     dj :                            (19)
                                (1       ) + (1 +     ) c        N =i




                                                      39
Given that household i'  s optimal labor supply li satis...es the functional ...xed-point equation
(19), let us conjecture for i for which Ai A ; so that i 2 N is in the neighborhood, that
                                                                                     2
                                                   1            1+                            1
                                                                                          "                                                           1=2       A A
                                                  e2    (1    ) +(1+           ) c
                                                                                                    (1 + ( hs + (1                      ) ls ))   "         +       1=2
                                                                                                                                                                "
log li = l0 +lA A+ls Ai +lR log R+l log                                                              p                                                                    ;
                                                                                                        " (A   A)
where R is the rental rate of capital. Substituting these conjectures into the ...xed-point
recursion for labor, equation (17), we arrive, by the method of undetermined coe¢ cients, at
the coe¢ cient restrictions:
                                                           2
              1 1        c               1+                    1    1      1
     l0 =                                                     " +     log + log (1    );
              21                (1     ) + (1 +        ) c        1
                 1                  1+               c
    lA =                                               ;
              1     (1          ) + (1 +      ) c
                         1        c
     ls =                                   ;
              (1     ) + (1 +           ) c
                        1
    lR =                   ;
                1
                 1    c
    l =                 ;
              1
which con...rms the conjecture for Ai A : It is straightforward to verify from these expres-
sions that dl
            d
              A
                 > 0 > dl d
                             A
                               : In addition, it follows that
             c              c

                                                               +
  log Ki = (1 + ) ls Ai + (1 + ) lA A +                                lR log R
                                                                                                1+                      1=2       A A
                                    1            1+
                                                                   2
                                                                           1         (1       ) +(1+        )       "         +        1=2
                                                                       "                                        c                  "
                 + (1 + ) l log e   2    (1    ) +(1+        ) c
                                                                                                   p                                         + h0 ;
                                                                                                       "   (A           A)
Substituting this functional form for the labor supply and capital demand of household i
into equation (15), the price of household i0 s good then reduces to
                                                        0                    1=2
                                                                                           1c
                                                                1+                  A A
             1+
                        (A Ai )+ 1        1+
                                                   2
                                                      1   (1  ) +(1+ ) c   "      +    1=2
                                                     " @                             "     A :
 pi = e (1 ) +(1+ ) c c          2 c (1 ) +(1+ ) c
                                                                 p
                                                                     " ( A   A   )
                                                                                                                                           1+
To arrive at the expressions in the statement of the proposition, we de...ne ' =                                                  (1     ) +(1+        )   c
and recognize that
                                        1=2       A A
                                 ' "          +        1=2
                          ' "1
                        1 2
                    e   2        p                 "
                                                               = E e'(Aj                  A)
                                                                                                  j A; Aj           A :
                                        " (A       A)
                                                                                  1
Furthermore, given equation (1), it follows since Ci (i) = (1  c ) (1   ) eAi Ki li  ; Cj (i) =
  p 1                  Aj   1
 ( " (A A )) c
               (1   ) e Kj lj ; and the optimal choice of li that
          "                                   #
                                      1+
                                     li
        E U fCj (i)gj 2N ; N                Ii = (1       )                 1
                                                               E pi eAi Ki li     Ii ;
                                    1+                      1+

                                                              40
from substituting with the household'
                                    s budget constraint at t = 2:

A.2         Proof of Proposition 2
Substituting the optimal demand for capital Ki into the market-clearing condition for the
capital in (7) reveals that the price R is given by
                   1+                                                                                                            1
log R =               A                              (1                )                   log K + log                       +                    log (1                  )
                    +                                                        +                                                        +
                                                                                                         2
                                                               1               1+                                1
                                                                                                             "                         1+                               1=2       A A
                     1+                                   e2           (1    ) +(1+             ) c
                                                                                                                         (1          ) +(1+            )            "         +          1=2
                                                                                                                                                            c                        "
                   +                         c   log                                                                 p
                      +                                                                                                  "   (A           A)
                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                1               2              1+                             1
                                                                                  (1       c)                                             "                     (1+ )(1           c)               1=2       A A
                                                                            e   2                   (1       ) +(1+          ) c
                                                                                                                                                       (1         ) +(1+             )         "         +           1=2
                                                                                                                                                                                         c                       "
                   + (1                      )                     log                                                                   p                                                                                       ;
                                                      +                                                                                           "   (A            A)

where K is the total amount of capital developed by capital producers at t = 1
                                                                      R          R
    Since market-clearing in the market for capital imposes that K i2N di = i2N Ki di; it
follows from equation (4) that the optimal choice of how much capital that capital producers
create is given by
                                  2
                                         0                      1=2
                                                                              1 1+
                                                                                 + c
                                                     1+               A A
                     1            6 1+ A       (1  ) +(1+ ) c "
                                                                    +     1=2
      log K =          1+
                            log E 6
                                  4e
                                     +   @            p                 "     A
                                                      +  " (A   A)
                                                                                                                                                                                                   3
                                                                                0                  (1+ )(1                                1=2
                                                                                                                                                                         1     (1
                                                                                                                                                                                 +
                                                                                                                                                                                         )
                                                                                                                         c)                            A A
                                                                                                (1   ) +(1+                )          "           +            1=2                                7
                                                                                @                                                                                        A                     I c7
                                                                                                                                 c                         "
                                                                                                                   p
                                                                                                                             (A           A)                                                      5 + k0 ;
                                                                                                                         "



with constant k0 is given by
                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                             1                                                  1      1+                                                                       2                   1+                                   1
        log         +            +
                                         log (1                        )+       2       +           c    + (1                )       +
                                                                                                                                          (1               c)             (1      ) +(1+             )               "
                                                                                                                                                                                                         c
 k0 =                                                                                                                    1+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             :
                                                                                                                          +

                                       1+
De...ning ' =        (1              ) +(1+                )
                                                                       and recognize that
                                                                   c


                                                                                       1=2            A A
                                                                             ' "                +            1=2
                                                       ' "1
                                                     1 2
                                                 e   2                       p                           "
                                                                                                                         = E e'(Aj                         A)
                                                                                                                                                                    j A; Aj                  A ;
                                                                                       "   (A            A)
                                                                                       1=2            A A
            1            2               1
                                                      (1                   c) ' "               +            1=2
              (1    c)       '2
        e   2                        "
                                                                   p                                     "
                                                                                                                         = E e(1                       c )'(Aj           A)
                                                                                                                                                                               j A; Aj               A :
                                                                            " (A            A)

we arrive at the expressions in the statement of the proposition.

                                                                                                              41
A.3          Proof of Proposition 3
We now derive household i'  s optimal cuto¤, given that other households all use an equilibrium
cuto¤ A . By substituting for prices, the optimal labor and capital choices of household i, the
realized capital price R; and capital demand Ki from Proposition 2, the utility of household
i at t = 1 from choosing to live in the neighborhood is
                                                      0                        1=2
                                                                                              1u
                                                                  1+                 A A
                                        (1+ )(1 c )         (1  ) +(1+ ) c   "     +    1 = 2
                              e 0 A (1 ) +(1+ ) c i @                                         A
                               u +u A+              A                                 "
E [Ui jIi ] = (1      )                                            p
                        1+                                            " (A     A)
                                                                                                                    1+
                            0               (1+ )(1                         1=2
                                                                                                        1(1   )      +
                                                                                                                     1+
                                                           c)                            A A
                                       (1     ) +(1+           )        "            +            1=2
                                                                                                                       +
                            @                        p
                                                                   c                          "         A                  ;
                                                           "   (A           A)

where
                                                         1+
                                                                                                                                    !
                                                1                                                                                                                                           2
             1+                                           +                      (        1)            (1    )                 2                             1+                                    1
u0      =                                   c            1+                              1+
                                                                                                                   (1      c)                                                                   "
          2 (1  )                                         +                               +
                                                                                                          +                                 (1              ) + (1 +              )   c
                                1+
                  11             +
             +                  1+
                                                         (1 + ) log                      + log (1              ) ;
                                 +
                                            1
                                                                                                                        1+
                                                                                                                                    !
                  1     1+                             1+                                                                +
uA =                                                                                              c     (     1)          1+
                                                                                                                                            ;
              1                        (1            ) + (1 +                        )    c                                +
                      1+
                       +
u       =                1+       c   > 0:
                          +

Since the household with the critical productivity A must be indi¤erent to its moving
decision at the cuto¤, it follows that Ui P = 0; which implies
                                                                                                                                                                                       1+
                                                                                                         1u 0                                                              1 (1   )
                                      0                  (1+ ) "
                                                                       1=2
                                                                                                                        (1+ )(1 c )
                                                                                                                                                    1=2                               1+
                                                                                                                                                                                        +
                                                                                          A A                                                   "               A A
                                                                                     +                                                                      +                          +

                                                                                                         A B                                                               C
               (1+ )(1  c)                          (1     ) +(1+            )                    1=2                   (1  ) +(1+                  )                1=2
        e   (1   ) +(1+
                             A
                          ) c i       @                   p
                                                                                 c            "
                                                                                                            @                   p
                                                                                                                                                        c        "
                                                                                                                                                                           A
                                                                   "   (A            A)                                                 "   (A              A)

             1+                 u0 uA A
    =                       e               P; with Ai = A                                                                                                                            (20)
             (1         )
which implies the bene...t of living with more productive households is o¤set by the higher
cost of living in the neighborhood.
   Fixing the critical value A and price P; we see that the LHS of equation (20) is increasing
in monotonically in Ai ; since (1 ) 1++(1+ ) c
                                               (1    c ) > 0: This con...rms the optimality of
the cuto¤ strategy that households with Ai        A enter the neighborhood, and households
with Ai < A choose to live somewhere else. Since Ai = A + "i ; it then follows that a fraction

                                                                                         42
          p                                                          p
               (A
               "     A) enter the neighborhood, and a fraction         " (A    A) choose to live
    somewhere else. As one can see, it is the integral over the idiosyncratic productivity shocks
    of households "i that determines the fraction of households in the neighborhood.
        From the optimal supply of housing by builder i in the neighborhood (6), there exists a
    critical value ! :
                                        ! = (1 + k ) log P;                                  (21)
                                                                                    p
    such that builders with productivity ! i ! build houses. Thus, a fraction          e (!     )
    build houses in the neighborhood. Imposing market-clearing, it must be the case that
                                                         p                                                      p
                                                     (        "   (A          A)) =                       (             e   (!          )) :

    Since the CDF of the normal distribution is monotonically increasing, we can invert the
    above market-clearing conditions, and impose equation (21) to arrive at
                                              r
                                         1        "
                              log P =               (A A )        :                    (22)
                                       1+k        e

    By substituting for P in equation (20), we obtain an equation to determine the equilibrium
    cuto¤ A = A (A; )
                                                                                                                                       1+
                                                 0                                   1=2
                                                                                                                    1 (1          )
                                                                                                                                      1+
                                                                                                                                        +
                                                                                                                                                                     1=2                            u
                           p                             (1+ )(1 c )             "                       A A                                        (1+ ) "                              A A
        (1+ )(1  c)    +        "= e
                                           A     B       (1  ) +(1+                  )
                                                                                             +                1=2
                                                                                                                    C
                                                                                                                                       +
                                                                                                                                                 (1   ) +(1+               )
                                                                                                                                                                                   +         1=2
     (1   ) +(1+   ) c         1+k                                                       c                "                                                                    c         "
e                                                @                                                                  A                                                              u
                                                                             A A                                                                                 A A
                                                                                 1=2                                                                                     1=2
                                                                             "                                                                                       "
                                   p
                                    "= e
               1+                  1+k
                                                 uA A     1
                                                         1+k
                                                                    u0
      =                    e                                             :                                                                                                                         (23)
               (1      )
    Taking the derivative of the log of the LHS of equation (23) with respect to A gives
        d log LHS
            dA
                  0                                                                                           1=2
                                                                                                                                       1
                                       A A                               1+                                             A A
             1 @                                                                                         "          +                             (1 + ) (1   c)
                                           1=2                (1       ) +(1+                )                                  1=2
      = u                              "                                                         c                          "          A+
              1=2                      A A                               1+                                   1=2           A A                (1    ) + (1 +    )
                   "                       1=2                 (1      ) +(1+                )            "         +           1=2
                                                                                                                                                                                             c
                                       "                                                         c                          "
                                                                             0                                                                                                            1
                       r                                            1+                           A A                                  (1+ )(1    c)            1=2
                                                                                                                                                                     +     A A
                1              "            1        (       1)      +
                                                                                                         1=2                     (1     ) +(1+    )        "                       1=2
           +                                                                 @                   "                                                     c                       "          A:
               1+k                             1=2                1+                                                                 (1+ )(1                   1=2
                                                                                                 A A                                             c)                        A A
                               e           "                       +                                     1=2                      (1   ) +(1+      )       "         +             1=2
                                                                                                     "                                                 c                       "


    The term in parentheses are nonnegative by the properties of the normal CDF. The last
    term is nonpositive, since > 1; and attains its minimum at A ! 1; from which follows,
    substituting for u ; that
                                                      r         1+
                                  d log LHS        1     "       +
                      as A ! 1,              !             +       1+
                                                                      > 0:
                                      dA        1+k      e          +


                                                                                           43
Consequently, since d log  dA
                             LHS
                                  > 0 when the last term attains its (nonpositive) minimum,
                 d log LHS
it follows that dA          > 0: Therefore, log LHS; and consequently LHS; is monotonically
increasing in A : Since the RHS of equation (23) is independent of A ; it follows that the
LHS and RHS of equation (23) intersect at most once. Therefore, the can be, at most, one
cuto¤ equilibrium. Furthermore, since the LHS of equation (23) tends to 0 as A ! 1;
and the RHS is nonnegative, it follows that a cuto¤ equilibrium always exists. Therefore,
there exists a unique cuto¤ equilibrium in this economy.
    It is straightforward to apply the Implicit Function Theorem to (23) to obtain
                                            1
                                               p " d log LHS
                                 dA                                 uA
                                      = 1+k       e
                                                     d log
                                                            dA
                                                           LHS
                                 dA                      dA
                                 dA            1         1
                                      =             d log LHS
                                                               < 0;
                                  d          1 + k dA

where
                                            0                                                                      1=2
                                                                                                                                             1
                                                     A A                              1+                                      A A
d log LHS                         1                      1=2                  (1    ) +(1+           )        "          +         1=2
          =             u                   @        "                                                   c                     "             A
    dA                                1=2            A A                                 1+                        1=2         A A
                                 "                       1=2                  (1       ) +(1+        )         "         +         1=2
                                                     "                                                   c                     "
                                                                        0                                        (1+ )(1                              1=2
                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                          1+                       A A                                              c)                                    A A
                            1                                                          1=2                    (1   ) +(1+                )        "               +            1=2
                                                           +            @          "                                                         c                             "             A:
                    +           1=2
                                      (         1)          1+                     A A                           (1+ )(1            c)                1=2                 A A
                            "                                +                         1=2                    (1   ) +(1+                )        "               +            1=2
                                                                                   "                                                         c                             "


                                                         d log LHS
Note that the nonpositive term in                            dA
                                                                            achieves its minimum at A !                                          1; at which
                                                                                         1+
        d log LHS                                                                         +                                1+
                  ! ((                          1) (1           c)            c)              1+
                                                                                                                                                                      :
            dA                                                                                 +
                                                                                                         (1              ) + (1 +                     )           c

                                                               dA
Then, as A !        1; the numerator of                        dA
                                                                        converges to
                                                                                                                                        1+
                                                                                                ((           1) (1       c)        c)                         1       1+
        r                                                                      (1 + )                                    1+
                                                                                                                                         +
                                                                                                                                                 +    1                         c
  1         "   d log LHS                                                                                                 +
                                                uA !           A! 1
 1+k        e       dA                                                                          (1                 )         + (1 +               )       c
                                                                                                           1+                            r
                                                                       1      1+         (      1)          +                  1                  "
                                                               +                                         1+
                                                                                                                         +                            ;
                                                                   1                                      +
                                                                                                                              1+k                 e

                                                     dA
which is positive. Consequently                      dA A = 1
                                                                            > 0: In contrast, as A ! 1; one has that
                r
         1           "           d log LHS
                                                         uA
        1+k          e               dA
                         r                                                                                                                                        1+
                                                                                                                                                                                !
          1                      "              1    1+                             1+                                                                             +
   ! A!1                                                                                                                 c     (             1)                     1+
                                                                                                                                                                                     ;
         1+k                     e          1                          (1         ) + (1 +                    )    c                                                 +


                                                                             44
    which is negative if

                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                             p                                          1+
                                                                                                                                                         +
                                                                                          1+        1+k
                                                                                                                         "
                                                                                                                         e
                                                                                                                             +(                   1)     1+
                                                                                                                                                           +
                              c   >        c   = (1            )                                                         p                                          1+     :                       (24)
                                                                   1+         1+                             1                                                       +
                                                                             1+                     1+       1+k
                                                                                                                                  "
                                                                                                                                  e
                                                                                                                                              (        1)            1+
                                                                                                                                                                       +


    We can rewrite equation (23) as
                                                                                                                                               1+
                                                        0                                 1=2
                                                                                                                             1 (1         )
                                                                                                                                              1+
                                                                                                                                                +
                                                                                                                                                                               1=2                            u
                                                                  (1+ )(1 c )                                s                                                 (1+ ) "                                  s
                                       p                                          "
                                                                                                   +                                           +
                                                                                                                                                                                               +
         (1+ )(1  c)       1
                        + 1+                   "    s   B         (1  ) +(1+              )   c          "
                                                                                                             1=2
                                                                                                                             C                              (1   ) +(1+                )   c        "
                                                                                                                                                                                                        1=2
e     (1   ) +(1+   ) c      k                 e
                                                        @                                                                    A                                                                 u
                                                                                  s                                                                                                s
                                                                                  1=2                                                                                              1=2
                                                                              "                                                                                                "
                                                             1+
                                                        1
                                           1   1+             +         1
             1+                        1                     1+    A   1+k
                                                                             u0
      =                       e                               +                   ;
             (1           )

    where s = A A determines the population that enter the neighborhood. It is straightfor-
    ward to show that
                             d log LHS      d log LHS
                                        =               < 0:
                                 ds             dA
    Consequently, we have
                                                                                   1
                                                               ds                 1+k
                                                                  =           d log LHS
                                                                                                        > 0;
                                                               d                   ds
                                                                                                                     1+
                                                                                          1        1+    1            +
                                                                                                                     1+
                                                               ds                     1
                                                                                                                      +
                                                                  =                               d log LHS
                                                                                                                                  > 0:
                                                               dA                                     ds
                                         p
    Thus, the population that enters,      " s ; is increasing in A and : Furthermore, it follows
    from (22) that                                   r
                                   d log P      1       " ds
                                           =                  > 0;
                                      dA      1+k       e dA

    and therefore the log housing price is increasing in A:
       Finally, we recognize that
                                                                                                                                               1+
                                                                                                                     1       1+       1         +
                                               2                                              2
              d2 P                    ds                     d2 s            ds                                  1                             1+
                                                                                                                                                +      ds d2 log LHS
                   =                               P+             P =                             P+                                                                 P;
              dA2                     dA                     dA2             dA                                          d log LHS 2                   dA      ds2
                                                                                                                             ds

                                       1+
                     1   1+       1     +          ds
    where        1                     1+          dA
                                                            > 0 by the above arguments. It follows that from calculating
                                        +
    d2 log LHS
        ds2
                 that
                                                                                                                                          1+
                                                d2 log LHS                                                                                 +            1
                                            lim            =( (                                         c)                   )                    1+
                                                                                                                                                                ;
                                           s! 1      ds2                                                                                           +    "
                                                                                                                                                            1



                                                                                              45
                                                                                                 d2 P                                             d2 P
and therefore, as P ! 1; from the expression for                                                 dA2
                                                                                                             one has that                         dA2
                                                                                                                                                           ! 1: Furthermore,
as s ! 1,                                                                                                                                 !
                                              r                                                                          1+
                      d log LHS           1                                                       "                       +
                                 !                                                                       +                  1+
                                                                                                                                              ;
                          ds            1+k                                                       e                          +

and
                                                                 d2 log LHS
                                                                 lim        = 0;
                                                             s!1      ds2
                                                                                                                                                       2                              2
and P ! 0 at an exponential rate. Consequently, as s ! 1, d             P
                                                                      dA2
                                                                           ! 0: Since d    P
                                                                                         dA2
                                                                                             is
                               2
                              d P
continuous, it follows that dA2      0: Consequently, P is convex in A: Since, in equilibrium,
the housing price is equal to the utility of the household with the cuto¤ productivity, it
follows that this utility is also convex and increasing in A:

A.4     Proof of Proposition 4
Given our assumption about the su¢ cient statistic in housing price, each household's pos-
terior about A is Gaussian A jIi s N A^i ; ^   1
                                                 with conditional mean and variance of
                                             A

                                                 2           1             1                         1                                    1
                                                                                                                                                           3       1   2          3
                                                         A        +       Q                      A                                    A                                    Q A
  ^i = A +
  A                  A
                         1
                               1 1 1 4                            A
                                                                      1
                                                                                      A
                                                                                           1
                                                                                               +z        2       1
                                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                                          1                5           4 z (P ) A 5
                                                                      1                              1                            1               1
                                                                  A                              A                            A       +       "                            Ai A
       = ^A1         AA       +       QQ      + z 2 z (P ) +                   " Ai        ;
  ^A =       A   +   Q       + z2         +     ":


Note that the conditional estimate of A   ^i of household i is increasing in its own productivity
Ai : Similarly, the posterior for capital producers about A is Gaussian A jI c s N A    ^c ; ^c 1 ;
                                                                                              A
where
                                                                          1            1                         1                        1
          ^c = A +                        1                           A       +       Q                      A                                          Q A
          A                           A        1 1                                1                  1               2        1
                                                                              A                  A       +z                                           z (P ) A
                 =           ^c
                              A
                                1
                                       AA      +       QQ        +z       2
                                                                               z (P ) ;
          ^c
           A =                A   +   Q       + z2 :

This completes our characterization of learning by households and capital producers.
    We now turn to the optimal decision of capital producers. Since the posterior for A A
of households is conditionally Gaussian, it follows that the expectations in the expression of
K in Proposition 2 is a function of the two conditional moments, A  ^c A and ^c    A : Let
                      20                                                                1 1+   3
                                                                                                                                                                                          +
                                                                                                                                  1=2                                  c
                             6B                                  (A A )                          1+                                           A A                                               7
                             6                               e                                                                "           +                                       C            c7
                                                                                      (1       ) +(1+            )                                     1=2
  ^c         ; ^c        = E 6B                                                                                                                                                   C
                                                                                                                     c                             "
F A      A                                                                                                                                                                                    I 7:
                A
                             4@                 A A               c+
                                                                          (1
                                                                          1+
                                                                                  )
                                                                                                  (1+ )(1                c)               1=2              A A
                                                                                                                                                                           (1
                                                                                                                                                                           1+
                                                                                                                                                                                ) A
                                                                                                                                                                                                5
                                                       1=2                                     (1   ) +(1+                )           "           +                1=2
                                                   "                                                                              c                            "



                                                                                      46
               A A
De...ne z =            1=2    and the function f (z )
                   "



                                                                            1=2             c
                                                                                                0             (1+ )(1                                   1=2
                                                                                                                                                                     1 1+     (1     )
                                              1+                                                                                      c)
                   1=2            (1        ) +(1+            )         "         +z                       (1   ) +(1+                     )        "         +z
  f (z ) = e   "         z                                         c
                                                                                                @                                              c
                                                                                                                                                                     A                    ;
                                                            (z )    c
                                                                                                                                      (z )

which is the term inside the bracket in the expectation. Then, it follows that
                                    0                        1=2
                                                                                    1
                                                1+
          1 df (z )                       (1  ) +(1+ ) c   "        +  z       (z ) A
                     = " 1=2 + c @
        f (z ) dz                               1+            1 = 2
                                                                    +z         (z )
                                          (1  ) +(1+ ) c "
                                         0         (1+ )(1 c )         1=2
                                                                                            1
                                                (1   ) +(1+ ) c "
                                                                           + z        (z ) A
                         +       (1     )@                                                    :
                           1+                      (1+ )(1 c )
                                                                     "
                                                                       1=2
                                                                           + z        ( z )
                                                (1   ) +(1+ )                                                               c


                                 1+                         1=2
                         (1    ) +(1+         ) c       "         +z              (z )
Notice that                      1+                         1=2                   (z )
                                                                                         achieves its minimum as z !                                                 1: Applying
                         (1    ) +(1+         ) c       "         +z
                                                                                                      1 df (z )
L'
 Hospital'
         s Rule, it follows that the minimum of                                                     f (z ) dz
                                                                                                                        is given by

                                          1 df (z )                                       1+                                                       1=2
                              lim                   =                                                                  (1             c)       "         >0
                             z!       1 f (z ) dz                                 +       + (1             )       c

                                                1 df (z )                                                                              df (z )
from which follows that                       f (z ) dz
                                                                            0 for all z; and therefore                                   dz
                                                                                                                                                             0; since f (z )                  0:
                                             1+
Consequently, since f (z )     is a monotonic transformation of f (z ) ; it follows that dF
                                              +
                                                                                          dx
                                                                                             (x; ^A )
   0 since this holds for all realizations of A A : This establishes that the optimal choice
of capital is increasing with A^c ; since f (z ) is increasing for each realization of z:
    The optimal choice of K then takes the following form
                                                                                                                                1+
                                                        1                    ^c                                                  +
                            log K =                         1+
                                                                       log F A                  A   ; ^c
                                                                                                       A           +                  1+
                                                                                                                                                   A + k0 :
                                                             +                                                                         +

By substituting the expressions for Ki and li into the utility of household i given in Propo-
sition 1, we obtain

      E [Ui jIi ]
                                                                              1+
                                           (1+ )(1  c)                         +                 ^c            1+                                       1+             1+                      1+
                                      (1     ) +(1+
                                                         A+
                                                      ) c i                    1+        (log F (A         A )+ + A
                                                                                                       A ;^c                           )+ 1 1                  (1    ) +(1+    ) c    c         +
                                                                                                                                                                                                    A +u0
  = (1         )                  e                                              +
                       1+
         20                                                                                                                                                         1 1+        3
                        1     +              (1+ ) c                        1+                                              1=2                                 c      +
                                                                                   (A A )                  (1+ ) "                                 A A
        6Be1                           (1    ) +(1+           ) c            +
                                                                                                      (1     ) +(1+               )
                                                                                                                                           +            1=2
                                                                                                                                                                    C            7
       E6                                                                                                                                                                     Ii 7
                                                                                                                                      c             "
        4@                                     A A                 c               (1+ )(1 c )         "
                                                                                                           1=2
                                                                                                                        A A
                                                                                                                                                                    A            5;
                                                        1=2                        (1  ) +(1+              )
                                                                                                                   +            1=2
                                                    "                                                          c            "



where u0 is given in the proof of Proposition 3. When Ai = A ; this further reduces to

                                                                                          47
            E [Ui jIi ]
                                               1+                        1+
                                                +                         +                     ^c A ;^c )+u0
                                                1+        A +             1+             log F (A      A
   = (1               )               e           +                         +
                          1+
                 20                                                                                                                                                                              1 1+              3
                            1     +              (1+ ) c                             1+                                                     1=2                                              c      +
                                                                                                 (A A )                   (1+ ) "                                  A A
             6Be1                          (1    ) +(1+             ) c               +
                                                                                                                       (1   ) +(1+                )
                                                                                                                                                          +                1=2
                                                                                                                                                                                                 C                7
            E6                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ii 7
                                                                                                                                                      c                "
             4@                                       A A                c                       (1+ )(1 c )            "
                                                                                                                            1=2
                                                                                                                                          A A
                                                                                                                                                                                                 A                5;
                                                              1=2                                (1  ) +(1+                 )
                                                                                                                                     +         1=2
                                                          "                                                                     c          "


Since the posterior for A A of household i is conditionally Gaussian, it follows that the
expectations in the expressions above are functions of the ...rst two conditional moments
A^i A and ^A : Let
                      20                                                                   1 1+                                                                                                                             3
                            1  +     (1+ ) c       1+                         1=2        c    +
                                                      (A A )          (1+ ) "       A A
                      6Be 1       (1 ) +(1+   ) c   +
                                                                  (1    ) +(1+ ) c
                                                                                   + 1=2   C                                                                                                                                 7
G A ^i A ; ^A = E 6 @                                                                "
                                                                                           A                                                                                                                              Ii 7
                      4                A A       c    (1+ )(1   )
                                                               c "
                                                                     1=2
                                                                            A A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5
                                          1=2         (1  ) +(1+ )
                                                                          + 1=2
                                                                                             "                                                            c                    "


                 A A
De...ne z =           1=2   ; and
                  "

                                                                                                                                                                               1=2                    c
                                                                                                                                            1+
                                      1     +                 (1+ ) c                            1+          1=2
                                                                                                                   z            (1        ) +(1+           )               "            +z
                                                                                                         "                                                      c
             g (z ) = e 1                            (1       ) +(1+             ) c              +
                                                                                                                                                      (z )         c


                                                (1+ )(1             c)                   1=2
                                          (1      ) +(1+              )              "           +z
                                                                             c
                                                                                                               ;
                                                               (z )
as the term inside the bracket. Then, it follows that
  1 dg (z )     1                               +                                  1+                                                      1+                              1=2                                     (z )
            =                                                                                                                   c                                      "               +(                     c)
g (z ) dz     1                                                (1                ) + (1 +                          )    c                   +                                                                      (z )
                                                        1+                                   1=2                                          (1+ )(1          c)                          1=2
                                            (1        ) +(1+              )              "         +z                                (1     ) +(1+             )               "             +z
                                                                                 c                                                                                     c
                            +     c                                                                                                                                                                       :
                                                        1+                                   1=2                                        (1+ )(1               c)                       1=2
                                            (1        ) +(1+                 )           "         +z                                (1   ) +(1+                )                  "             +z
                                                                                 c                                                                                     c

                   1+                     1=2
            (1   ) +(1+         ) c   "         +z             (z )
Note               1+                     1=2                  (z )
                                                                         achieves its minimum as z !                                                  1: Applying L'
                                                                                                                                                                   Hospital'
                                                                                                                                                                           s
            (1   ) +(1+         ) c   "         +z
                                                                                                                                                   1 dg (z )
Rule, it follows, with some manipulation, that the minimum of                                                                                    g (z ) dz
                                                                                                                                                                           is given by

                                                                                         1 dg (z )
                                                                          lim                      = 0:
                                                                      z!             1 g (z ) dz

                            1 dg (z )                                                              dg (z )
It follows that           g (z ) dz
                                                     0; and therefore                               dz
                                                                                                                       0; since g (z )                         0: Consequently, since
       1+
                                                                                                                                                      dG
g (z )  +is a monotonic transformation of g (z ) ; it follows that                                                                                    dx
                                                                                                                                                              (x; ^A )                           0; since this
holds for all realizations of A A :

                                                                                                   48
   Since the household with the critical productivity A must be indi¤erent to its moving
decision at the cuto¤, it follows that Ui P = 0; which implies
                                        1+
                 (1+ )(1  c)             +             ^c            1+                             1+              (1+ ) c              1+
            (1     ) +(1+
                               A+
                            ) c i        1+    (log F (A         A )+ + A
                                                             A ;^c                     )+ 1 1             (1        ) +(1+    ) c         +
                                                                                                                                               A +u0
        e                                  +


          ^i                                 1+
        G A              A ; ^A =                        P; Ai = A                                                                                     (25)
                                             (1      )
which does not depend on the unobserved A or the supply shock : As such, A = A (log P; Q) :
Furthermore, since A ^i is increasing in Ai and G A
                                                  ^i A ; A is (weakly) increasing in A    ^i ; it
follows that the LHS of equation (25) is (weakly) monotonically increasing in Ai ; con...rming
the cuto¤ strategy assumed for households is optimal. Those with the RHS being nonnega-
tive enter the neighborhood, and those with it being negative choose to live elsewhere.
    It then follows from market-clearing that
                                p                   p
                              (     " (A    A)) = (    e (!    )) :

Since the CDF of the normal distribution is monotonically increasing, we can invert the
above market-clearing condition, and impose equation (21) to arrive at
                                         r
                                     1       "
                          log P =              (A A )         ;
                                   1+k       e

from which follows that
                                    r                                                                    r
                                         e                                                                      e
                         z (P ) =              (1 + k ) log P +               +A =A                                             ;
                                         "                                                                      "
                    p "
and therefore z =      e
                         : This con...rms our conjecture for the su¢ cient statistic in housing
price and that learning by households is indeed a linear updating rule.
    As a consequence, the conditional estimate of household i is

                                  ^i = ^ 1                                             "
                                  A     A                AA      +       QQ   +             z+           " Ai        ;
                                                                                       e
                                                                     "
                                  ^A =           A   +   Q   +            +       ";
                                                                     e

and the conditional estimate of capital producers is

                                    ^c = ^c              1                                      "
                                    A     A                      AA      +    QQ       +                 z ;
                                                                                                e
                                                                          "
                                    ^c
                                     A =             A   +    Q   +           :
                                                                          e

Substituting for prices, and simplifying A terms, we can express equation (25) as
      1+             p       !                                                                  1+
       +
       1+        +    "= e
                     1+k
                             A                                                                   +
                                                                                                 1+                  1+              1
                                                                                                                                           p   "z
 e       +                         ^
                                 G A                    ^c
                                               A ; ^A F A                 A ; ^c                   +      =                        e 1+k       e
                                                                                                                                                    u0
                                                                                                                                                         ;
                                                                               A
                                                                                                                     (1        )
                                                                                                                                                       (26)

                                                                     49
Notice that the LHS of equation (26) is continuous in A : As A !                                                           1; the LHS of equation
(26) converges to
                                        lim LHS = 0:
                                                               A ! 1

Furthermore, by L'
                 Hospital'
                         s Rule and the Sandwich Theorem, one also has that

                                                                lim LHS = 1:
                                                               A !1

Since the RHS is independent of A ; it follows that the LHS and RHS intersect once. There-
fore, a cuto¤ equilibrium in the economy with informational frictions exists.
    Now consider the derivative of the log of the LHS of equation (26):
                                       p                              ^                                                             ^c
 d log LHS
                       1+
                                                    "= e        ^c G0 A            A ; ^A                             1+         F0 A            A ; ^c
                                                                                                                                                      A
                        +                                        A                                                     +
           =              1+
                                   +                                                                                    1+
                                                                                                                                                          ;
     dA                    +
                                            1+k                 ^A G A^            A ; ^A                                +
                                                                                                                                   ^c
                                                                                                                                 F A             A ; ^c
                                                                                                                                                      A


where G0 ( ; ^A ) and F 0 ( ; ^c
                               A ) are understood to be ...rst derivatives with respect to the ...rst
                                         1 df (z )
argument. From our derivation of f (      z ) dz
                                                   above, we recognize that

                                                             1 df (z )                 1=2
                                                                                   "         ;
                                                           f (z ) dz
since the latter two terms are nonpositive. Furthermore, we can rewrite
                              2                                                                                                                      3
       F0 A ^    A ; ^A           p
                                f    " (A   A)     d log f (z )              p
                         =E   4                                    p                                                               "         I c5 ;
       F A ^     A ; ^A         F A^     A ; ^A        dz       z = " (A A )


              p                                                               p
           f ( " (A A ))                        f                          f ( " (a A ))
where E    F (A^ A ;^A )       Ii = 1; so that wa =                        F (A^ A ;^A )         acts as a weighting function. We
can take the derivative inside the expectation because f (z ) has a continuous ...rst derivative.
It then follows that
                           ^
                        F0 A                    A ; ^A                    d log f (z )
                                                                    max                   p                                 1:
                          ^
                        F A                 A ; ^A                   A        dz       z=            " (A        A )


Similarly, recognizing that
                       (1+ )(1         c)                1=2                             1+                          1=2
                  (1     ) +(1+         )           "          +z             (1       ) +(1+        )           "         +z
                                                c                                                        c
                                                                                                                                    0:
                     (1+ )(1           c)                1=2                             1+                          1=2
                  (1   ) +(1+               )        "         +z             (1       ) +(1+        )           "         +z
                                                c                                                        c


                  1 dg (z )
we can bound    g (z ) dz
                              by

            1 dg (z )              1                +                      1+                                              1+              1=2
                                                                                                             c                         "         :
          g (z ) dz            1                               (1        ) + (1 +                )   c                      +

                                                                         50
If   c        ; since the latter two terms are always nonpositive, and
                                       1 dg (z )                       1+                                        1=2
                                                                                                         c "           ;
                                     g (z ) dz               (1      ) + (1 +                   )   c

if c < ; since the second term then attains its maximum as z ! 1; and we have
truncated the third term. Consequently,
              ^              (
         G0 A      A ; ^A        1  +          1+               1+
                                                                    ; if c
                               1         (1  ) +(1+ ) c c        +
                                               1+
                                                                           :
         G A ^    A ; ^A                (1  ) +(1+ )      c ; if c <                        c


                                     ^c                 1+                                          1+                                         d log LHS
If   c   < ; then, since              A
                                     ^A
                                             1 and       +
                                                                  > 1; so that              1+       +
                                                                                                             > 1; we can bound                     dA
                                                                                             +
from below by
                                                        p
                       d log LHS                             "= e                    1+
                                              1+                                                                           c   > 0;
                           dA                           1+k               (1       ) + (1 +                  )   c

                1+                                                                 ^c                   1+                                         1+
since    (1   ) +(1+     )           c   < 1: If    c        ; then, since          A
                                                                                   ^A
                                                                                            1 and        +
                                                                                                                 > 1; so that             1+        +
                                                                                                                                                        >
                             c                                                                                                             +
                         d log LHS
1; we can bound              dA
                                      from below by
                                                  p
     d log LHS                            1+         "= e                               1           +                    1+
                                 1+             +                                                                                                   c
         dA                         1               1+k                            1                     (1            ) + (1 +            )   c
                                                                               p
                                    ( + ) (1   c)                                  "= e
                       =                                                  +                 > 0:
                                 (1   ) + (1 +    )                  c         1+k
Consequently, d log
                  dA
                    LHS
                           0; and therefore the LHS of equation (26) is (weakly) monotonically
increasing in A : Since the LHS of equation (26) is monotonically increasing in A ; while
the RHS is ...xed, it follows that the cuto¤ equilibrium is unique. Therefore, there exists a
unique cuto¤ equilibrium with informational frictions.
          ^c and A
    Since A         ^i are both increasing in the public signal Q; it follows by applying the
Implicit Function Theorem to equation (26) that
                                                                    dA
                                                                        < 0;
                                                                    d"Q
where "Q is the noise in Q; since the LHS of equation (26) is nonnegative and (weakly)
monotonically increasing in A : Since the noise in the public signal is independent of A; it
              ds
follows that d" Q
                  > 0; and more households enter the neighborhood in response to a more
                                                      dP
positive noise shock. Similarly, it also follows that d" Q
                                                           > 0; and the housing price increases
in response to the stronger housing demand.
    By applying the Implicit Function Theorem to equation (26) with respect z; we see that
                    1
                         p       "
                                              ^
                                          G0 (A    A ;^A )            "
                                                                      e
                                                                                                1+
                                                                                                 +
                                                                                                             ^c A ;^c )
                                                                                                        F 0 (A      A
                                                                                                                                      "
                                                                                                                                      e
                                                                          "                      1+                                    "
          dA       1+k           e        G(A ^    A ;^A )    A+ Q+       e
                                                                               +   "
                                                                                                   +
                                                                                                        F (A ^c A ;^c )
                                                                                                                    A            A+ Q+ e
              =                                                            d log LHS
                                                                                                                                               :
           dz                                                                  dA

                                                                          51
            ^
        G0 (A                    ^c A ;^c )
                  A ; ^ A ) F 0 (A      A
Since   G(A ^              ;     ^
                  A ;^A ) F (Ac A ;^c
                                                > 0; we can ...nd a su¢ cient condition for the learning
                                        A)
                                                                                             ^
                                                                                         G0 (A    A ;^A )
e¤ect to dominate the cost e¤ect by truncating the                                       G(A ^    A ;^A )
                                                                                                                term and recognizing
     ^c A ;^c )
F 0 (A      A              1+                                     1 df (z )
F (A ^c A ;^c )          + +(1     )
                                           (1    c) ;   since   f (z ) f (z )
                                                                                achieves its minimum at this value. It
            A                          c

then su¢ ces for the learning e¤ect to dominate the cost e¤ect that
                     r                 1+                                                                   "
             1            "             +                 1+                                                e
                                         1+
                                                                                    (1       c)                             0;
            1+k           e               +
                                                   +      + (1           )      c                  A   +    Q   +       "
                                                                                                                        e


from which follows that it is su¢ cient, although not necessary, that
                                                                  1+                                        r
                              1+k                                  +            + + (1      ) c                     "
                                                                1+
                                                                                                                        ;
                        1+ " ( A+
                            e
                                                Q) k             +
                                                                                (1  c ) (1 + )                      e


for dA
     dz
        < 0: As a consequence, more households enter in response to the information in a
higher housing price, and this impact is in(de)creasing in k if " e ( A + Q )       (>) 1: It
                                dP
then follows that, in addition, dz > 0 and more households also enter the neighborhood.
    Finally, as Q % 1; that A   ^c ; A
                                     ^i ! a:s: A; since ^c ; ^i % 1: Taking the limit along a
                                                         A    A
sequence of Q ; equation (25) converges to equation (23), and therefore A converges to its
perfect-information benchmark value, as do the optimal labor and capital supply. There-
fore the noisy rational expectations cuto¤ equilibrium converges to the perfect-information
benchmark economy as Q % 1:

A.5       Proof of Proposition 5
We begin with our analysis of the equilibrium at t = 2; after informational frictions have
dissipated after an arbitrary pro...le of housing policies by households. To see that this is the
unique equilibrium in the economy, de...ne the operator T : B (R) ! B (R) characterizing
the optimal household i'  s optimal labor choice:

                      (1 +    ) (1   c)                (1 +      )
T (x (i)) =                                Ai                                (log (1    ) + log R)
                   (1    ) + (1 +      ) c       (1    ) + (1 +          ) c
                             1+                                     (1 +     ) c
                   +                         log(1    )                               log E 1fHj =1g
                     (1    ) + (1 +      ) c                (1      ) + (1 +      ) c
                           (1 +    ) c
                   +                         log E eAj +x(j ) 1fHj =1g ;                         (27)
                     (1    ) + (1 +      ) c

where B (R) is the space of functions             bounded in the     norm kf k = supz jf ( z )j
                                                                                          (z )
                                                                                                for
                                                                                  p
  (z ) > 0: When households follow a cuto¤ strategy, then E 1fHj =1g =               " (A     A)
         Aj +x(j )               Aj +x(j )
and E e            1fHj =1g = E e          1f Aj A g : We introduce the weighted norm since x (i)
is potentially unbounded. T (x (i)) is continuous across i; since the expectation operator is

                                                                52
bounded and preserves continuity for lognormal Aj : Furthermore, T ( ) satis...es monotonicity
T (y (i)) T (x (i)) whenever y (i) x (i) (8 i), and discounting since

                                                        (1 +  ) c
          T (x (i) + ) = T (x (i)) +                                                 < T (x (i)) +                (x ) ;
                                           (1           ) + (1 +         )     c

for x = arg sup kf k ( ) and a constant > 0: T is therefore a strict contraction map by
the Weighted Contraction Mapping Theorem of Boyd (1990). Since a contraction map has,
at most, one ...xed point, if an equilibrium with a continuous x (i) exists, it is the unique
equilibrium, at least within the class of functions bounded in the          sup norm. Notice now
that the choice of ( ) is arbitrary, as it does not impact the contractive properties of T ( ) :21
We therefore conclude the x (i) that solves the ...xed-point equation is unique.
    Since x (i) = (1 +     ) li is unique in the economy, it follows that the function for capital
Ki is also unique. As such, total capital demand in the economy is unique, and the market-
clearing rental rate R is therefore also unique. Consequently, the equilibrium we derived is
the unique equilibrium at t = 2 in the economy, given the household decision strategy at
t = 1; fHi gi2[0;1] :
    In addition, we recognize from the functional ...xed-point equation (27) that li is strictly
                                                     k      k 1              k
increasing in Ai ; since one can take a sequence li    = T li   ; for which li is strictly increasing
in Ai along the sequence, and take the limit as k ! 1: Furthermore, li conditional on Ai is
increasing in A from the functional ...xed-point equation (27) by similar arguments, since li
is strictly increasing in eAj = eA+"j for any arbitrary housing policy.
    We now turn our attention to t = 1: Consider the problem of household i when all
other households follow arbitrary strategy pro...les. Solving for the household i0 s optimal
consumption and production decisions at t = 2; it follows we can express Ki and pi as
                                     1          1+
                    Ki =                       li  ;
                                (1        )R
                                                                         Z                               c
                                     1+         c                    1                   1+
                     pi =       eAi li              E 1fHj =1g                      eAj lj  dj               ;
                                                                             N =i

and, by imposing market-clearing in the market for capital, the price of capital is given by
                                                      Z
                                   1        1       1
                        R=                                l1+ dj:
                                (1    ) E 1fHj =1g K N j

Since household i is atomistic, it follows, by substituting for pi ; Ki ; and R; that
                                                    1    c
                                                              h                         i   c
                                                                                                    h                      i
                                          1+                        1+                                   1+
E [Ui jIi ] = (1      )        E     eAi li                  E eAj lj        jj2N               E       lj       jj2N          K      j Ii :
                          1+
                                                                                                                               (28)
  21
    The choice of ( ) is not entirely without loss, as existence depends on the space of                         bounded functions
being a complete metric space.

                                                             53
Now ...x K as a parameter, since it is publicly observable to all households. Note that the
          1+
term eAi li    is increasing in Ai ; ignoring indirect e¤ects through inference about A; and in
A conditional on Ai ; since li is increasing in these arguments. Now suppose that A increases
to (1 + ") A; holding ...xed Ai ; P; and K; and this increases lj to (1 + ) lj for all j: Then

                                   E [Ui jIi ]
                                               = (1 + ") (1 + )1        > 0;
                                  E [Ui jIi ]

and E [Ui jIi ] is also increasing in A:22 As all households share a common posterior about
A after observing the housing price, their private beliefs about A and their private type
Aj are perfectly positively correlated. Consequently, we can express the expected utility of
household i as
                                  E [Ui jIi ] = h (Ai ; P; Q) K ;
       @h
with @A  i
           > 0 since the argument in the expectation is increasing in Ai and A realization-by-
realization.
    It then follows that household i will follow a cuto¤ strategy, and buy if

                                                   1
                                        Ai     h       (P=K ; P; Q) ;

with the cuto¤ determined by the participation of other households in the neighborhood.
This con...rms the optimality of their cuto¤ strategy in their private type. As this holds for
any P and K; the result follows for any P and K:
   In the special case of perfect information, we can express E [Ui jIi ] = (1 ) 1+ f (Ai ) g (N ) ;
                              1   c
                    1+
with f (Ai ) = eAi li         is strictly increasing in Ai ; while g (N ) is independent of Ai :
Household i will then follow a cuto¤ strategy, and buy if

                                                       1
                                          Ai       f       (P=g (N ))

with the cuto¤ determined by the participation of other households in the neighborhood.
    Furthermore, we recognize that builders, regardless of their beliefs about demand fun-
damental, A; will follow cuto¤ strategies when choosing whether to supply a house. By
market-clearing and rational expectations, the functional form for the housing price and the
equilibrium beliefs of households follow.
    Given that the housing price has the conjectured functional form, capital producers
form rational expectations about A; and their optimal supply of capital is unique from the
concavity of their optimization program. As such, the cuto¤ equilibrium we characterized
is the unique rational expectations equilibrium in the economy, both with informational
frictions and perfect-information.
  22
    In the background, the utility of households, conditional on A; is supermodular in Ai and the actions of
the other households.

                                                        54
