                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE POLITICAL-ECONOMY TRILEMMA

                                       Joshua Aizenman
                                           Hiro Ito

                                      Working Paper 26905
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26905


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020




This paper was conceived when Ito was visiting the Research Institute of Economy, Trade and
Industry (RIETI, Japan) as a visiting fellow. The authors are grateful for helpful comments and
suggestions by Discussion Paper seminar participants at RIETI. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Joshua Aizenman and Hiro Ito. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Political-Economy Trilemma
Joshua Aizenman and Hiro Ito
NBER Working Paper No. 26905
March 2020
JEL No. F36,F41

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper investigates Rodrik's political-economy trilemma: policy makers face a trade-off of
choosing two out of three policy goals or governance styles, namely, (hyper-) globalization,
national sovereignty, and democracy. We develop a set of indexes that measure the extent of
attainment of the three factors for 139 countries in the period of 1975-2016. Using these indexes,
we examine the validity of the hypothesis of the political-economy trilemma by testing whether
the three trilemma variables are linearly related. We find that, for industrialized countries, there is
a linear relationship between globalization and national sovereignty (i.e., a dilemma), and that for
developing countries, all three indexes are linearly correlated (i.e., a trilemma). We also
investigate whether and how three political-economic factors affect the degree of political and
financial stability. The results indicate that more democratic industrialized countries tend to
experience more political instability while developing countries tend to be able to stabilize their
politics if they are more democratic. The lower level of national sovereignty an industrialized
country attains, the more stable its political situation tends to be, while a higher level of
sovereignty helps a developing country to stabilize its politics. Globalization brings about
political stability for both groups of countries. Furthermore, more globalized countries, whether
industrial or developing, tend to experience more financial stability. Future data will allow us to
test the possibility of regime changes associated with the post-2016 dynamics.


Joshua Aizenman
Economics and SIR
USC
University Park
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043
and NBER
aizenman@usc.edu

Hiro Ito
Department of Economics,
Portland State University
1721 SW Broadway, Suite 241
Portland, OR 97201
ito@pdx.edu
1. Introduction

      In the international macroeconomics literature, the complexity of open macro policy

management is viewed through the lens of the "open economy trilemma." This hypothesis,

advanced by Mundell and Fleming in the 1960s, states that a country may simultaneously choose

any two, but not all, of the three goals of monetary policy independence, exchange rate stability,

and financial market openness to the full extent. 1

      Figure 1 (a) is a textbook graphical presentation of the policy trade-offs associated with this

trilemma. Each of the three sides ­ representing monetary independence, exchange rate stability,

and financial integration ­ depicts a potentially desirable goal, yet it is not possible to be

simultaneously on all three sides of the triangle. The top vertex ­ labeled "floating exchange rate

regime" ­ is associated with monetary policy autonomy and open financial markets, but not

exchange rate stability, the preferred choice of some industrialized countries such as Australia,

Canada, Japan, and New Zealand. This hypothesis has been widely taught, explaining the

constraints policymakers face in an open economy setting. These constraints imply policy

tradeoffs imposed by arbitrage forces linking the interest rates of nations' bonds in the presence

of capital mobility. 2

      Dani Rodrik (2000) postulated the presence of international political-economy trilemma

associated with globalization. That is, policy makers face a trade-off of choosing two out of three

policy goals or governance -- globalization, national sovereignty, and democracy. A continuous

version of the globalization trilemma states that if a country increases its globalization, it has to

give up either some democracy or some national sovereignty. 3 The more a country opens up and

1
  See Mundell (1960), Fleming (1961), and Boughton (2000) for an overview of the history of the open economy
Trilemma.
2
  See Shambaugh (2004), Obstfeld, et al. (2005), Aizenman, et al. (2013), Obstfeld (2015) for various tests of the
open economy Trilemma.
3
  Or, more strictly speaking, the weighted sum of democracy and national sovereignty must fall.
                                                          1
integrates itself to the world, the more directly it faces the impact of market mechanism. Trade

and financial liberalization may help private markets to allocate economic resources more

efficiently, which may facilitate economic growth and development (a conjecture dubbed as "the

Washington consensus" associated with globalization). Such globalization trend constrains

domestic economic policy making, shrinking the domestic policy space. 4 This is in line with

Friedman (1999), "your economy grows and your politics shrinks." In such a nation state, the

process of integration with the globalized world may increase the role of more independent

technocrats' taking over the role of policy making, diminishing the role of "mass politics." In

Friedman's words, instead of wearing different political "jackets" or "suits," such a country

wears the "Golden Straitjacket," a choice depicted by the top vertex of the triangle in Figure 1

(b).

       In a Golden Straitjacket state, policy making often does not reflect the political will of the

majority of the voters. For example, regulators in a capital-abundant country may try to push

forward trade liberalization while their democratic voters oppose to it because they fear and

expect trade liberalization could make them worse-off. Thus, when globalization and national

sovereignty are pursued, democracy will be constrained. A nation state can pursue both hyper-

globalization and democracy, though it would have to give up on its state sovereignty, possibly

in the context of federalism, delegating external issues dealing with globalization to the federal

center. For example, the U.S. states follow democratic decisions in their internal regulations,

while delegating external decisions to the federal levels, diluting their own sovereignty. Hence,

countries that pursue deeper international economic integration guided by democratic votes may




4
 That means, for example, ruling and opposition parties would barely differ from each other and argue only over
minor differences instead of debating grand issues.
                                                        2
converge towards "global federalism," exemplified by the European Union (EU) and the U.S.,

depicted by the right vertex of the triangle in Figure 1 (b).

      Alternatively, a democratic state may decide to curtail globalism and implement

protectionist measures if its majority voters prefer so. This policy configuration constrains the

domestic impact of global interests. This situation is exemplified by the Bretton Woods system,

where member states were allowed to implement capital controls, and various trade barriers

existed despite a series of trade liberalization efforts under the regime of the General Agreements

on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). Countries give up the opportunity to integrate themselves to the

world markets while they pursue full extents of national sovereignty and democracy, exemplified

by the right vertex of the triangle in Figure 1 (b).

      These tradeoffs were articulated by Rodrik as a political-economy trilemma, where at most

only two of the following triplets of policy dimensions can be achieved: globalization, national

sovereignty, and democracy. Until recently, the framing of this trilemma was mostly done as a

binary choice between the three policy goals. Yes, in practice, one expects the presence more

continuous tradeoffs. 5 When it comes to international political-economy trilemma, to our

knowledge, no studies have quantitatively tested the validity of the tradeoff among the three

political-economic variables. This is one of the primary focus of this paper.

      We begin by constructing a set of the indexes, each one of which measures the extent of

attainment of the three political-economic factors that represent international policy goals or

orientation: globalization, national sovereignty, and democracy.




5
  Aizenman, et al. (2010, 2013), Ito and Kawai (2012, 2014), and Aizenman and Sengupta (2013) create continuous
indexes for the three policy goals of the open economy trilemma, testing and overall confirming the validity of a
continuous version of Mundell-Fleming's hypothesis. Studies that test a binary choice hypothesis include
Shambaugh (2004), Obstfeld, et al. (2005), Obstfeld (2015), Han and Wei (2018).
                                                        3
     These indexes, available for 139 countries in the last four decades, show that industrialized

and developing countries have gone through different paths of development in the pursuit of

three policy choices and orientation. We show countries' international political-economic policy

combinations has developed with much variance over the sample time of 1975-2016 and across

countries.

     Our three indexes suggest that in the last four decades, industrialized countries have faced a

dilemma between globalization and national sovereignty while these countries maintained overall

high and stable levels of democratization. The combination of rising levels of globalization and

declining extent of national sovereignty from the 1980s through the 2000s mainly reflect the

experience of European industrialized countries. Developing countries, in contrast, experienced

convergence of declining sovereignty and rising globalization and democratization around the

same period. Emerging market economies experienced rising globalization and democratization

earlier than non-emerging market economies.

     We also examine the validity of Rodrik's hypothesis by testing whether the three trilemma

variables are linearly related. We find that, for industrialized countries, there is a linear negative

association between globalization and national sovereignty, while the democratization index is

statistically constant during our sample period. Thereby, during 1975-2016, the political

economy trilemma for the major industrial countries was mostly a dilemma between

globalization and national sovereignty. For developing countries, a weighted average of the three

indexes adds up statistically to a constant, with positive and significant weights, indicating they

are in a trilemma relationship.

     The fact that countries choose different mixtures of the three political-economic factors, in

ways correlated with their economic development, suggest that different "doses" of political

orientation have different impacts or implications on political and economic situations. To gain
                                                   4
further insight, we also investigate whether and how three political-economic factors affect the

degree of political and financial stability.

      Our estimation results suggest clear patterns of heterogeneity among the three grouping of

countries. On average, democratic industrialized countries experience greater political

instability. The lower level of national sovereignty an industrialized country embraces, the more

stable its political situation tends to be. In contrast, developing countries tend to be able to

stabilize their politics if they are more democratic. Globalization brings about more political

stability for both groups of countries. Furthermore, more globalized countries, whether industrial

or developing, tend to experience more financial stability.

      In reading these results, one should keep in mind the sample and data dependence of our

results. The GFC, the Eurozone crisis, and demographic transitions put in motion new forces that

mostly are not captured by our sample, and probably are not measured properly by our indices.

Some observers argue that the diffusion of `strong man' regimes diluting the power and the

independence of the judiciary system, and reducing overtime media independence degrades

overtime the quality of democracy. Our finding that industrialized countries have experienced

the rising levels of globalization, declining degrees of national sovereignty, and greater political

instability may mask a darker story of growing gaps between de jure and de facto measures of

democracy. This possibility and other new trends are not depicted well in our sample, needing

more observations, and probably compiling new indices controlling for recent trends dealing

with press and media trends. We close our paper with a preliminary discussion of these issues.

      The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we outline the methodology of

constructing the three indexes of the political-economy trilemma. In Section 3, we examine the

trend of the indexes for different groups of countries, and also examine whether the indexes

entail any structural breaks corresponding to major global political and economic events. Section
                                                   5
4 tests the validity of a linear specification of the political-economy trilemma indexes to examine

whether the notion of the trilemma can be considered to be a trade-off and binding. Section 5 we

investigate the implications of policy choices based on the political-economy trilemma by

examining how the policy choices among the three trilemma policies affect political stability and

financial stability. In Section 6, we conclude the paper.



2. Construction of the Measures for the Great Political economy trilemma

     As was in the case with the open economy trilemma, empirical explorations on the validity

of the political-economy trilemma have been quite limited, simply due to the lack of systematic

variables that measure the extent of policy orientation toward globalization, national sovereignty,

and democracy. In order to investigate empirically whether or not the trilemma of political-

economy is "valid" and "binding," we construct the three variables pertaining to international

political economy as follows.



2.1 Extent of Globalization

    In this paper, we assume globalization is composed of the four dimensions: financial

globalization, trade globalization, interpersonal globalization, and political globalization. Our

index of globalization is the first principle component of de jure and de facto measures of

financial globalization, de jure and de facto measures of trade globalization, de jure and de facto

measures of political globalization, and de facto measure of interpersonal globalization (See

Table 1).

    Financial globalization is composed of de jure and de facto financial globalization. We

measure de jure financial globalization with the Chinn-Ito index of financial openness (Chinn

and Ito, 2006, 2008). We define the degree of de facto financial openness as the sum of the total
                                                 6
external assets and external liabilities divided by GDP. The data on total external assets and

liabilities are obtained from the dataset on international investment positions developed by Lane

and Milesi-Ferretti (2001, 2007, and 2017). However, the ratio of the sum of total external assets

and liabilities to GDP can be very high, especially for economies with global financial centers

(e.g., Hong Kong, Ireland, and Singapore). Therefore, we winsorize this ratio at the 5th and 95th

percentiles (with both percentiles being calculated from a sample excluding all the financial-

center economies), 6 and normalize the ratio so that the ratio would range zero and one. 7

     We also measure trade globalization with de facto and de jure indexes. The former is the

sum of exports and imports divided by GDP, 8 and for the latter, we use the de jure measure of

trade globalization from the KOF Globalization Index. 9 This measure is composed of the

prevalence of regulatory trade barriers from Gwartney, et al. (2017); 10 income from taxes on

international trade as percentage of total revenue (inverted) from the World Development

Indicators; and unweighted means of tariff rates (Gwartney, et al., 2017). 11

     We consider de facto interpersonal globalization as one of the components of the aggregate

measure of globalization and measure it with the KOF Globalization Index's measure of de facto

interpersonal globalization. 12 It is composed of international voice traffic (the sum of


6
   That means that extremely small values below the 5th percentile and extremely large values above the 95th
percentile are replaced by the threshold values instead of being replaced by missing variables so that observations
will be kept.
7
  The definition of financial centers follows that of Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2017). They are: the Bahamas,
Bahrain, Belgium, Cyprus, Hong Kong, Ireland, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Panama, San Marino, Singapore,
Switzerland, and the United Kingdom.
8
  We also winsorize the ratio at the 5th and 95th percentiles and normalize the ratio to make it range between zero
and one.
9
  https://kof.ethz.ch/en/forecasts-and-indicators/indicators/kof-globalisation-index.html
10
   It is the average of two subcomponents: prevalence of non-tariff trade barriers and compliance costs of importing
and exporting.
11
   For more details, refer to Gygli, et al. (2018).
12
   Gygli, et al. (2018) also include de jure and de facto informational globalization, and cultural globalization.
However, we do not include these subindexes because, from the perspective of materialist approach, we think these
items are less relevant to our definition of globalization. We also exclude de jure interpersonal globalization
because this does not contribute much to the time variation of the aggregate variable.
                                                         7
international incoming and outgoing fixed and mobile telephone traffic in minutes per capita);

"transfer" which is the sum of gross inflows and outflows of goods, services, income or financial

items (without a quid pro quo) per capita; international tourism (i.e., the sum of arrivals and

departures of international tourists as a share of population); and migration, which is defined as

the number of foreign or foreignborn residents as percentage of total population.

    The extent of political globalization is measured by the KOF Globalization Index's de jure

and de facto measures of political globalization. The de jure political globalization index is

composed of 1) the number of international inter-governmental organizations in which a country

is a member; 2) international treaties signed between two or more states and ratified by the

highest legislative body of each country since 1945; and 3) the number of distinct treaty partners

of a country with bilateral investment treaties.

    The de facto political globalization index is composed of 1) the number of embassies in a

country; 2) personnel contributed to U.N. Security Council Missions per capita; and 3) the

number of international oriented nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) with members in that

country or territory. For the details on how de jure and de facto measures of political

globalization constitute the aggregate political globalization index, refer to Gygli, et al. (2018).

    For the (aggregate) measure of globalization, we first compute the first principle component

of de jure and de facto financial globalization measures; de jure and de facto trade globalization

measures; de jure and de facto political globalization measures, and the de facto measure of

interpersonal globalization. Then, we winsorize the resultant first principle component at the 5th

and 95th percentiles and normalize it to make the index range between zero and one.




                                                   8
2.2 Democratization Index

     We measure the extent of democratization with the first principle component of two

democracy indexes, polity2 and polconv. polity2 is the measure of democratization from the

Polity IV database (which is developed by the Polity IV Project; see Marshall, et al., 2017).

polity2 is the difference between DEMOC, which measures the extent of the existence of

institutionalized democracy, AUTOC, which measures the extent of the existence of

institutionalized autocracy. The higher polity2 indicates that a higher extent of democracy exists

in the country of concern.

     Polconv is the index for "political constraint" from the political constraint (polconv)

database developed by Henisz (2000). This index measures the "the feasibility of policy change

(the extent to which a change in the preferences of any one actor may lead to a change in

government policy)." If a dictator-like political leader can implement a policy change with no

resistance, the level of political constraint would be zero. Hence, the higher the level of political

constraint is, the more difficult for a political leader to change a policy discretionally, i.e., the

more democratic the country of concern would be.

     We winsorize the first principle component of polity2 and polconv at the 5th and 95th

percentiles and normalize the resultant figures as well.



2.3 Sovereignty Index

     In our context, sovereignty means that a nation state is able to exercise its political power

without being subject to or dependent upon other states. Sometimes the interest a country

pursues is not the same as the interest pursued by another or other countries. A country with a

higher level of sovereignty, we assume, implements a policy or pursue a certain policy goal

rather unilaterally, without caring much about the interest of others.
                                                    9
       Our sovereignty index measures the extent of sovereignty a country pursues, and we define

it to be the first principal component of three variables: herfgov, execnat, and allhouse. herfgov is

the Herfindahl Index of the government that shows the degree of concentration of political

power. If there is only one party (or one ruler), this index takes the value of one. The more

parties in the government, the lower this index's values would be. The underlying assumption is

that, the more fragmented the ruling government is (i.e., the Herfindahl index is low), the harder

it should be to advocate policies that would only benefit the domestic country.

       execnat is a dummy variable which takes the value of one if the government of the country

of concern is run by nationalists. allhouse is a dummy variable that takes the value of one if the

government controls both houses of the legislature (or one house if there is no upper house).

       After calculating the first principle component of the three variables, we winsorize the first

principle at the 5th and 95th percentiles and normalize the resultant figures as well.

       With all these variable constructions, we have the indexes of globalization, democracy, and

sovereignty for 139 countries in the period of 1975-2016. 13 The data availability is shown in

Appendix 1.



3. Summary Statistics

3.1 Developments of the Indexes of the Political-Economy Trilemma

        Now with all the indexes at hand, let us compare these indexes to get some insights of how

the architecture of international economy and political governance system has evolved over time.

       Among the three elements of the political economy trilemma, as of the last few years, the

extent of democracy is the highest on average (Figure 2 (a)), though it has been almost caught up



13
     The indexes of globalization and sovereignty are available up to 2017.
                                                          10
rapidly by the extent of globalization. Industrialized countries have been fully democratic

throughout the sample period (Figure 2 (b)). 14 Developing countries, whether those with

emerging markets or not, 15 have become more democratic in the first half of the 1990s, but since

then, their extent of democracy has been stable (Figures 2 (c) and (d)).

     Industrialized countries started pursuing globalization in the beginning of the 1980s and

steadily increased the extent of globalization through the early 2000s when they became fully

globalized. As anecdotally discussed, the speed and timing of globalization makes emerging

market countries differ from non-emerging market developing countries. Emerging market

countries started pursuing globalization in the early 1990s and proceeded with it until the mid-

2000s whereas non-emerging market countries started globalization in the late 1990s and

pursued it relatively slowly.

     Sovereignty has been on a moderately declining trend during the sample period for all the

samples. Generally speaking, when globalization progresses, the level of sovereignty appears to

decline. 16 This is consistent with the political science literature that characterizes the rise of

globalization and its (negative) impact on sovereignty as an either-or relationship. 17 In terms of

the level of sovereignty, it is the lowest among industrialized countries on average. The clear

divergence between increasing globalization and decreasing sovereignty among industrialized

countries in Figure 2 (b) mainly reflects the efforts among European industrial countries to form

the European Union that took place the late 1980s through the end of the 1990s. The member




14
   "Industrialized countries" are traditional OECD countries whose IMF code is mostly less than 200 (except for
Turkey and South Africa). For more details on the country compositions of our sample, refer to Appendix 1.
15
   Again, refer to Appendix 1 for the country composition of the subsamples.
16
   However, there can be countries which pursue greater levels of both democracy and national sovereignty while
having more closed economies.
17
   See Cable (1995), Evans (1997), Ohmae (1995), Strange (1996), and Van Creveld (1999).
                                                       11
countries integrated their markets and harmonized regulatory systems, while giving up their

sovereignty ­ they moved toward the bottom right corner of the triangle in Figure 1 (b).

    In contrast, less developed countries experience convergence of declining sovereignty and

rising globalization, rather than divergence of the two. Until the late 1980s for emerging market

economies and the mid-1990s for non-emerging market economies, sovereignty had been

strongly pursued among less developed countries. This is similar to the development of monetary

independence in the framework of the open economy trilemma (Aizenman, et al., 2013). It is not

surprising considering that monetary independence refers to a state where monetary authorities

are capable of implementing monetary policy autonomously without being subject to foreign

monetary authorities.

    In the 1980s and 1990s, as developing countries become more democratic and more

globalized, they tend to have given up sovereignty. Now, sovereignty is the least pursued policy

goal among emerging market economies.

    Among the emerging market economies in Asia, policy makers pursued state sovereignty

the most until the early 1990s (Figure 3 (a)). However, while sovereignty was in a moderately

declining trend, countries in the region made efforts to become more democratic and open their

doors to the rest of the world. Since the millennium, all three policy goals have been hovering

around the middle levels. Interestingly, this resembles the development of monetary

independence, exchange rate stability, and financial openness of emerging market economies

(especially those in Asia) in the framework of the open economy trilemma as Aizenman, et al.

(2013) showed. Like in the case of the open economy trilemma, emerging market economies in

Asia may have been trying to hedge against not just economic but also political instability.

    Latin American countries have been more democratic than other less developing countries

(Figure 3 (b)). These countries have maintained relatively stable levels of sovereignty, which has
                                                12
been the most pursued policy orientation among the three in most of the sample period.

However, their sovereignty has still declined somewhat while these economies started marching

steadily toward globalization in the 1990s.



3.2 Structural Breaks

         Figures 2 and 3 show that while there is heterogeneity across countries and over time,

there is some discernable trend in different income or regional groups of countries. Now, we

shed more light on the evolution of the index values by investigating whether major international

economic or political events have been associated with structural breaks in the index series.

         We examine whether the following economic and political events have significantly

impacted the development of the three policy choices, namely, the Latin American debt crisis of

1982, the demise of the Soviet Union and the Eastern bloc in 1991; the Asian (and other

emerging markets') Financial Crisis of 1997-98; and the Global Financial Crisis of 2007-08.

         Treating the years of 1982, 1991, 1997-98, and 2007-08 as potential candidates for

structural break points, we test the equality of the group mean of the indexes over the candidate

break points for each of the subsample groups. 18 Table 2 (a) reports the results of the equality

tests.

         Consistent with Figure 2, while industrialized countries steadily increased the extent of

globalization over the major events, they significantly reduced the level of sovereignty in the

aftermath of the 1982 debt crisis and the Financial Crisis of 2007-08. While industrialized

countries have scored very high levels of democracy, the index has a structural break in 1991, the

collapse of the Soviet Union and its bloc.


18
   The data for the candidate structural break years are not included in the group means either for pre- or post-
structural break years. For the Asian crisis, for example, we remove observations for the years of 1997 and 1998.
                                                        13
       Table 2 (b) lists the most statistically significant structural breaks for each of the indexes

and each country group. Interestingly, for all the samples, the Asian Financial Crisis of 1997-98

is the most significant structural break for globalization, and the demise of the Soviet empire in

1991 is for the level of democracy. It also exerted influence on the sovereignty of developing

countries and a significant structural break in that year as well.



4. Theoretical validity of the three indexes: Are they linearly related?

     In this section we examine whether the trilemma relationship portrayed in Figure 1 (b) is

supported by the data. As we already discussed, a strict trilemma relationship implies choosing

one of the vertexes of the trilemma triangle, embracing two out of the three policy choices. If

countries do not implement the two policies fully, and if there is a substitutability between the

trilemma goals, a country may trade off the drop in the two polices with partial achievement of

the third goal. Heuristically, it means a policy combination of a country that lies inside the

triangle. We test this possibility by verifying the fit of a linear version of trilemma trade-offs,

where the weighted sum of the three trilemma policy variables adds up to a constant.

     Specifically, we test this conjecture by estimating the fit of a linear regression, where the

weighted sum of the three trilemma policy variables equals a constant.



     1 = (0 + 1  ), + (0 + 1  ), + (0 + 1  ),                                                  (1)



where GL stands for the index of globalization, DM for democracy, and SV for sovereignty. LDC

is a dummy variable that takes the value of one for non-industrialized countries.

     Because we have shown that different subsample groups of countries have experienced

different development paths in terms of international political economy, we allow the
                                                  14
coefficients on all the variables to differ between industrialized and developing countries by

interacting the dummy for developing countries with each of the three political-economy

trilemma variables. The regression is run for the full sample period as well as the subsample

periods identified in the preceding subsection. We report the results in Table 3.

     The goodness of fit is high for the whole sample period as well as for the subsample

periods. The adjusted R-squared is 94% or above, in line with the conjuncture that the three

policy goals are linearly related to each other, and that policy makers face a trade-off of the three

policy goals. The sign and significance of the weights provides pertinent information on the

trade-offs between the trilemma variables during the sample period.

     Figure 2 (b) illustrates that the level of democracy for the industrialized countries (IDC)

group has been consistently at high levels ( > 0.95) throughout the sample period, and overall

stable. As long as the level of democracy is time-invariant, the estimated model reduces to a

linear combination of the other two variables, i.e., globalization and sovereignty. Table 4 reports

the linearity test, where the variable for democracy is not included in the estimation for the IDC

group, but included for the LDC group. It improves the statistical significance for many of the

estimates while the adjusted R-squared is barely affect.

     The estimation results for the IDC group that the estimates on both globalization and

sovereignty are consistently significantly positive indicate that these countries face a dilemma

between globalization and sovereignty; increasing the level of one of the two variables would

surely lead to a fall in the level of the other. For developing countries, the linear relationship

exists for all three indexes, which means these countries face a trilemma of globalization,

sovereignty, and democracy. Consistently positive estimated coefficients imply that increasing

the level of one of the three indexes would lower the weighted sum of the other two, as

Aizenman, et al. (2013) found for the open macroeconomic trilemma.
                                                  15
            The table also indicates that the impact of globalization is significantly greater for IDCs

than for LDCs. The impact of sovereignty levels is greater for LDCs than for IDCs. Consistent

with Figure 2, while developing countries have tried to maintain relatively high levels of

sovereignty, they have been cautious in globalizing themselves. However, the gaps between the

two groups in terms of the impacts of globalization and sovereignty has narrowed in the last

decade or so (Columns (2) through (6)).

            Over the subsample periods, for the group of industrialized countries, the estimated weights

of both globalization and sovereignty are in a declining trend toward the end of the sample

period. In contrast, for the group of developing countries, while the impacts of globalization and

sovereignty have been in a moderately declining trend, the impact of democracy has been rising.

            Figure 4 illustrates the goodness of fit from a different angle. In the top panels, the solid

lines show the means of the predicted values (i.e.,  +   +   ) based on the estimation

results of equation (1) for the full sample (i.e., first column of Table 3) for the groups of

industrial countries (top) and developing countries (bottom). To incorporate the time variation of

the predictions, the subsample means of the prediction values as well as their 95% confidence

intervals (that are shown as the shaded areas, though they surround the means of the predicted

values very tightly, especially for IDC) are calculated using five-year rolling windows. 19 This

exercise should allow us to get some inferences about how "binding" the trilemma is.



19
     Both the mean and the standard errors of the predicted values are calculated using the rolling five-year windows.
                                                                                                   t -4    n


The formula for the mean and the standard errors can be shown as xt|t -4 =
                                                                                                   x
                                                                                                   ^
                                                                                                    t     i =1
                                                                                                                 it
                                                                                                                            and
                                                                                                                      n×5
             t -4    n

              (x                - xt|t - 4 )
                                           2
               ^           it
              t     i =1

SE ( x
     ^) =                n × 5 -1                    , respectively, where n refers to the number of countries in a subsample (i.e., IDC and
                                               n×5
LDC), x
      ^it to the prediction values, and                         xt|t -4 to the mean of x
                                                                                       ^it in the rolling five-year window.
Because of the use of rolling five-year windows, the lines in the figures only start in 1979.
                                                                                 16
Conceptually, if the linear relationship is to be constraint, the predicted values should hover

around the value of one.

        The panels also illustrate the product of the estimated coefficient and the actual values for

each of the explanatory variables ­ i.e., ,  , and   . 20 Considering that the estimated

coefficients in this regression exercise yield approximate estimates of the weights countries put

on the three policy goals, ,  , and   provide sufficient information about "how much

of" the policy choices countries have actually implemented.

        From the top panel of Figure 4, we can see that for the group of industrialized countries,

the average predictions of the weighted sum of globalization, democracy, and sovereignty

expressed as the linear model (equation (1)) are constantly around or on the value of one

throughout the sample period, suggesting that the trilemma is "binding" consistently. 21

        In the case of developing countries (bottom of Figure 4), the average of the predicted sum

of globalization, democracy, and sovereignty are below the value of one until the mid-2000s,

since which it has been more or less at the value of one. In the mid-1990s, the level of

sovereignty pursued by developing countries declined and stabilized around the early 2000s, and

the level of adoption of democracy went up and stabilized around the same time. For this group

of countries, globalization has been the least pursued policy goal, thought its prevalence inched

up since the mid-1980s.

        In sum, during most of our sample period, industrialized countries have constantly

achieved the highest level of democracy. Thereby these countries face a dilemma between


20
   However, in the case of IDC (top-panel), both    +          and        +   are so close to the value of one
(black line) that they are not discernable from the line for the mean of  +          +   (red line).
21
   When we redraw the figure using the estimates from Table 4, which removes the insignificant democracy
variable, the mean of the predicted of globalization and sovereignty (i.e.,  +  ) is statistically below the
value of one through the millennium (not reported). Since then, however, the predicted weighted sum has been
significantly greater than the value of one. That is mainly driven by the rising trend of globalization among these
countries since 1990 through the mid-2000s.
                                                        17
globalization and national sovereignty. As these countries have steadily increased the extent of

integration with the rest of the world since the early 1980s, their national sovereignty levels have

declined in tandem. Developing countries, in contrast, increased the level of democracy and

decreased the level of sovereignty in the mid-1990s. In the last decade or two, these countries

steadily globalized.

        Among these countries, emerging market economies are characterized as countries that

have pursued high levels of democracy and globalization whereas non-emerging market ones

tend to put priorities on sovereignty and democracy. This finding may indicate that sovereignty

and democracy are viewed as ingredients for political and economic stability. In the section

below, we examine whether and how each or mixture of the political-economy trilemma policy

goals affect political and economic stability.



5. Impacts of the political-economy trilemma indexes


       In this section, we examine whether and to what extent the three factors of the political-

economy trilemma affect the degree of political stability and economic stability in terms of the

probability of financial crisis.



5.1 Estimations on political stability


      Different combinations of globalization, democracy, and sovereignty might affect the

degree of political stability differently. A nation state with a high level of sovereignty may be

better able to stabilize its political situation. However, if the state is governed by a dictator-like

leader (who can full exercise national sovereignty with much ease), it can experience political

instability.

                                                  18
      It is also hard to generalize the impact of the extent of democracy. A more democratic

country may be able to better bring out stability in its politics especially when the transparency

of elections and policy making is warranted. However, history has also shown cases where

democratic societies have experienced frequent, and fraudulent, elections, which eventually led

to unstable politics. Globalization may also have ambiguous impacts on domestic politics. Being

more open to the outside world may make domestic politics face more foreign pressure that tends

to prefer transparency of power transitions and policy implementations. However, being more

open to the rest of the world may make the country of concern more subject to external shocks,

which may cause economic or financial instability and political instability.

      Identifying the effects of different political-economy factors based on the trilemma may

also help us identify and understand countries' motivations for changes in policies and

governance forms. Hence, we empirically examine how various choices of the three policies

affect the degree of political stability.

      We measure the degree of political stability by using the data on "political stability and

absence of violence/terrorism" from the World Bank's Worldwide Governance Indicators. The

higher values it takes, the better conditions it represents. It ranges from zero to one. This data,

however, is only available from 1996 through 2017.

      Using this variable as the dependent variable, we estimate the following candidate

explanatory variables.

      Economic development (relative income) ­ The higher levels of economic development a

country has achieved, the more stable its political situation can be. We measure the level of

economic development by using the per capita income data from Penn World Table 9.1 and

normalizing it as a ratio to the U.S. per capita income level.



                                                  19
      Income inequality ­ The more unequal the income distribution is, the more political

instability the country of concern may experience. We use the Gini index of inequality in

household per capita disposable income from the Standardized World Income Inequality

Database (SWIID). 22

      Financial crisis ­ As de Bromhead, et al. (2012) and Funke, et al. (2015) show, financial

crises can lead to a rise of political extremism, which can destabilize politics. We try to capture

the impact of financial crisis on political stability by including in the estimation the dummy for

financial crisis. We construct the crisis dummy by using Laeven and Valencia's (2018) database

on the occurrences of currency, banking and sovereign crises. The dummy takes the value of one

if any of currency, banking, and sovereign crisis happens.

      Expenditure on social protection ­ If the country of concern provides more social safety

net or protection, that country may be able to embrace more political stability. We measure the

size of social protection as the sum of general government's expenditures on social benefit

programs, education, and health (all as shares of total government expenditure). Because the

variable for social protection is quite limited, we test its impact separately from the baseline

model.

      Along with these variables, we also test the impacts of the political-economy trilemma

indexes. Each estimation will include any two of the three trilemma indexes (instead of all three

variables collectively) because we have shown that these three measures of the trilemma are

linearly related. 23


22
  See Solt (2019) and https://fsolt.org/swiid/ .
23
  One can question whether it is appropriate to regress the variable for political instability on the democratic index
because the variables for political instability and democracy may include some overlapping variables as
components. According to the website for the Worldwide Governance Indicators
https://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/Home/Documents, the "political stability and absence of
violence/terrorism" does not contain any variables used to construct our democracy index. We thank the audience at
the Discussion Paper seminar at the RIETI for raising this issue.
                                                         20
     Furthermore, given that industrialized countries and developing countries have different

development paths for the three policy combinations (Figure 2), it is reasonable to expect the

impacts of the political-economy trilemma indexes differ between the group of industrialized

countries and that of developing countries. Hence, we not only include the dummy for

developing countries (LDC) but also allow the estimates of the trilemma indexes to differ

between the two groups of countries by interacting the dummy with each of the trilemma

indexes.

     All the explanatory variables are lagged by one year to mitigate the impact of endogeneity.

Because the variable for political stability is only available from 1996 on, the estimation is done

for the period of 1996-2016.

     The estimations yield interesting results, which we report in Table 5.

     First, the configuration of the political-economy trilemma policies has different impacts on

the level of political stability between industrialized countries and developing countries. Among

industrialized countries, more democratic countries tend to experience more political instability,

whereas among developing countries, more democratic countries tend to experience more

political stability (columns (1) and (3)). These findings suggest that there is an inverted U shape

of association between democracy and political stability where the high level of democracy faces

a negative association with the level of political stability and the low level faces a positive

association.

     The extent of state sovereignty also has different effects on the level of political stability.

The lower level of state sovereignty an industrialized country has, the more stable its political

situation tends to be, while the opposite is true for a developing country. Globalization

contributes to greater political stability for both industrialized and developing countries. The



                                                  21
results from models (2) and (3) suggest that its impact seems to be greater on developing

countries.

      The other variables affect the level of political stability as we expect. Developing countries

in general are more likely to have lower level of political stability. In addition to that, more

economically developed countries, whether industrial or developing countries, tend to have

greater political stability. The more equal income distribution a country achieves, the more

political stability it can also achieve. Countries that experience financial crisis (either banking,

currency, or sovereign) tend to experience political instability. Countries whose governments

spend more on social protection and benefits tends to experience greater political stability.



5.2 Estimations on financial stability

      Now, let us investigate whether configurations of political-economy trilemma policies have

any impact on economic or financial stability. More specifically, we estimate the effect of

trilemma policies on the likelihood of financial crisis. Here, financial crisis means either

banking, currency, or debt crisis ­ we use the same dummy variable as we used in the estimation

of political stability.

        We hypothesize the probability that a crisis will occur, Pr(yt = 1), is a function of a vector

of characteristics associated with observations in year t, or Xt, and the parameter vector , with the

control variables in X lagged one year to avoid endogeneity issues. The log of the following

function is maximized with respect to the unknown parameters through nonlinear maximum

likelihood.

          () = =1   ( ) + (1 -  ) 1 -  ( )                                                     (2)




                                                  22
      where m indicates the number of countries times the number of observations for each country

and the function F(.) is the standardized normal distribution.

      The following variables are included in the vector of characteristics, Xt.

      Economic development (Relative income to the US) ­ More economically developed

countries tend to have better legal systems and institutions that can help reduce the likelihood of

experiencing financial crisis.

      International reserves (IR) ­ Countries with ample IR holdings should be able to fight against

speculative attacks on their currencies and also both internal and external drain of capital. Hence,

countries with more IR holdings should face lower likelihood of financial crisis. We use IR,

excluding gold, as a ratio to GDP (from the World Development Indicator database).

      Real output growth ­ A country experiencing high real output growth may be less likely to

face financial instability or able to prevent financial instability from turning into a financial crisis.

We use the growth rate of real GDP in local currency (available from the World Development

Indicator database).

      Private credit growth ­ As most exemplified by Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999), a number

of studies have shown that credit grows fast before experiencing a financial crisis. We use the

(first-difference) change in the ratio of private credit creation to GDP as the measure of credit

growth.

      Real exchange rate overvaluation ­ If a country has its currency overvalued, it tends to

experience financial crisis. 24 Chinn (2000) shows East Asian emerging market economies

experienced currency overvaluation prior to the Asian Financial Crisis of 1997-98. We define real

exchange rate overvaluation from the Hodrick-Prescott (HP)-filtered series of the real exchange

24
  Overvaluation of the exchange rate can lead not just to currency crisis but also to banking and debt crisis.
Currency mismatch can be caused by currency overvaluation, and it can make the debt burden greater in terms of
domestic currency. That would put stress on banks and increases risk premium for government bonds.
                                                       23
rate. The real exchange rate is calculated using the exchange rate between country i and its base

country (in the sense of Aizenman et al. 2013) and the CPI of the two countries. Higher values of

this variable indicate the real exchange rate value is lower (i.e., appreciated) than its time trend.

         Along with these explanatory variables, we test the impacts of the political-economy

trilemma variables. Furthermore, in contrast to the estimation on political stability, we do not find

in a preliminary analysis any different impacts between industrial and developing countries. Hence,

we do not include the interaction terms between the trilemma indexes and the dummy for

developing countries. We apply the estimation model to the data from 1976 to 2016 and report the

results in Table 6. 25

         Countries with higher credit growth, lower levels of IR holding, and their currencies

overvalued tend to experience a financial crisis.

         Among the trilemma variables, only the variable for globalization enters the estimation with

a significantly negative sign. That is, the more globalized a country is, the less likely it is to

experience a financial crisis.

         A possible explanation for the significant effect of globalization is that, if a country is more

open to the rest of the world, it tends to have higher degrees of transparency in its policy making

and to be more subject to market dynamics. That can alleviate potential effects of corrections or

punishments by the markets, such as capital flight, because more globalized economies are more

constantly subject to scrutiny by investors and other countries' policy makers.




25
     The estimates reported in the table are marginal effects.
                                                             24
6. Concluding remarks

     The ongoing political and economic events and changes in the global arena make observers

wonder if there is any patterns or rules across countries or over time. We follow the view of Rodrik

(2000) and reckon that countries face a trade-off of choosing two out of the three policy choices

or directions of policy orientation, namely, globalization, national sovereignty, and democracy.

Like the open economy trilemma where policy makers face a trade-off of choosing two policies

out of full extents of monetary autonomy, exchange rate stability, or financial openness, we assume

countries face the political-economy trilemma.

     In this paper, we explored the empirical validity of Rodrik's theorem of the political-

economy trilemma ­ policy makers face a trade-off of choosing two out of three policy goals of

governance orientation, namely, (hyper-)globalization, national sovereignty, and democracy. We

also observed the historical and geographical development of the three factors, and investigated

the impacts of these trilemma factors on political and financial stability.

     We first developed a set of the indexes that measure the extent of attainment of the three

political-economic factors for 139 countries in the period of 1975 ­ 2016. The trend of the three

indexes suggest that industrialized countries have faced a dilemma between globalization and

national sovereignty. This is mainly because these countries have consistently achieved the highest

levels of democratization throughout the sample period. While these countries started becoming

more integrated with the world in the 1980s and completed the integration efforts by the 2000s,

they have been on a moderately declining trend in their national sovereignty, consistent with

anecdotal arguments that advanced countries face a trade-off of pursuing national sovereignty or

living with globalization. Developing countries, in contrast, experienced convergence of declining

sovereignty and rising globalization since the early 2000s, while many countries have also become



                                                 25
more democratized. In recent years, these countries having been experiencing of a convergence of

the three factors of political-economy policy orientation around middle to mid-high ranges.

      We also examined the validity of the hypothesis of the political-economy trilemma by testing

whether the three trilemma variables are linearly related. Consistent with the graph observation,

for industrialized countries, there is a linear relationship between globalization and national

sovereignty. For developing countries, all three indexes are linearly correlated.

      Different paths of development in terms of the political-economy trilemma configuration

have made us interested in investigating the impact of the three political-economic factors on

political and financial stability.

      Our estimation results suggest that more democratic industrialized countries tend to

experience more political instability while developing countries tend to be able to stabilize their

politics if they are more democratic. The lower level of national sovereignty an industrialized

country embraces, the more stable its political situation tends to be. Globalization brings about

political stability for both groups of countries.

      When we estimated the impact of the three political-economy variables on financial stability,

we found that only globalization matters, but for both industrialized and developing countries;

more globalized countries tend to face more stable politics. This result, along with the result that

globalization can bring about more political stability, casts a stark contrast with the anecdotal

arguments on the streets that globalization is one of the contributing factors to economic instability

or uncertainties we observe in the globalized world.

      As a last note, we must share a potential caveat on our political-economy trilemma index.

Recently, organizations that publish democratization indexes such as the Economist Intelligence

Unit (EIU) and Freedom House report declines the level of democracy in major economies such

as Turkey, Argentina, Brazil, Hungary, and most importantly the United States. The EIU has
                                                    26
downgraded the U.S. democracy index from the "full democracy" category (the most democratic

category out of four groups) to "flawed democracy" (the second most democratic) since 2016. 26

Another democracy index, the Freedom House index, also depicts a decline in the level of

democracy for the U.S. ­ the aggregate free index has been on a gradual decline in the total U.S.

score since 2010. 27

      Since the mid-2010s, several industrialized countries (e.g., Austria, Germany, Iceland, Italy)

have experienced a decline in their democracy indexes. Given that these democracy indexes report

many countries are experiencing a decline in the level of democracy on a relatively large scale

lately, our democracy index, which is constructed with the intent of covering as many years as

possible, may not capture well the possible new shift in international political trend, which may be

too subtle and recent to measure with our rather coarse index. To identify or test a new paradigm

shift, we may have to wait for a few more years of observations. That may affect the relationship

of the trilemma variables.




26
   The EIU's democracy index is the composition index of the subindexes that measure five aspects of democracy:
electoral process and pluralism; civil liberties; the functioning of government; political participation; and political
culture. Based on the total score, countries are classified into four categories: "full democracy," "flawed
democracy," "hybrid regime," and "authoritarian regime."
27
   The aggregate score of the U.S. as of 2018 is 86 out of 100, which is lower than the scores of major advanced
countries such as Canada (99), Australia (98), Japan (96), Germany (94), U.K. (93), and France (90). However, the
U.S. is still categorized as a "Free" country, the highest group category above "Partly Free" and "Not Free." The
countries whose total scores are close to that of the U.S. are Belize, Croatia, Greece, Latvia, and Mongolia.
                                                          27
                                                             43   132   France (i)           1975   -   2016
Appendix 1: Country list
                                                             44   646   Gabon                1975   -   2015
      ISO    Country name           Data availability        45   648   Gambia, The          1975   -   2015
  1    914   Albania                1995    -   2016         46   915   Georgia              1996   -   2016
  2    612   Algeria                1978    -   2016         47   134   Germany (i)          1990   -   2016
  3    614   Angola                 1993    -   2016         48   652   Ghana (e)            1980   -   2016
  4    213   Argentina (e)          1984    -   2016         49   174   Greece (i)           1975   -   2011
  5    911   Armenia                1996    -   2016         50   258   Guatemala            1975   -   2016
  6    193   Australia (i)          1976    -   2016         51   656   Guinea               1996   -   2016
  7    122   Austria (i)            1976    -   2016         52   654   Guinea-Bissau        1985   -   2015
  8    912   Azerbaijan             1996    -   2015         53   336   Guyana               1975   -   2015
  9    513   Bangladesh (e)         1980    -   2016         54   263   Haiti                1992   -   2016
 10    913   Belarus                1996    -   2016         55   268   Honduras             1982   -   2016
 11    124   Belgium (i)            1975    -   2016         56   944   Hungary (e)          1991   -   2016
 12    514   Bhutan                 2009    -   2016         57   534   India (e)            1975   -   2016
 13    218   Bolivia                1980    -   2016         58   536   Indonesia (e)        1975   -   2016
 14    616   Botswana (e)           1975    -   2016         59   429   Iran, Islamic Rep.   1979   -   2015
 15    223   Brazil (e)             1975    -   2016         60   178   Ireland (i)          1975   -   2016
 16    918   Bulgaria (e)           1994    -   2014         61   436   Israel (e)           1975   -   2016
 17    748   Burkina Faso           1993    -   2016         62   136   Italy (i)            1977   -   2016
 18    618   Burundi                1983    -   2016         63   343   Jamaica (e)          1977   -   2016
 19    522   Cambodia               1995    -   2016         64   158   Japan (i)            1977   -   2016
 20    622   Cameroon               1975    -   2015         65   439   Jordan (e)           1990   -   2016
 21    156   Canada (i)             1975    -   2016         66   664   Kenya (e)            1975   -   2015
 22    626   Central African Rep.   1988    -   2003         67   542   Korea, Rep. (e)      1975   -   2016
 23    628   Chad                   1998    -   2015         68   917   Kyrgyz Republic      2001   -   2016
 24    228   Chile (e)              1990    -   2016         69   544   Lao PDR              1984   -   2015
 25    924   China (e)              1984    -   2016         70   941   Latvia               1996   -   2016
 26    233   Colombia (e)           1975    -   2016         71   446   Lebanon              2005   -   2015
 27    636   Congo, Dem. Rep.       1975    -   1992         72   666   Lesotho              1975   -   2016
 28    634   Congo, Rep.            1975    -   1995         73   668   Liberia              1976   -   2016
 29    238   Costa Rica             1975    -   2016         74   946   Lithuania (e)        1996   -   2016
 30    662   Côte d'Ivoire (e)      1984    -   2016         75   962   Macedonia, FYR       2003   -   2016
 31    960   Croatia                1996    -   2016         76   674   Madagascar           1978   -   2015
 32    423   Cyprus                 1977    -   2016         77   676   Malawi               1975   -   2016
 33    935   Czech Republic (e)     1996    -   2009         78   548   Malaysia (e)         1975   -   2016
 34    128   Denmark (i)            1975    -   2016         79   678   Mali                 1980   -   2002
 35    243   Dominican Republic     1984    -   2016         80   682   Mauritania           1975   -   1978
 36    248   Ecuador (e)            1980    -   2016         81   684   Mauritius (e)        1977   -   2016
 37    469   Egypt, Arab Rep. (e)   1977    -   2016         82   273   Mexico (e)           1977   -   2016
 38    253   El Salvador            1975    -   2016         83   921   Moldova              1996   -   2016
 39    939   Estonia                1996    -   2016         84   948   Mongolia             1995   -   2016
 40    644   Ethiopia               2011    -   2015         85   686   Morocco (e)          1978   -   2016
 41    819   Fiji                   1977    -   2006         86   688   Mozambique           1988   -   2016
 42    172   Finland (i)            1976    -   2016         87   518   Myanmar              2012   -   2016

                                                        28
 88   728   Namibia                  1994   -   2016         133    298   Uruguay                  1975   -   2015
 89   558   Nepal                    1992   -   2016         134    927   Uzbekistan               1996   -   2007
 90   138   Netherlands (i)          1981   -   2016         135    299   Venezuela, RB (e)        1975   -   2014
 91   196   New Zealand (i)          1976   -   2016         136    582   Vietnam                  1995   -   2015
 92   278   Nicaragua                1989   -   2016         137    474   Yemen, Rep.              1995   -   2007
 93   692   Niger                    1990   -   2016         138    754   Zambia                   1994   -   2015
 94   694   Nigeria (e)              1980   -   2016         139    698   Zimbabwe (e)             1984   -   2015
 95   142   Norway (i)               1975   -   2016
                                                            Notes: "(i)" stands for "advanced economies" which
 96   564   Pakistan (e)             1989   -   2016        are traditional OECD countries (whose IMF code is
 97   283   Panama                   1985   -   2016        less than 200). "(e)" stands for emerging market
 98   853   Papua New Guinea         1983   -   2015        economies.
 99   288   Paraguay                 1991   -   2016
100   293   Peru (e)                 1979   -   2016
101   566   Philippines (e)          1979   -   2016
102   964   Poland (e)               1990   -   2016
103   182   Portugal (i)             1977   -   2016
104   968   Romania                  1990   -   2016
105   922   Russian Federation (e)   1996   -   2016
106   714   Rwanda                   1982   -   2016
107   456   Saudi Arabia             1994   -   2016
108   722   Senegal                  1975   -   2012
109   724   Sierra Leone             1975   -   2016
110   576   Singapore (e)            1975   -   2016
111   936   Slovak Republic (e)      1996   -   2016
112   961   Slovenia (e)             1996   -   2016
113   199   South Africa (e)         1975   -   2016
114   184   Spain (i)                1978   -   2016
115   524   Sri Lanka (e)            1975   -   2016
116   732   Sudan                    1975   -   1989
117   366   Suriname                 1988   -   2016
118   734   Swaziland                2009   -   2015
119   144   Sweden (i)               1975   -   2016
120   146   Switzerland (i)          1980   -   2016
121   463   Syrian Arab Republic     1975   -   2007
122   923   Tajikistan               2006   -   2010
123   738   Tanzania                 1990   -   2016
124   578   Thailand (e)             1977   -   2014
125   742   Togo                     1980   -   2015
126   744   Tunisia (e)              1975   -   2016
127   186   Turkey (e)               1975   -   2016
128   746   Uganda                   1981   -   2016
129   926   Ukraine                  1996   -   2016
130   466   United Arab Emirates     2007   -   2015
131   112   United Kingdom (i)       1975   -   2016
132   111   United States (i)        1977   -   2016

                                                       29
References:



Aizenman, J. and R. Sengupta. 2013. "The Financial Trilemma in China and a Comparative

       Analysis with India," Pacific Economic Review, 123­146.

Aizenman, Joshua, Menzie D. Chinn, and Hiro Ito. 2013. "The `Impossible Trinity' Hypothesis

       in an Era of Global Imbalances: Measurement and Testing," Review of International

       Economics, 21(3), 447­458 (August).

Aizenman, Joshua, Menzie D. Chinn, and Hiro Ito. 2011. "Surfing the Waves of Globalization:

       Asia and Financial Globalization in the Context of the Trilemma," Journal of the

       Japanese and International Economies, vol. 25(3), p. 290 ­ 320 (September).

Aizenman, Joshua, Menzie D. Chinn, and Hiro Ito. 2010. "The Emerging Global Financial

       Architecture: Tracing and Evaluating New Patterns of the Trilemma Configuration,"

       Journal of International Money and Finance 29 (2010) 615­641.

Cable, V. 1995. "The Diminished Nation-State: A Study in the Loss of Economic Power."

     Daedalus 124 (2):23­51.

Chinn, M.D. 2000. "Before the Fall: Were East Asian Currencies Overvalued?" Emerging

     Markets Review 1 (2) (August).

Chinn, M. D., and H. Ito. 2006. What Matters for Financial Development? Capital Controls,

     Institutions, and Interactions. Journal of Development Economics 81(1): 163­192.

Chinn, M, and H Ito. 2008. A new measure of financial openness. Journal of Comparative Policy

     Analysis, vol 10, no 3), pp 309­322.

Cruz, C., P. Keefer, & C. Scartascini. 2018. "Database of Political Institutions 2017 (DPI2017)."

    Inter-American Development Bank. https://mydata.iadb.org/Reform-Modernization-of-the-

    State/Database-of-Political-Institutions-2017/938i-s2bw.
                                               30
de Bromhead, A., B. Eichengreen and K.H. O'Rourke. 2012. "Right Wing Political Extremism

    in the Great Depression", Discussion Papers in Economic and Social History, Number 95,

    University of Oxford.

Evans, P. 1997. "The Eclipse of the State? Reflections on Stateness in an Era of Globalization."

    World Politics 50(1):62­87.

Friedman, Thomas L. 1999. The Lexus and the Olive Tree: Understanding Globalization. New

    York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

Funke, M., M. Schularick and C. Trebesch. 2015. "Going to extremes: Politics after financial

    crises, 1870-2014", CEPR, Discussion Paper No. 10884.

Gwartney, J., R. Lawson & J. Hall. 2017. Economic Freedom of the World: 2017 Annual Report.

    Fraser Institute. https://www.fraserinstitute.org/studies/economic-freedom .

Gygli, S., F. Haelg & J.E. Sturm. 2018. "The KOF Globalisation Index ­ Revisited," KOF

    Working Papers, No. 439, February 2018.

Han, X. and S.J. Wei. 2018. "International transmissions of monetary shocks: Between a trilemma

    and a dilemma," Journal of International Economics, Volume 110, January 2018, Pages 205-

    219.

Henisz, W. J. 2000. "The Institutional Environment for Economic Growth." Economics and

    Politics 12(1): 1-31.

Ito, H., and M. Kawai. 2014. Determinants of the Trilemma Policy Combination. ADBI Working

    Paper 456. Tokyo: Asian Development Bank Institute.

Ito, H. and M. Kawai. 2012. "The Trilemma Challenge for SEACEN Member Economies: New

    Measures of the Trilemma Hypothesis and Their Implications on Asia." In V. Pontines and




                                               31
    R. Siregar eds., Exchange Rate Appreciation, Capital Flows and Excess Liquidity:

    Adjustment and Effectiveness of Policy Responses. (June 2012).

Kaminsky, G. I. and C.M. Reinhart. 1999. "The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and

    Balance-of-Payments Problems," American Economic Review Vol. 89 No. 3 (June).

Laeven, Luc and Fabián Valencia. 2018. "Systemic Banking Crises Revisited," IMF Working

    Papers WP/18/206, Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.

Lane, P and G-M Milesi-Ferretti. 2001. "The external wealth of nations: measures of foreign assets

    and liabilities for industrial and developing countries", Journal of International Economics,

    vol 55, pp 263­294.

Lane, P and G-M Milesi-Ferretti. 2007. "The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: revised and

    extended estimates of foreign assets and liabilities, 1970­2004", Journal of International

    Economics, vol 73, no 2. pp 223-250.

Lane, P and G-M Milesi-Ferretti. 2017. "International financial integration in the aftermath of the

    Global Financial Crisis", International Monetary Fund Working Paper no 17/115, 10 May.

Marshall, M. G., T. R. Gurr, & K. Jaggers. 2017. Polity IV Project Political Regime

    Characteristics and Transitions, 1800-2016. Dataset Users' Manual. Center for Systemic

    Peace (www.systemicpeace.org).

Mundell, R.A. 1963. Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy under Fixed and Flexible Exchange

    Rates. Canadian Journal of Economic and Political Science. 29 (4). pp. 475­85.

Obstfeld, M., J. C. Shambaugh, and A. M. Taylor. 2005. "The Trilemma in History: Tradeoffs

       among Exchange Rates, Monetary Policies, and Capital Mobility." Review of Economics

       and Statistics 87 (August): 423­438.




                                                32
Ohmae, K. 1995. The End of the Nation State: The Rise of Regional Economies. New York: Free

    Press.

Rodrik, D. 2000. "How Far Will International Economic Integration Go?" Journal of Economic

    Perspectives, Volume 14, Number 1 (Winter 2000), Pages 177­186.

Solt, Frederick. 2019. "Measuring Income Inequality Across Countries and Over Time: The

    Standardized World Income Inequality Database." SWIID Version 8.1, May 2019.

Strange, S. 1996. "The Retreat of the State: The Diffusion of Power in the World Economy,"

    Cambridge Studies in International Relations, No. 49. Cambridge: Cambridge University

    Press.

Van Creveld, M. 1999. The Rise and Decline of the State. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.




                                              33
Table 1: Great Political Economy Trilemma Indexes and Their Components
                              Components                  Sub-component                       Original data
                                                          De jure financial openness          Chinn-Ito index
                              Financial globalization                                         Lane and Milesi-Ferretti database
                                                          De facto financial openness
                                                                                              (External assets+liabilities)/GDP
                                                                                              Prevalence of regulatory trade barriers (Gwartney, et
                                                          De jure trade openness
                              Trade globalization                                             al., 2017)
                                                          De facto trade openness             (exports+imports)/GDP
 Globalization index                                      De jure political globalization     Number of NGOs in which a country is a member
 (= First principle                                                                           International treaties signed between two or more
 component of de jure and                                                                     states and ratified by the highest legislative body of
 de facto financial                                                                           each country since 1945
 globalization measures, de   Political globalization
                                                                                              number of distinct treaty partners of a country with
 jure and de facto trade      (extracted from the KOF
                                                                                              bilateral investment treaties
 globalization measures,      Globalization Index
                              (Gygli, et al., 2018)       De facto political globalization    Number of embassies
 political globalization
 measure, and de facto                                                                        Personnel contributed to U.N. Security Council
 measure of interpersonal                                                                     Missions per capita
 globalization)                                                                               Number of international oriented NGOs with
                                                                                              members in that country or territory
                                                                                              International voice traffic, min./capita
                                                                                              Sum of gross inflows and outflows of goods,
                                                                                              services, income or financial items, World
                              De facto interpersonal globalization (Gygli, et al., 2018)      Development Indicator
                                                                                              International tourism, WDI
                                                                                              Migration (% of population)
 Democracy index              Democratization index                                           polity2 (Marshall, et al., 2017)
 (= First principle
 component of polity2 and     Political constraint                                            Polconv (Henisz, 2000)
 polconv)
 Sovereignty index                                                                            herfgov from the Database of Political Institutions
                              Herfindahl index of the government (herfgov)
 (= First principle                                                                           (DPI)
 component of herfgov,        Nationalist executive branch (execnat)                          execnat from DPI
 execnat, and allhouse)       Government controlling both houses of legislature (allhourse)   allhouse from DPI

                                                                          34
Table 2 (a): Tests for Structural Breaks in the Trilemma Indexes


                                                                    1975-81           1983-90          1992-96         1999-2006        2009-2016
                                                      Mean           0.518             0.620             0.746            0.896            0.945
                           Globalization             Change                            +0.102           +0.126           +0.150           +0.049
                                                t-stats (p-value)                  5.34 (0.00)***   6.21 (0.00)***   8.76 (0.00)***   4.01 (0.00)***
                                                      Mean           0.914             0.930             0.945            0.936            0.943
    Industrial
                            Democracy                Change                            +0.015           +0.015           -0.009           +0.007
    Countries                                   t-stats (p-value)                   1.83 (0.07)*    2.30 (0.02)**      1.47 (0.14)      1.45 (0.15)
                                                      Mean           0.405             0.316             0.309            0.353            0.288
                           Sovereignty               Change                            -0.088           -0.007           +0.044           -0.065
                                                t-stats (p-value)                  2.87 (0.04)***     2.22 (0.82)      1.30 (0.20)    2.22 (0.03)**
                                                                    1975-81           1983-90          1992-96          1999-2006       2009-2016
                                                      Mean           0.160              0.159            0.231             0.365           0.476
                           Globalization             Change                            -0.001           +0.072            +0.134          +0.111
                                                t-stats (p-value)                    0.09 (0.93)    5.12 (0.00)***   8.41 (0.00)***   7.50 (0.00)***
  Non-Emerging                                        Mean           0.242              0.292            0.492             0.534           0.558
   Developing               Democracy                Change                            +0.051           +0.199            +0.042          +0.025
    Countries                                   t-stats (p-value)                   1.63 (0.10)*    7.29 (0.00)***     1.83 (0.07)*     1.41 (0.16)
                                                      Mean           0.703              0.699            0.603             0.551           0.509
                           Sovereignty               Change                            -0.003           -0.097           _-0.052          -0.042
                                                t-stats (p-value)                    0.12 (0.90)    3.76 (0.00)***    2.06 (0.04)**   2.08 (0.04)**
                                                                    1975-81          1983-90           1992-96         1999-2006        2009-2016
                                                      Mean           0.196             0.194             0.286            0.448            0.522
                           Globalization             Change                           -0.001            +0.091           +0.162           +0.074
                                                t-stats (p-value)                   0.07 (0.94)     4.75 (0.00)***   8.13 (0.00)***   3.88 (0.00)***
    Emerging                                          Mean           0.457             0.476             0.607            0.640            0.678
     Market                 Democracy                Change                           +0.019            +0.132           +0.033           +0.037
    Countries                                   t-stats (p-value)                   0.58 (0.56)     4.45 (0.00)***     1.29 (0.20)     2.00 (0.05)**
                                                      Mean           0.654             0.625             0.519            0.450            0.455
                           Sovereignty               Change                           -0.029            -0.106           -0.069           +0.005
                                                t-stats (p-value)                   0.97 (0.33)     3.54 (0.00)***   2.42 (0.02)**      0.20 (0.84)
         Note: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


                                                                       35
Table 2 (b): Summary of the Structural Breaks Tests


                                                      Structural Breaks
                                      Globalization       1997-98
     Industrial Countries
                                       Democracy            1991
            (IDC)
                                       Sovereignty          1982


        Non-Emerging                  Globalization       1997-98
         Developing
                                       Democracy            1991
          Countries
         (NOEMG)                       Sovereignty          1991


                                      Globalization       1997-98
      Emerging Market
         Countries                     Democracy            1991
          (EMG)
                                       Sovereignty          1991




                                          36
                   Table 3: Testing the linearity of political economy trilemma indexes

                         1975-2016     1975-1981    1983-1990     1992-1996     1999-2006    2009-2016
                               (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)
   Globalization             0.014       -0.009        0.041         0.022         0.194        0.119
                           (0.043)       (0.175)      (0.107)       (0.154)       (0.149)      (0.213)
    Democracy                1.027        1.019        1.002         1.026         0.842        0.931
                         (0.040)***    (0.114)***   (0.081)***    (0.136)***    (0.151)***   (0.227)***
    Sovereignty              0.081        0.168        0.125         0.042         0.099        0.029
                          (0.032)**     (0.087)*     (0.065)*       (0.090)       (0.069)      (0.079)
LDC x Globalization          0.332        0.556        0.343         0.490         0.209        0.263
                         (0.046)***    (0.198)***   (0.120)***    (0.166)***      (0.155)      (0.216)
LDC x Democracy             -0.325       -0.545       -0.346         -0.315       -0.108       -0.174
                         (0.042)***    (0.121)***   (0.085)***     (0.139)**      (0.153)      (0.229)
LDC x Sovereignty            0.714        0.801        0.820         0.694         0.569        0.572
                         (0.033)***    (0.091)***   (0.068)***    (0.093)***    (0.072)***   (0.082)***
       N                     4,113         402          646           504           961          955
     Adj. R2                  0.94         0.94         0.96          0.95          0.94         0.95
    Note: * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.


                   Table 4: Testing the linearity of political economy trilemma indexes,
                                     w/out democracy index for IDC

                          1975-2016    1975-1981     1983-1990     1992-1996    1999-2006    2009-2016
                              (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
   Globalization             1.037        1.435         1.283         1.146        1.007        0.987
                          (0.016)***   (0.075)***    (0.040)***    (0.044)***   (0.033)***   (0.027)***
    Democracy

    Sovereignty              0.471        0.518         0.503         0.371        0.235        0.215
                          (0.030)***   (0.085)***    (0.064)***    (0.083)***   (0.066)***   (0.066)***
LDC x Globalization         -0.692       -0.888        -0.899        -0.634       -0.604       -0.604
                          (0.025)***   (0.126)***    (0.073)***    (0.079)***   (0.053)***   (0.041)***
 LDC x Democracy             0.702        0.474         0.656         0.712        0.734        0.758
                          (0.013)***   (0.045)***    (0.028)***    (0.031)***   (0.028)***   (0.027)***
 LDC x Sovereignty           0.325        0.451         0.442         0.365        0.434        0.386
                          (0.032)***   (0.090)***    (0.067)***    (0.087)***   (0.069)***   (0.069)***
        N                    4,113         402           646           504          961          955
      Adj. R2                 0.93         0.93          0.95          0.94         0.94         0.95




                                                    37
           Table 5: Factors that affect the level of political stability, 1996 ­ 2016
  Dependent Variable: Level of political stability and absence of violence/terrorism
                                               (1)                (2)              (3)            (4)
          Relative income                    0.264              0.168            0.167           0.072
                                          (0.017)***        (0.019)***        (0.019)***      (0.024)***
        Gini index (SWIID)                   -0.142             -0.103           -0.127         -0.807
                                           (0.063)**          (0.061)*         (0.058)**      (0.075)***
           Financial crisis                  -0.043             -0.032           -0.033         -0.066
                                          (0.015)***         (0.015)**         (0.015)**      (0.021)***
                 LDC                         -0.718             -0.354           -0.405         -0.265
                                          (0.111)***        (0.036)***        (0.099)***      (0.050)***
     Democracy index (DEM)                   -0.489                              -0.215
                                          (0.115)***                           (0.109)**
            LDC x DEM                        0.642                               0.303
                                          (0.116)***                          (0.110)***
      Sovereignty index (SVT)                -0.113             -0.121                           -0.081
                                          (0.016)***        (0.015)***                        (0.017)***
             LDC x SVT                       0.192              0.167                            0.094
                                          (0.020)***        (0.019)***                        (0.024)***
     Globalization index (GBL)                                  -0.032           0.122           -0.020
                                                               (0.037)        (0.037)***        (0.048)
            LDC x GBL                                           0.271            0.081           0.242
                                                            (0.038)***         (0.038)**      (0.050)***
    Social protection expenditure                                                                0.115
      (% of Govt expenditure)                                                                  (0.054)**
                  N                          1,891              1,878            1,904            736
               Adj. R2                        0.53               0.55             0.55            0.70
            # of countries                    131                131              131              58
Notes: * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Regional specific dummies and the constant term are included in the
estimation, but omitted from presentation. All the right-hand side variables are lagged by one year. The
dependent variable is political stability and absence of violence/terrorism from the World Bank's Worldwide
Governance Indicators. LDC is the dummy for developing countries (See Appendix 1).




                                                     38
Table 6: Factors that affect the likelihood of financial crisis, 1976 ­ 2016
       Dep. Var.: Dummy for financial crisis
                                     (1)                 (2)              (3)
         Relative income           -0.066              -0.024           -0.020
                               (0.017)***             (0.022)          (0.023)
          Credit growth            0.251                0.258            0.260
                               (0.042)***           (0.043)***       (0.043)***
            IR holding             -0.352              -0.297           -0.297
                               (0.041)***           (0.046)***       (0.047)***
         GDP growth rate           -0.141              -0.168           -0.159
                                 (0.074)*            (0.077)**        (0.076)**
         Real appreciation         0.022                0.024            0.028
          above the trend       (0.011)**            (0.011)**        (0.011)**
         Democracy index           -0.004                                0.002
                                  (0.015)                              (0.014)
        Sovereignty index          -0.007             -0.008
                                  (0.013)            (0.012)
        Globalization index                           -0.053           -0.059
                                                    (0.021)**        (0.021)***
                 N                   2,823             2,816            2,882
           # of countries             120               120              120

  Notes* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. We estimate the likelihood of financial crisis using the probit
  model. The estimates reported in the above table are marginal effects. The constant term is included
  in the estimation but omitted from presentation. All the RHS variables are lagged by one year. The
  dependent variable is the dummy for financial crisis, that is constructed by using Laeven and
  Valencia's (2018) database on the occurrences of currency, banking and sovereign crises. The
  dummy takes the value of one if any one of the three types of financial crisis happens.




                                           39
 Figure 1: Open economy trilemma and political-economy trilemma
                       (a) Open economy trilemma
                         Floating exchange rate regime
                               e.g., Japan, Canada




Financially closed
       system              Exchange Rate Stability          Monetary Union /
                                                            Currency Board
e.g., Bretton Woods                                          e.g. Euro, Gold
China in the 1980s                                             Stand., HK


                      (b) Political-Economy Trilemma



                             "Golden Straitjacket"




  "Bretton Woods
   Compromise"
                        Democracy ­ Mass Politics        Global Federalism




                                    40
                           Figure 2: Development of political economy trilemma Indexes ­ income groups

                              (a) Full sample                                                         (b) Industrialized countries




                                                                               1
1




                                                                               .75
.75




                                                                               .5
.5




                                                                               .25
.25




                                                                               0
0




      1975   1980   1985   1990     1995     2000    2005   2010   2015              1975   1980   1985   1990     1995     2000    2005   2010   2015
                                      year                                                                           year

                           Globalization            Democracy                                             Globalization            Democracy
                           Sovereignty                                                                    Sovereignty




                     (c) Emerging market countries                                                 (d) Non-Emerging market LDCs
1




                                                                               1
.75




                                                                               .75
.5




                                                                               .5
.25




                                                                               .25
0




                                                                               0




      1975   1980   1985   1990     1995     2000    2005   2010   2015              1975   1980   1985   1990     1995     2000    2005   2010   2015
                                      year                                                                           year

                           Globalization            Democracy                                             Globalization            Democracy
                           Sovereignty                                                                    Sovereignty



                                                                          41
                             Figure 3: Development of political economy trilemma indexes ­ regional groups

                       (a) Emerging Asia (ex. Japan)                                                         (b) Latin American Economies
 1




                                                                                       1
 .75




                                                                                       .75
 .5




                                                                                       .5
 .25




                                                                                       .25
 0




                                                                                       0
       1975   1980   1985     1990     1995     2000     2005      2010   2015               1975   1980   1985     1990     1995     2000     2005      2010   2015
                                         year                                                                                  year

                              Globalization            Democracy                                                   Globalization             Democracy
                              Sovereignty                                                                          Sovereignty




                            (c) East&Central Europe                                                               (d) Sub-saharan Africa




                                                                                      1
1




                                                                                      .75
.75




                                                                                      .5
.5




                                                                                      .25
.25




                                                                                      0
0




      1975    1980   1985     1990    1995      2000    2005    2010      2015              1975    1980   1985    1990     1995      2000    2005    2010      2015
                                        year                                                                                  year

                             Globalization             Democracy                                                   Globalization             Democracy
                             Sovereignty                                                                           Sovereignty



                                                                                 42
Figure 4: Political Orientation for Industrial and Developing Countries

                     Policy Orientation - Industrial Countries

  1
  .8
  .6
  .4
  .2
  0




         1980                1990               2000                2010           2020
                                                 Year

                  i                                               Upper Bound/Lower Bound
                  aGBL+bDEM                                       aGBL+cSVT
                  bDEM+cSVT                                       Upper Bound
                  Mean of (aGBL+bDEM+cSVT)                        Lower Bound
       The shaded areas indicate the 90% confidence interval for aGBL+bDEM+cSVT.




                   Policy Orientation - Developing Countries
  1
  .8
  .6
  .4
  .2
  0




         1980                1990               2000                2010           2020
                                                 Year

                  i                                               Upper Bound/Lower Bound
                  aGBL+bDEM                                       aGBL+cSVT
                  bDEM+cSVT                                       Upper Bound
                  Mean of (aGBL+bDEM+cSVT)                        Lower Bound
       The shaded areas indicate the 90% confidence interval for aGBL+bDEM+cSVT.




                                                43
