                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   DO COLLEGE APPLICANTS RESPOND TO CHANGES IN STICKER PRICES EVEN
                      WHEN THEY DON'T MATTER?

                                        Phillip B. Levine
                                          Jennifer Ma
                                        Lauren C. Russell

                                      Working Paper 26910
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26910


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2020




We are grateful to seminar participants at the National Bureau of Economic Research Fall
Education Program Meeting, Dartmouth College, Harvard University Graduate School of
Education, Lafayette College, Swarthmore College, Wellesley College, and the DC Economics of
Education seminar for their comments and suggestions. This manuscript uses proprietary data
from the College Board, which has reviewed this manuscript and granted permission to release it.
The views and opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors alone. Phillip Levine is
also the founder and CEO of MyinTuition Corp., a non-profit organization that provides
participating colleges and universities with simplified financial aid calculators. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Phillip B. Levine, Jennifer Ma, and Lauren C. Russell. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do College Applicants Respond to Changes in Sticker Prices Even When They Don't Matter?
Phillip B. Levine, Jennifer Ma, and Lauren C. Russell
NBER Working Paper No. 26910
March 2020
JEL No. I22,J24

                                          ABSTRACT

Do students respond to sticker prices or actual prices when applying to college? These costs differ
for students eligible for financial aid. Students who do not understand this may not apply to some
colleges because of the perceived high cost. We test for this form of "sticker shock" using
College Board data on SAT scores sends, as a proxy for applications, to state flagship institutions
for students entering college in 2006­2013. Some public flagships guarantee financial aid will
meet full financial need. Sticker price increases at those schools would not affect the actual cost
after factoring in financial aid and should not affect decisions for those eligible for aid. We
exploit the large and variable increases in sticker prices at public flagships during the financial
crisis generated from state budget shortfalls. We also control for local labor market conditions to
abstract from the recession's impact on individual educational decisions. We find evidence of
sticker shock -- students unaffected by virtue of institutional aid policies still apply less often.
Using data from the National Student Clearinghouse, we also find that price increases at public
flagships reduce enrollment of high achieving students, regardless of financial aid status, who
often choose private colleges instead.

Phillip B. Levine                                Lauren C. Russell
Department of Economics                          Fels Institute of Government
Wellesley College                                University of Pennsylvania
106 Central Street                               3814 Walnut Street
Wellesley, MA 02481                              Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER                                         lrus@sas.upenn.edu
plevine@wellesley.edu

Jennifer Ma
College Board
1919 M Street NW
Washington, DC 20036
jma@collegeboard.org
1. Introduction

         Students from low- and moderate-income families are substantially under-represented at

public flagship universities. Only 27 percent of students at those institutions come from the

bottom 60 percent of the parental income distribution. 1 Those whose parents are in the top 40

percent of the income distribution represent 73 percent of students. A student at a public flagship

is nine times more likely to come from the top 20 percent of the parental income distribution

than the bottom 20 percent.

         These patterns are troubling given that public flagships have the potential to be engines of

upward mobility (Chetty et al., 2020). Notably, the underrepresentation of children from low-

and moderate-income families has been increasing over time. Three-fourths of public flagships

enroll a lower percentage of these students today than they did in the late 1990s. 2

         A lack of understanding of college pricing and the financial aid system may contribute to
this pattern. Prior work, which has focused almost exclusively on low-income, high-achieving
students, documents that it is at the college application stage  rather than at the point of
admissions or matriculation  where the behavior of low-income students differs most from
their higher-income peers (Hoxby and Avery, 2013; Hoxby and Turner, 2015). Perceived costs
are one of the most important factors influencing where students apply. Sixty-seven percent of
families report factoring in the price of college when finalizing college application lists, and a
majority of high school seniors report ruling out colleges based on sticker prices alone, without
considering their likely financial aid awards (Sallie Mae, 2016; The College Board and Arts &
Sciences Group, 2012). In another survey, 44 percent of students destined for public colleges and
universities reported rejecting colleges at the application stage based on published sticker prices
alone (Longmire & Company, 2013).


1
  Authors' analysis of data from Chetty et al. (2017). These statistics are based on those flagship institutions that can
be separately identified in the Mobility Report Cards and reflect the most recent data year available (children born in
1991).
2
  Authors' analysis of data from Chetty et al. (2017).


                                                           1
         "Sticker shock" occurs when students are discouraged from applying to schools based on
the sticker price, ignoring the potential availability of financial aid. Although sticker prices for
in-state students at public flagship institutions are considerably lower than those at highly
selective private colleges, they are still generally higher than alternative public options, like
community colleges or regional, less-selective public four-year colleges. Inadequate knowledge
of financial aid and the true cost of attending a public flagship institution may contribute to the
observed enrollment patterns of low- and moderate-income students.
         The 2008-09 financial crisis provides us with an opportunity to examine the existence
and extent of sticker shock. Many states dramatically increased tuition and fees at public
postsecondary institutions at that time due to dramatic declines in state appropriations (Long,
2015). Since these tuition increases were heavily covered by the news media, it is likely that they
were well known by students of college-going age or their parents, and some students may not
have applied to their public flagship as a result. 3
         In some states, though, financial aid policies were in place that would have protected aid-
eligible students from experiencing increases in costs of attendance. A handful of public
flagships have a policy of "meeting full demonstrated financial need" (at least for state
residents). That is, they provide enough financial aid through grants, work study, and loans to fill
the gap between the sticker price and the "Expected Family Contribution (EFC)", which is the
amount a student and her family can "afford" as determined by the financial aid system. For aid-
eligible students at an institution that meets full financial need, an increase in the sticker cost of
attendance (COA) would not increase their EFCs, which are determined only by their finances. 4




3
  For example, see Duke (2009), Asimov (2009), and Gordon and Khan (2009). Because the news media focused
primarily on increases in tuition and fees rather than costs of attendance, we use tuition and fees as our primary price
measure. We also explore the sensitivity of our results to the use of cost of attendance.
4
  Most public flagships use the Federal Methodology (FM) to determine a family's Expected Family Contribution.
This methodology uses information reported on the Free Application for Federal Student including family size, the
number of children enrolled in higher education, the age of the older parent, and the income and assets of the parent
and student. Unlike the Institutional Methodology (IM), used by a few public flagships and hundreds of private
institutions, the FM does not consider the net value of a family's primary residence or small businesses owned by
the family.


                                                           2
       This institutional framework sets up a quasi-experiment that we use to examine the
impact of the sticker price on college-going behavior. In this paper, we focus on students'
decisions to apply to public flagship universities, taking advantage of changes in tuition sticker
prices and the fact that low- and moderate-income students in states that meet full need were not
subject to price increases. We instrument sticker prices using the "state budget shocks" approach
used by Deming and Walters (2017) to further focus our analysis on the impact of recession-
related budget cuts. We also control for the local labor market conditions, which could directly
impact students' resources and college-going.
       When the financial crisis hit, it made college more expensive for financial aid recipients
at public flagships that do not meet full need, but not at those that do meet full need. If we
observe a reduction in applications among students likely to receive financial aid in state
flagships that meet full need in the years immediately following the financial crisis, this would
support the notion that sticker shock exists.
       Our results indicate that sticker shock is indeed an issue that affects application decisions

of potential college students who would be eligible for financial aid. Overall, students are

sensitive to changes in sticker prices in the application stage of the process. A 10 percent

increase in sticker prices at a public flagship generates around a 1.2 to 1.8 percentage point

reduction in the likelihood of applying to an institution, as proxied by sending SAT scores to that

institution. Importantly, we find little difference in that impact between students likely to be

eligible for financial aid at schools that meet full need compared to those that do not. Since aid-

eligible students should not respond to changes in sticker prices at meet-full-need schools, we

interpret these results as evidence of sticker shock.

       We also find that price increases at public flagships have little impact on total

enrollments among all students, regardless of their financial aid/meet-full-need status. Public

flagships maintain their enrollment by lowering their admissions standards, enrolling fewer high




                                                  3
achieving students. We see a commensurate increase in enrollments among those high achievers

at private not-for-profit four-year colleges instead.

2. Institutional Details and Trends in College Pricing

2.1. Past Research
         Some prior work has investigated whether making net prices more salient affects college-
going. The net price represents the sum of all resources that a family needs to pay, including
cash, loans, and work-study funds, to cover the cost of attendance. It is equivalently calculated as
the COA less the direct grant aid offered to the student from any source (federal, state,
institutional, or other).
         The evidence on whether students respond to net prices is mixed. Providing students with
the average price of attendance after factoring in financial aid does not have a large impact on
college-going intentions (Bleemer and Zafar, 2018). Similarly, making average net price
information more easily available through the College Scorecard has had no effect on college
application as proxied by SAT score sending or online college search behavior (Hurwitz and
Smith, 2018; Huntington-Klein, 2016).
         Levine (2014) argues that what students want are estimates that are specific to them, not
on average. This is consistent with the findings of Bettinger et al. (2012), which shows that
providing individualized cost information along with assistance completing financial aid forms
had a large impact on college attendance. Similarly, Hoxby and Turner (2013) find that
providing semi-customized information on college net costs along with other information
regarding academic "fit" causes high-achieving, low-income students to apply and be admitted to
more colleges. 5 Dynarski et al. (2018) find that a marketing campaign touting free tuition for
those with incomes under $60,000, which was not a change from previous pricing policy, had a
large impact on applications and enrollments.




5
 It is important to note that Gurantz, et al. (2019) report that they did not find significant enrollment effect from a
series of large randomized control trials that focused on reducing information barrier for low- and middle-income
high-achieving or on-track students.


                                                            4
         The studies that are closest to our work is Hemelt and Marcotte (2011) and Deming and
Walters (2017), both of which examine the impact of tuition changes at public institutions on
enrollment. Hemelt and Marcotte use data from 1991 through 2006 and use OLS to estimate their
models. Deming and Walters recognize the potential endogeneity problem in determining levels
of tuition and estimate their models using state budget shares as an instrument, which we
describe in more detail below. They use data from 1990 through 2013 in their analysis. They also
examine the impact of a school's expenditures on enrollment, an issue we also return to below.
Neither of these papers, though, focuses on sticker shock; they do not distinguish students by
income or institutions by meet-full-need status, which is the focus of our analysis.
2.2 Financial Aid Policy and the Impact of Price Increases
         The interaction between a meet-full-need financial aid policy and price increases is
critical to our empirical strategy; we describe that here. A critical component of a financial aid
system is a determination of what the family can afford to pay. Ignoring the obvious difficulty in
setting that amount, this is the purpose of completing the FAFSA. 6 The "expected family
contribution (EFC)" is the calculated ability to pay, which is constructed based on a family's
financial attributes as reported on the FAFSA.
         At meet-full-need institutions, students with an EFC below COA receive enough
financial aid (through grants, loans, or work-study) so that the net price they pay combined with
their financial aid equals the COA. 7 This is not true at institutions that do not meet full need.
Students who are eligible for financial aid at those institutions are required to pay more than their
EFC.
         When COA rises, families with sufficient financial resources to afford the COA at the
original and new levels pay full price either way. They face the entire price increase. The impact



6
  Using FAFSA alone to determine ability to pay is called the "federal methodology (FM)." Many schools also rely
on the CSS Profile and "institutional methodology (IM)." All state flagships that do not meet full need use FM.
7
  There is a distinction between schools that meet full need and those that are "need-blind" in admission, meaning
that acceptance decisions are independent of financial need. All schools that are need-blind also meet full need, but
not vice versa. In our analysis, all state flagships that meet full need are at least need-blind for students residing in
that state, which is the group our analysis focuses on.



                                                            5
of the price increase on financial aid recipients depends on the school's meet-full-need status. At
a school that meets full need, financial aid adjusts to fill in the new, larger gap between COA and
the student's EFC. An increase in the COA has no bearing on their net price. 8 If the school does
not meet full need, then the student will be expected to pay more as tuition increases.
         This institutional detail sets up the natural experiment we exploit in our empirical
analysis. At institutions that do not meet full need, an increase in the sticker price affects all
students. At institutions that meet full need, an increase in the sticker price only affects those
students who can afford to pay that higher price. 9 Therefore, the spike in sticker prices following
the financial crisis should not have affected low- and moderate-income students at meet-full-
need schools. It would have affected higher-income students at those schools and all students at
schools that do not meet full need.
2.3. Financial Aid Policy in Practice
         To demonstrate the variability in financial aid systems across state flagship institutions,
we calculated net prices using each school's net price calculator for a dependent student with
household income of $50,000 and no assets. 10 According to the FAFSA4caster, an online tool
that estimates eligibility for federal financial aid, this family is estimated to have an EFC of
$2,600 (with rounding) in 2019. 11 Loans and work-study would be expected in addition to the
EFC. First-year undergraduate students can borrow up to $5,500 through the federal student loan
system (including subsidized and unsubsidized loans), and it is not uncommon for schools to



8
  This discussion overlooks the group of students who are just on the cusp of financial aid eligibility before the COA
increase in a meet-full-need state. That COA increase will qualify those students for aid, protecting them from some
portion of the higher cost. In practice, the part of the income distribution where students are on that financial aid
margin is thin enough that the number of students affected in this way is small. We do not address that issue in our
analysis.
9
  In theory, colleges could continue to meet full need and increase their revenue by increasing expected loan
burdens, which are also incorporated into a complete financial aid award. In practice, most colleges and universities
set their loan expectations at the maximum allowed by federal Stafford Loans ($3,500 subsidized or $5,500
including an additional $2,000 of unsubsidized loans).
10
   We also assumed the student was 18 years old, unmarried, with no dependents, was applying to college for the
first time, and had one younger sibling. We further assumed that the student's parents were 47 and 48 years old,
married, and paid no income tax. Appendix Table A.1 provides a list of these flagship institutions. The state flagship
institutions in California and Texas are Berkeley and Austin, respectively.
11
   The exact EFC depends on the state and ranges from $2,111 to $3,036. We use $2,600 as an average for
illustrative purposes in this discussion.


                                                          6
offer students up to $3,500 in work-study funds. Accordingly, an institution that charged this
student $11,600 after grant aid would be meeting her full need. If a school charged this student
more than $11,600 after grant aid, the school would not have met full need. The gap is labeled
"unmet need."
        Because of variation in whether a flagship meets full financial need, students at schools
with very similar full costs of attendance can face vastly different financial burdens after
factoring in financial aid. Figure 1 documents the amount of unmet financial need across states
for a hypothetical dependent student living on-campus with household income of $50,000, no
assets, two married parents, and one other sibling who is not in college. All calculations are
based on information provided by net price calculators posted on university websites in fall
2019. In some states (California, Michigan, North Carolina, Virginia, Delaware, Illinois,
Washington, Wisconsin, and Wyoming), a student with that financial profile would have his/her
entire financial need met. All of these states, other than Wyoming, have policies dictating that
they meet full need, at least for those with modest incomes. 12 This student would have unmet
financial need in the remainder of the states, facing a price higher than she could "afford." The
amount of this unmet need ranges from $2,000 in Florida to $16,000 in Alabama. 13
        For the sample period we use in our empirical analysis, we categorize the flagship

institutions in California (Berkeley), Michigan (UM), North Carolina (UNC), and Virginia

(UVA) as meeting full need, at least for residents of each state. Illinois and Wisconsin adopted



12
   The follobwing webpages identify each state's policy of meeting full demonstrated financial need:
https://finaid.umich.edu/how-aid-is-awarded/ (University of Michigan ­ Ann Arbor), https://sfs.virginia.edu/need
(University of Virginia), http://admission.universityofcalifornia.edu/paying-for-uc/how-aid-works/index.html
(University of California System), https://admissions.unc.edu/files/2013/09/Financial-Aid-Fact-Sheet.pdf
(University of North Carolina ­ Chapel Hill), https://www.udel.edu/apply/undergraduate-admissions/financing-
your-degree/ (University of Delaware; effective fall 2009), and https://www.washington.edu/huskypromise/
(University of Washington). The University of Wisconsin ­ Madison began the Bucky's Tuition Promise program
which guarantees free tuition and no fees for incoming freshman for families earning less than $56,000 per year in
the 2018-2019 school year (https://financialaid.wisc.edu/uw-madison-free-tuition-for-families-making-less-than-
56k/). The University of Illinois began the Illinois Commitment program which provides free tuition for families
earning less than $61,000 per year in the 2019-2020 school year (https://osfa.illinois.edu/illinois-commitment/).
13
   These amounts are for a student at the 25th percentile of the school's GPA and SAT distribution who would likely
not qualify for merit aid.



                                                         7
their policies after our sample period ended (and only do so now for students with lower

incomes). Delaware and Washington implemented their policies partway through our 2006­20l3

sample period, requiring us to drop them from our analysis altogether. 14

         Changes in cost of attendance, which are largely driven by changes in tuition and fees
(and, typically, smaller changes in room and board), have very different impacts on actual net
prices depending on whether the school meets full financial need or not. If a meet-full-need
institution raises its tuition and fees by $1,000, the price paid by the student with household
income of $50,000 will not change. Her net price is determined solely by the self-help
expectation and EFC, and her grant aid would increase by exactly $1,000 to offset the price
increase. The same student, however, at a school that does not meet full need would see her net
price increase by the full amount of the tuition increase.
         This is the intuition that underlies our empirical strategy. Aid-eligible students in states
where the flagship meets full financial need should not respond to sticker price increases since
their actual price paid does not change with the increase. 15 Aid-ineligible students and aid-
eligible students in states where the public flagship does not meet full financial need may
respond by decreasing application and enrollments.




14
   We also drop Pennsylvania and Wyoming from our analysis. In Pennsylvania, SAT score sends cannot be reliably
matched to specific public institutions in PA. Wyoming does not have an official policy to meet full need. However,
calculations from its net price calculator suggest that low-income students have no unmet need. How an increase in
COA translates to a student's net price is unclear in such a system, so we have chosen to drop it from our analysis.
This leaves us with 46 states used in our analysis (note: the District of Columbia has no flagship institution), 4 of
which meet full need and 42 do not.
15
   In theory, "meet-full-need" schools could shift costs onto aid-eligible students in response to a budget shortfall by
increasing loan expectations and reducing grant aid. In practice, however, we see little evidence that the schools we
identify as meeting full need did that. Loan burdens increased at many institutions in 2007-08, in response to a
federal increase in the maximum Stafford Loan. That would be captured by year fixed effects, though. Identifying
school-specific changes in these policies during the financial crisis is difficult given the proprietary nature of this
information. We are able to document, though, that overall borrowing at the UC Berkeley and the University of
Michigan did not change noticeably in 2009-10. We are also able to document that the University of Virginia and
the University of North Carolina had policies in place through this period that eliminate loans from the financial aid
package for lower-income students. Based on this evidence, we conclude that shifting costs onto aid-eligible
students through increasing loan expectations did not occur in a meaningful way at the schools we label as meet full
need in response to the recession.


                                                           8
2.4. Trends in College Pricing
         Despite the importance of the full cost of attendance in determining the actual cost to
students after factoring in financial aid as illustrated above, in the remainder of this analysis we
focus on tuition (and fees) to capture "sticker price." The difference between the two measures
reflects room and board (most incoming students at public flagship institutions live on campus),
along with an estimate of the cost of books, travel, and other miscellaneous expenses. We focus
on tuition because changes in tuition prices reflect what the media typically reports (cf. Duke,
2009; Asimov, 2009, and Gordon and Khan, 2009). We explore the sensitivity of our results to
this decision subsequently, but that is what students are likely to know and to respond to.
         Another advantage of using tuition rather than cost of attendance is that the former is the
price that is often set by the state government or the state board of higher education. 16 Expenses
beyond tuition and fees generally are not set at the state level and are largely designed to cover
costs. Our instrumental variable strategy is based on the relationship between state economic
conditions, budget issues, and the need for revenue from state colleges and universities. Tuition
is the component of college costs that captures this.
         The Great Recession that started in 2008 led to a large jump in sticker tuition at public
flagship universities. Figure 2 uses data from the Integrated Postsecondary Data System (IPEDS)
to show yearly increases in real tuition and fees from 2006 to 2013 (measured in August 2013
dollars using the CPI-U for adjustment). 17 At the height of the recession in 2009, public flagships
increased their tuition and fees by 9 percent on average in real terms. In the following year,
tuition jumped by another 6 percent in real terms. In nominal terms, the increases were even
larger, prompting widespread media coverage and outcry over the increases. In California, for
example, the California Board of Regents instituted a 32 percent (nominal) tuition hike because
of the state's large budget deficit, and students protested at several campuses (Duke, 2009).



16
   See Zinth and Smith (2012) for a categorization of tuition-setting authority by state.
17
   The statistics reported here are calculated using one observation per school. We have also estimated analogous
statistics weighted by the number of SAT score senders in each state. The patterns in the data are similar, but with an
even larger spike in tuition and fees during the recession.



                                                          9
        Tuition increases were much larger in states that were more heavily affected by the
recession. As shown in Figure 3, in states where the state unemployment rate increased by less
than 5 percentage points, average real tuition increased by 7.7 percent in 2009-10. 18 By contrast,
in states where the state unemployment rate increased by more than 5 percentage points, tuition
increased by 12.8 percent. Increases in each of the next two years were considerably larger in
these states as well.
        Low- and moderate-income students living in states where the public flagship meets full
financial need were insulated from the increases in tuition and fees. Any increase in tuition
would be met with additional grant aid for financial aid recipients, wiping out any revenue gain
from those students. Any increase in revenue at those institutions would have been realized from
students not receiving financial aid. As a result, larger tuition increases are required at meet-full-
need flagships to generate the same revenue as that raised from flagships that do not meet full
need. Indeed, that is what we see in the data. Figure 4 shows that schools with a policy of
meeting full financial need raised tuition and fees more during the financial crisis than those that
did not meet full need. 19
        This finding sets up an interesting potential paradox. Schools with meet-full-need
financial aid policies do so to benefit aid-eligible students. Yet when financial circumstances
require them to increase tuition, they must increase tuition by larger amount since those increases
are only paid by a subset of students. But if students respond to the sticker price and not their
true cost, the aid-eligible students (and others) may respond by reducing their likelihood of
applying. Whether there is empirical support for this response is the focus of the remainder of
our analysis.




18
   Our econometric models rely on state appropriations to distinguish economic activity, but within-state change in
this measure and the unemployment rate are very highly correlated. A regression of the state budget shock on the
unemployment rate in a model including state fixed effects has an R2 of 0.97. We use the change in the
unemployment rate here for the purposes of ease of interpretation.
19
   We sought to investigate the hypothesis that marginal revenue generated from a tuition increase is lower at meet-
full-need schools. Unfortunately, we were unable to locate data on revenue from tuition restricted to undergraduates.


                                                         10
3. Data Description and Preliminary Analysis

3.1 Data Description

        To investigate the application response to prices, we use data on SAT score sends from
the College Board. 20 These data cover all students in the 2006 through 2013 high school
graduation cohorts who took the SAT and sent at least one score report to a college or university.
Following prior work by Pallais (2015) and Hurwitz and Smith (2018), we use the sending of a
test score report to proxy for applying to a particular college.
        We also have information on each student's SAT scores, demographics (race, gender, and
parental education) and zip code. Our primary strategy is to use each student's zip code to
determine whether the student is "likely aid-eligible." We assume that the student is aid-eligible
if the median family income in her zip code is $75,000 or less based on our analysis of data from
the 2013 five-year sample of the American Community Survey. Eighty-four percent of families
in these zip codes have incomes less than $100,000 and 95 percent have incomes less than
$150,000. At a public flagship institution with a cost of attendance around $30,000, the income
cut-off for aid eligibility for families with typical asset values is in the vicinity of $125,000.
Perhaps 90 percent of families we define to be likely aid-eligible are actually eligible for
financial aid. We report below sensitivity analyses designed to test alternative proxies for
financial aid-eligibility, including self-reported income.
        Although we have data on the universe of SAT takers who sent at least one score, we do
not have data corresponding to ACT score send reports. The SAT is the dominant test on the
coasts, but not the Midwest, as shown in Appendix Figure A.1. It is unlikely that changes in
student preferences for sending an SAT versus ACT score would be impacted by the tuition of
the public flagship in their state, so we do not believe that our use of SAT score-sending alone is
an issue for our empirical strategy. Nevertheless, in our regressions, we control for the percent of



20
 These data are derived from data provided by the College Board (Copyright © 2006-2013 The College Board.
www.collegeboard.org)



                                                     11
high school graduates in the state taking the SAT. 21 We also include year fixed effects to control
for the secular decline in SAT score sending relative to ACT score sending over our study
period. 22
          Among the 26.7 million graduating high school seniors in the 2006 to 2013 cohorts, 11.6

million (43 percent) had taken the SAT and 8.5 million (74 percent of SAT takers) sent scores to

at least one college. Around 2.6 million SAT takers had sent scores to state flagships during this

period.

          We examine enrollment behavior among applicants using merged College Board and

National Student Clearinghouse (NSC) data. The NSC data cover about 98 percent of all

undergraduate enrollment in the United States. It records up to four postsecondary institutions in

which a student enrolls. For our analysis, we consider a student enrolled in a flagship if either of

her first two postsecondary institutions within 180 days of high school graduation is a flagship.

Using this definition, 9 percent of total SAT senders (or 23 percent of flagship SAT senders) in

our analysis enrolled in a flagship.

          Information on sticker prices comes from the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data

System (IPEDS). As we described earlier, we use in-state tuition and fees as our primary sticker

price measure and CPI-adjust all prices to 2013 dollars using the CPI-U index in our analysis.

Our state budget shock instrument is constructed using data on total state appropriations per

student per year and the share of each flagship institution's total revenue that comes from state

appropriations in a base year. The institution-specific data comes from IPEDS, the state

appropriations data comes from the State Higher Education Executive Officers Association




21
   This is defined as the percentage of high school graduates in the cohort who take the SAT and submit at least one
score report.
22
   See Adams (20l7) for a discussion of how the popularity of the SAT and ACT has changed over time.


                                                        12
(2018), and the number of high school students in the state comes from the Western Interstate

Commission for Higher Education (2016).

Preliminary Analysis

       Before providing a more technical assessment of sticker prices on score sending and
enrollments, we start with a descriptive analysis of the raw data. Figures 3 and 4, reported earlier,
document the differential price changes by severity of the recession and meet-full-need status,
respectively. In Figure 5, we examine whether trends in SAT score sending to students' home
state's flagship are correlated with those differential price increases.
       The upper plot of Figure 5 shows that between 2006 and 2013, the percent of students
sending an SAT score to the public flagship declined in all states regardless of the severity of the
recession. The decline is more than twice as large, though, in states where the state
unemployment rate increased by more than 5 percentage points relative to other states (a 12
percentage-point drop rather than a 5 percentage-point drop). These data are consistent with a
significant score-sending response to the larger increase in tuition and fees in states where the
recession was more severe. Of course, these descriptive patterns are also consistent with the
direct impact of the recession on family income and the ability to afford a college education
regardless of public flagship pricing decisions. We address this complication subsequently in our
full econometric analysis.
       The lower plot shows that declines in scores sent to flagships were also larger for states
that meet full financial need. In combination, Figures 3, 4, and 5 provide preliminary evidence
that students respond to changes in tuition by reducing the likelihood of "applying" (i.e. sending
SAT scores) to public flagship institutions. We pursue this further in a more fully specified
econometric model below.
       The next relevant question is whether price sensitivity is different among financial aid-
eligible and financial aid-ineligible students, particularly distinguishing public flagships by meet-
full-need status. Aid-eligible students should not be price sensitive at meet-full-need schools




                                                  13
(here, and throughout the remainder of the discussion, we will use the labels MFN and not-MFN
schools to distinguish their meet-full-need status).
       We provide preliminary evidence on this point in Figure 6. In this figure, the Y-axis
measures the difference in the likelihood of sending scores to public flagships between MFN and
not-MFN schools. We know from Figure 3 that prices increased more at MFN schools following
the financial crisis. Among "aid-ineligible" students (defined as students residing in a high-
income zip code where median family income is greater than $75,000 per year) who are largely
subject to those price increases, we may then expect to see a decline in scores sent to MFN
schools relative to not-MFN schools when prices jumped starting in 2010. That is exactly what
we see in Figure 6 (orange line  note that the difference in scores sent between types of
schools is normalized to zero in 2006). There is around a 4-percentage point drop in scores sent
between 2010 and 2011 for "aid-ineligible" students at MFN schools compared to non-MFN
schools.
       We repeat this analysis for "aid-eligible" students in Figure 6, with the results displayed
in the blue line (again, differences in scores sent between MFN and not-MFN schools are
normalized to zero in 2006). We also see a decline in scores sent to MFN schools relative to not-
MFN schools right at the point that relative prices jumped at MFN schools. The reduction in
scores sent between 2010 and 2011 is somewhat smaller, around 3 percentage points for this
group, but still noticeable. Nonetheless, "net prices" after factoring in financial aid would likely
have been unaltered for students in this group. We would have expected to see no change in
score sending behavior for students at MFN schools but declines in score sending at not-MFN
schools. Consequently, the difference should have narrowed. Instead, the difference increases.
This provides preliminary evidence consistent with sticker shock. Again, we pursue this further
in a more fully specified econometric model below.
       We have repeated this analysis for enrollment rates, describing patterns in enrollments by
MFN and by the magnitude of the recession in much the same way that we did in Figures 5 and
6. No obvious patterns exist in these data (see Appendix Figures A.2 and A.3). We provide a




                                                 14
more complete discussion of enrollment outcomes when we present the results from our
complete econometric analysis.

4. Formal Testing for Sticker Shock

4.1 Empirical Specification
         The descriptive figures are informative but do not exploit the full extent of price variation
over this time period. Additionally, they do not control for changing demographics of SAT takers
in the state or local economic conditions which could impact score sending to the flagship. The
discussion that follows focuses specifically on the outcome of score-sending behavior, but it
applies directly to the subsequent analysis on enrollment decisions.
         We start by estimating the score send response to tuition among all students with the
following model:
                          Sicst = 1lnTs,t-1 + 2Uc,t-1 + Xi + t + s + icst                                          (1)

where Sicst is an indicator that equals 1 if student i from county c in state s in graduation cohort t
sent a SAT score report to her public flagship institution, lnTs,t-1 is the log of real tuition and fees
at public flagship s in academic year t - 1, Uc,t-1 is the unemployment rate in student i's county in
calendar year t-1, Xi is a matrix of student covariates (verbal and math SAT scores, parental
education indicators, race indicators, female indicator, percent of the state's high school
graduates taking the SAT and sending a score report, median family income in her zip code, and
an indicator for residing in low-income zip code), t are cohort fixed effects, and s are state
(school) fixed effects. 23 We cluster standard errors at the state (school) level.
         In addition to estimating equation (1) by OLS, we also estimate an IV regression to
address the potential endogeneity of tuition and fees. We follow the lead of Deming and Walters
(2017) and use state budget shocks as our instrument. Technically, state budget shocks are
defined as

23
  Note that state fixed effects are equivalent to school fixed effects because we have one public flagship per state.
We have also estimated analogous models that also include all state universities that meet full need even if they are
not flagships. These include eight other University of California schools along with William and Mary in Virginia.
Our results are qualitatively similar than those we report here. We have chosen to present results using one flagship
per state because it lessens the heavy weight placed on just the California schools.



                                                         15
                             (2005)
                    =       ×
                                (2005)

The first term captures annual changes in state spending per student at each institution. 24 The
second term reflects how important state appropriations were to a school's total revenue, with
both values measured in 2005. That baseline period occurred prior to the sample used in our
study and is chosen as an exogenous measure of state support to each flagship institution. If a
state experienced a more severe recession and faced greater spending cuts to higher education,
that would matter more for schools that receive a larger share of their spending from the state.
        In combination, it measures the budget shock a school experiences if state appropriations
are cut, which they were during the recession. We measure the state budget shock in year t - 2,
the academic year prior to when the academic year t - 1 tuition rate is set as the instrument (see
Appendix 1 for a full discussion of timing issues and lag lengths in our analysis). Importantly,
we also control for the county unemployment rate to capture direct local effects of the recession
which could impact family finances and college-going. The first stage in this IV specification
takes the form:
                         lnTs,t-1 = 1Zs,t-2 + 2Uc,t-1 + Xi, + t + s + uicst                                    (2)

        Although we use a Deming and Walters-style instrument, we note an important
distinction between our work and theirs. We focus only on the 2006 through 2013 period. 25 The
impact of the financial crisis on school budgets, which began in the 2009-10 academic year was
by far the largest factor influencing state budgets during this period. State variation in the
severity of the recession provides an important source of exogenous variation on its own,
reducing the potential influence of endogenous pricing decisions. The sensitivity of our results to
using IV instead of OLS may be limited because of this.
        Our focus on state flagship institutions also alleviates one other concern that the Deming
and Walters' research raises regarding our analysis. These authors find that state budget shocks


24
  Our measure of student population is the number of high school seniors graduating in year t.
25
  The considerably shorter sample period that we use also prevents us from extending our analysis to introduce
Deming and Walters' alternative instrument, caps and freezes on state tuition. We experimented with this approach,
but we found too little power in our first stage to implement this approach.


                                                        16
also affect spending at higher education institutions, not just tuition. This would cause a problem
in our analysis because we may be conflating sticker shock, which should only affect some
groups of students, with "spending shock," which would affect all students. Bound, et al. (2019)
also examine this issue and find support for a relationship between business cycle conditions and
spending at higher education institutions, in general. They also find, though, that research-
intensive universities, like state flagships, do not adjust their spending in response to state budget
shocks. We also conducted our analysis that supports this conclusion.
       The aggregate analysis represented by equation (1) does not inform the question of

whether sticker shock occurs. Our test of sticker shock is based on the differences in estimated

elasticities between "aid-eligible" and "aid-ineligible" students in states that do and do not meet

full financial need. To estimate these elasticities, we estimate a triple-difference specification of

the form:

            Sicst = 1lnTs,t-1 + 2lnTs,t-1×Ei + 3lnTs,t-1×MFNs + 4lnTs,t-1×Ei×MFN s

            + 5MFNs×Ei + 6MFNi + 7MFNs + 8Uc,t-1 + Xi, + t + s + icst                              (3)

where Ei is an indicator that equals 1 if student i resides in a lower income zip code (a proxy for

financial aid eligibility), and MFNs is an indicator for whether the public flagship in state meets

full need. Note that the Ei main effect is included in Xi. The triple difference reflects changes in

the likelihood of sending s score between high sticker shock and low sticker shock states (first

difference), students in meet full need and not-meet-full need states (second difference) and low-

income status (third difference).

       Adding the appropriate coefficients provides the overall effect of a tuition increase for

four different groups of students: "aid-ineligible" students in not-MFN states (1), "aid-eligible"

students in not-MFN states (1 + 2), "aid-ineligible" students in MFN states (1 + 3), and "aid-

eligible" students in MFN states (1 + 2 + 3 + 4). These estimates can be converted into

elasticities by dividing by the mean rate of score sending within each group.


                                                  17
        If "aid-eligible" students are aware of net prices and respond accordingly, we should find

that their elasticity is 0. In other words, whatever impact higher sticker prices have on score

sending for the other groups of students (i.e. 1 + 2 + 3) should be completely counteracted by

the fact that "aid-eligible" students in MFN states are the only group that face no net price

increase when sticker tuition rises (i.e. 1 + 2 + 3 = -4). If this is not true and if the elasticity

for this group is negative and significant, it would provide evidence of sticker shock. In fact, if 4

= 0, then students in this group would fully incorporate the sticker price change the same way

that other groups do despite the fact it does not apply to them.

4.2 Score Sending Results
        Table 1 reports the estimated coefficients obtained from the models described in

equations (1) through (3). Table 2 uses the coefficients from Table 1 to estimate the absolute

impact of a tuition increase on the probability of sending SAT scores to students' own states'

public flagship institution. It also converts these estimates to elasticities.

        The first row of Table 1 corresponds to the estimates using scores sent from all students.

The OLS estimate indicates that a 10 percent increase in tuition and fees at the public flagship

decreases the probability that an SAT taker from that state sends a score to the public flagship by

1.8 percentage points (a 5.4 percent decrease relative to the mean score-sending rate of 33.7

percent). This corresponds to a price elasticity of -0.54, reported in Table 2. The IV estimate is

similar, leading to a 1.2 percentage point reduction in score sending and a price elasticity of

score sends of -0.35. These results suggest that the demand curve for college applications, as

measured by SAT score sends, is downward sloping, but inelastic.

        The remainder of Tables 1 and 2 reports the estimated coefficients from the triple
difference specification represented by equation (3) and the associated elasticities by group. All
interacted coefficients are small and statistically insignificant, including the triple interaction. In


                                                   18
OLS, the estimated impact is similar across all groups. The IV estimates are mainly consistent
with OLS, but less precise in this specification.26 The estimated impact for aid-ineligible
students in states that do not meet full need is smaller in an absolute sense, but it is not estimated
precisely enough to statistically distinguish it from the other groups. In both OLS and IV, we
cannot reject the null hypothesis that absolute impacts are equal. Elasticities are somewhat bigger
(although not significantly different) for students in MFN states, which is attributable to similar
point estimates, but lower mean rates of score sending.
        Importantly, the estimated absolute impact and elasticity for "aid-eligible" students in
MFN states is negative and statistically significant (the p-value on the absolute impact is very
small in OLS and equal to 0.033 in IV). This indicates that "aid-eligible" students in MFN states
are less likely to send scores to public flagships when tuition increases, which is consistent with
sticker shock. As discussed earlier, the actual net price paid by these students would not change
with an increase in tuition.
4.3 Heterogeneity in Responsiveness to Tuition Increases
        We also consider whether any heterogeneity exists in the results across population
subgroups that may be differentially affected by sticker shock in the application decisions to
public flagship institutions. Of course, differences in behavioral responsiveness to price changes
across groups is a possibility, but a simpler explanation would be the underlying propensity to
apply to one of these schools in the first place. If a student is less interested in applying to a
school in the first place, that student is less likely to respond to a price increase by withholding
their application.




26
   There are currently no tests for weak instruments in the case of multiple endogenous regressors with non-i.i.d
errors (Baum et al., 2007). However, we follow the advice of Baum et al. (2007) and nevertheless report the
Kleibergen and Paap Wald Rank F test statistic in Table 1 for our triple difference specification (Kleibergen and
Paap, 2006). This statistic cannot be compared to the usual Stock-Yogo weak id test critical values because the
Stock-Yogo values assume i.i.d errors. Critical values have not yet been tabulated for the Kleibergen-Paap rk
statistic since the thresholds depend on the type of violation of the independent and identically distributed
assumption, which differ across applications (Bazzi and Clemens, 2013). Angrist and Pishke (2009) show using
Monte-Carlo simulations that two stage least squares is approximately median-unbiased in the just-identified case
even with weak instruments, so we believe weak instruments bias is unlikely to be a problem in our setting.



                                                        19
        In our analysis, we separate students into population subgroups with different underlying
propensities to apply to a public flagship. We measure these propensities by the average SAT
score send rate for the 2006 through 2008 cohorts who graduated from high school before the
tuition price spikes brought about by the financial crisis. We distinguish two groups that are
more likely to apply to a public flagship ­ students whose combined math and verbal SAT scores
are above the state-specific flagship "median" among enrolled students 27 and students who have
a parent who graduated from college. In our data, 45.6 percent and 41.0 percent of these students
from the 2006 through 2008 cohorts who took the SAT sent their scores to a public flagship,
respectively. We also distinguish students by race/ethnicity, separating them into categories of
white, underrepresented minorities (black or Hispanic), or Asian. Among these three groups, our
baseline SAT score send rate to public flagships is highest for Asian students (51.6 percent) and
lowest for underrepresented minorities (32.2 percent).
        The results of our analysis are reported in Table 3. We report absolute impacts on the
probability of sending SAT scores to a public flagship in response to tuition increases, using
OLS and IV as before. Across all these groups, we see results similar to our earlier findings that
the responsiveness of score sending to tuition increases is generally comparable regardless of
aid-eligibility and the MFN status of the public flagship in the student's state of residence.
Sticker shock appears to be a problem for all population subgroups.
        Yet the absolute impact of the score send response is different across groups. Our
analysis yields point estimates that are largest for students with high SAT scores and for Asian
students. These groups have the highest baseline propensity to apply to a public flagship.
4.5 Specification Checks
        Our identification strategy relies strongly on the potential differential response of "aid-
eligible" students in states whose flagships meet full need in their financial aid policies. If this
group of students responds to price increases the same way as other students, that represents
sticker shock. But it is important to note that having an MFN financial aid policy is not randomly


27
  The "median" is defined as the midpoint between the 25th and 75th percentiles, based on data available from
IPEDS.


                                                        20
assigned across state flagship institutions. Indeed, the schools that have these policies tend to be
those that have higher academic standards as measured by the average SAT scores of their
accepted students. Based on IPEDS data, the four MFN flagship institutions (UC Berkeley,
Michigan, North Carolina and Virginia) are all in the top 10 of the average SAT distribution
among flagship institutions. School/state-specific fixed effects address long-term differences in
application and enrollment behavior, but one could imagine that students respond to price
changes at more selective schools differently than they would at other schools. An alternative
interpretation of our results might be that it is capturing the impact of differential price
elasticities at more selective flagships relative to others as opposed to differences by MFN status.
           We examine this possibility by restricting our sample to the subset of schools with
median combined SAT scores (as defined earlier) above 1200; 17 state flagship institutions meet
this criterion. 28 This approach reflects a crude way to restrict the sample to just the "elite"
flagships. If we estimate the same specifications as described earlier just for these schools and
obtain similar results, then MFN status is unlikely to be acting as a proxy for "elite" status in
interpreting those results.
           The elasticities obtained from this analysis are provided in Table 4. Because we are only
including 17 states in this analysis and clustering our standard errors by state, we report p-values
from traditional clustering by state and those obtained using a wild bootstrap approach. The
smaller sample size and the use of a wild bootstrap technique to conduct statistical inference
generates results that are less precise than in the full analysis, particularly in the IV models.
Overall, though, our results are broadly consistent with those reported earlier for the full sample
of states. The demand elasticity point estimates are somewhat smaller in the "elite" school
sample, but we would not be able to statistically distinguish them from the full sample. More
importantly, the demand elasticities across groups are similar and statistically indistinguishable
from each other. Greater precision would improve our interpretation of these results, but we see
no evidence based on this analysis to lead us to question the interpretation of our earlier results.



28
     The states represented include: CA, CT, FL, GA, IA, IL, KS, MA, MD, MI, MN, NC, NJ, OH, TX, VA, and WI.


                                                       21
         Another potential issue in interpreting our results is that we restrict our sample to those

students who sent any SAT scores, and those students may reflect a selected sample. It is

possible that SAT score senders are more likely to respond to changes in sticker prices or, in IV

models, state economic conditions, than non-senders. To gauge whether this form of selection is

a relevant issue, we estimate OLS and IV models of SAT score sending among the population of

SAT takers (including non-senders) in the College Board database. We find no evidence that

score sending probabilities are affected by tuition at public flagships. 29

         Another specification check examines the sensitivity of our results to alternative

measures of aid-eligibility status. Our median family income in the student's zip code measure is

imperfect in that some higher income families still reside in relatively low median income zip

codes and vice versa. We estimated several alternative measures of likely aid-eligibility to test

the sensitivity of our results. Instead of zip codes with median family income below $75,000, we

also tried analogous measures with different values of median family income ($50,000 and

$100,000). We also experimented with student-reported family income and parental education to

distinguish those who are likely to be eligible for financial aid. The results of these analyses are

reported in Table A.2. They all yield similar estimates of the impact of tuition increases on

scores sent to public flagship institutions. 30


29
   We also tried to examine whether SAT taking is endogenous. Since the College Board collects data on any
student interacting with them, including PSATs and AP exams, its data extends beyond those who take the SAT. We
have estimated models comparable to those described in equations (1) through (3), but used the full sample of
students in the College Board database and excluded the explanatory variables that are only available for SAT takers
(like SAT scores) or only widely reported for SAT takers (like parental education). The results using the more
limited set of controls indicate that increases in tuition brought about by changes in state economic conditions are
correlated with changes in the number of students who take the SAT. The question for us is whether those tuition
increases lead to a reduction in the number of students who take the SAT and would be applying to a state flagship
otherwise. The group of students on the margin of taking the SAT due to changes in state tuition are probably not
marginal for applying to a flagship, so we believe this does not present a problem for our empirical strategy.
30
   We have also estimated models using a continuous measure of financial-aid eligibility based on the probability
that a student's family income is below $75,000 using this zip code-level measure of median family income. The
results are qualitatively similar to those reported below. We chose to report the discrete version because it is more
easily interpretable in a quasi-experimental framework.


                                                         22
        We also consider the ACT as a substitute for the SAT as an additional specification

check. An "application" in our data is sending an SAT score to a school, but in some parts of the

country, that is unlikely just because the ACT is much more common. A student in one of those

areas who takes and sends SAT scores may be selected in some non-random way that could have

an impact on our results. To test this hypothesis, we restricted our sample to students residing in

states where SAT score-sending rates are the highest -- a third or more of a high school

graduation cohort take the SAT. This occurs in about half the states. The results of this analysis

are also reported in Appendix Table A.2; the responsiveness of SAT score sends to changes in

tuition are no different in this sample of the students.

        We also report in Table A.2 an additional specification check that examines the influence

that California plays in driving the results. As the most populous state and the protests that

resulted following the announced tuition increases, perhaps the aggregate price sensitivity is

driven solely by UC Berkeley. We explore this possibility by simply dropping Berkeley from the

sample. Again, we find our results to be strongly robust to this sample restriction. 31

        The final set of specification checks we report addresses how score sending responds to

changes in cost of attendance rather than tuition and fees. The cost of attendance represents

tuition and fees plus other components of costs (room and board, transportation and personal

expenses, and books and supplies). If, as we argue in section 2.4, students respond to changes in

tuition because that is what is publicized, then incorporating these other elements of cost

introduces a random component to our key explanatory variable. In terms of our IV strategy,




31
  We do note, however, that IV estimates become very unstable when we drop California from the sample because
there appears to be too little variation in labor market conditions across other meet full need states to provide
sufficient identification.


                                                        23
these additional elements of cost (which are typically set by the campuses, not the state) are also

less affected by state budget conditions, weakening our identification strategy.

        The results of our analysis using COA rather than tuition and fees, shown in Table A.3,

support these propositions. OLS estimates for all students are similar between the COA and

tuition and fees specifications, but the results by MFN status and aid eligibility are considerably

less precisely estimated. In the IV models, the state budget shock instrument is a weaker

predictor of COA compared to tuition and fees; the F-statistic from the first stage fell from 20.8

to 4.87. Consequently, our results for the impact of changes in COA on score-sending are much

noisier than the results for the impact of changes in tuition and fees in the aggregate and in

models broken down by MFN status and aid eligibility. Overall, we believe this analysis supports

our preference to focus on tuition and fees in this analysis.

5. Impact on Enrollments

        If students respond to changes in college pricing with full information regarding their

actual financial impact, then a tuition increase has the potential to increase socioeconomic

diversity at MFN colleges. At these schools, low- and moderate-income students are protected

from those tuition increases and should not reduce their likelihood of applying. Those at other

schools and higher-income students will all face the higher cost and could reduce their likelihood

of applying. What we just saw, however, is that these students responded to an increase in the

sticker price the same way as others even though it did not affect them. Applications of all

students declined in response to tuition increases, regardless of their aid eligibility or their state

flagship's MFN status.

        This raises the question of where they eventually enrolled? If all students, including aid-

eligible students in states whose public flagship meets full need, are less likely to apply to those



                                                   24
flagships, what impact does that have on enrollments at those institutions and other institutions

with which they compete? We can use similar methods to those described earlier to address this

question. We simply replace the dependent variable, using enrollment rather than application.

For this exercise, we use the National Student Clearinghouse data for the same students included

in our application analysis.

       Before reporting the results of this analysis, we note that the likely estimated impact on

enrollments, if any, will be smaller than that on applications since only a relatively small

percentage of applicants to public flagships are accepted and enroll. Even if some students did

not apply because of the price increase, they may not have been accepted anyway, reducing the

potential impact on enrollment. The smaller estimated impact also creates a power issue,

particularly in our IV specifications. With smaller anticipated effects and the larger standard

errors associated with them (based on the properties of the binomial distribution), it becomes

much more difficult to generate results precise enough to reject the null hypothesis of no effect.

       Indeed, our attempts to estimate IV models of the same form as earlier generated mainly

insignificant coefficients. We report only OLS estimates in the remainder of this discussion as a

result. Despite this limitation, it is important to keep in mind that OLS and IV estimates in our

analysis of flagship applications were similar albeit slightly larger. Endogeneity in tuition setting

does not seem like a major problem during our sample window, but it may have a minor

influence on our results.

       The first issue we address is whether enrollments change at all at public flagships. As the

most competitive public institution in the state, these schools receive considerably more

applications than students who are accepted. A reduction in applications does not necessarily




                                                 25
generate a reduction in enrollment. They can always adjust their admissions standards to

maintain it.

        In fact, this is what we see. The first row of Table 5 reports the estimated impact on

overall enrollment at public flagships in response to changes in tuition. We find no statistically

significant changes in flagship enrollment in the aggregate and by MFN status or aid eligibility.

This result is consistent with Barrow and Davis (2012), Long (2015), and Charles, Hurst, and

Notowidigdo (2018) who show strong evidence of cyclicality in college enrollments at two-year

public institutions and for part-time enrollments at four-year public institutions, but the impact

on full-time enrollments at four-year public institutions is clearly smaller or perhaps non-

existent.

        To determine the extent to which this result is attributable to changes in selectivity, we

examine the impact of changes in sticker prices on the combined math and verbal SAT scores of

enrolled students who sent their SAT scores to the flagship. The second row of Table 5 reports

the results of estimating models that are identical in specification except that the dependent

variable is now the combined SAT score of enrolled SAT score-sending students at public

flagships. The results indicate that a tuition increase reduces those scores. A 10 percent increase

in tuition leads to a 2.2 point drop in combined SAT scores in the aggregate. The differences in

effects by MFN and aid-eligibility status are small and not statistically significant.

        We extend this analysis by focusing solely on "high-achieving" students, whose SAT

scores are above the "median" (midpoint of the 25th and 75th percentile) of enrolled students at

each institution. For these students, in OLS specifications we see a statistically significant

reduction in enrollment; overall, a 10 percent increase in tuition leads to a 0.7 percentage point

decline in enrollments among this group. These past two sets of results support the conclusion



                                                 26
that public flagships maintained their enrollment after increasing their prices during the recession

by lowering admissions standards.

        This raises the question of where high-achieving students who otherwise would have

enrolled in their home state's public flagship end up enrolling? One possibility is that they could

have chosen to reduce their college cost by living closer to home and attending a non-flagship 4-

year state university. 32 Identifying the impact of flagship tuition on public, non-flagship

enrollment, however, is complicated because flagship and non-flagship tuition are both set within

the context of the same state's budgetary environment and are often determined through a similar

process. Indeed, the correlation in tuition between flagships and non-flagships across states and

years in our data is 0.91. Non-flagships do not necessarily have the same excess supply of

applicants to maintain enrollment if a price increase reduces demand. If increases in flagship

tuition is matched by tuition increases in non-flagship institutions, then we would expect to see a

reduction in enrollments at those institutions, not an increase associated with substitution. In

other words, the results of this analysis would have a negative bias.

        By restricting our sample to high-achieving students, though, this should be less of a

problem. In our data, high achievers are 2.5 times more likely to attend a public flagship than a

public non-flagship institution (17.0 percent versus 6.8 percent). By restricting our sample to just

high achievers, we reduce the bias associated with the correlated prices and can better identify

substitution. The results of this analysis are reported in the fourth row of Table 5. We find no

statistically significant change in the enrollment of high achievers at public non-flagships in

response to a tuition increase.




32
  High-achieving students are very unlikely to attend community college; just 2.1 percent do so in our sample.
Perhaps because of this, we find no evidence of substitution to these institutions.


                                                        27
       The remainder of the table considers the impact on other enrollment options among high-

achieving students. We consider the following alternatives: out-of-state flagship institutions,

four-year private non-profit institutions, and the subset of those institutions that have "meet full

need" financial aid policies. The final category is likely to have the lowest cost of attendance for

lower income students, but they are not that common and typically highly selective. We note that

the huge jump in tuition at public institutions during the financial crisis was not matched by

tuition increases at private institutions (Ma, et al., 2018), suggesting that identifying the cross-

price effect is easier here than in the case of public non-flagships. Own-price effects are

adequately controlled for with year fixed effects since private non-profit institutions tend to have

national (or at least regional) markets. Competition across those institutions also restricts local

differences in price variation over time. Similarly, the out-of-state flagship market is a national

one, so year fixed effects will capture the average effect of price changes at those institutions.

       The results indicate that high achievers are more likely to attend a private non-profit 4-

year institution when public flagship prices rise. A 10 percent increase in tuition at public

flagships increased enrollment of these students at these private colleges by 0.8 percentage

points. This roughly matches the decline in enrollment of high achievers at public flagships. We

also see modest evidence of increases in enrollments at out-of-state flagships and MFN private

institutions, but those effects are spotty and considerably smaller.

6. Discussion

       Price discrimination in the form of high sticker prices with generous financial aid for
lower-income students is a common pricing strategy at selective universities across the United
States. In theory, this pricing strategy can maximize tuition revenue while maintaining access for
lower-income students because generous financial aid awards keep prices affordable. However,
if students are unaware that they will qualify for financial aid and are discouraged from applying


                                                  28
based on high sticker prices, this pricing strategy may not have its intended effect of increasing
access to higher education.
          In this paper, we examine the existence of sticker shock using exogenous variation in
sticker prices at state flagship universities during and after the 2008 financial crisis. Using data
on SAT score sends corresponding to students in the high school classes of 2006 to 2013, we
investigate whether low- and moderate-income students in states where flagship institutions meet
full financial need responded to price increases by reducing their application rates. Notably, in
these states, those students would have been fully insulated from sticker price increases. Yet we
find that they apply less often, similar to higher-income students and those living in states that do
not meet full need. These results suggest the existence of important informational frictions.
         Interestingly, had low- and moderate-income students not exhibited sticker price shock,
tuition price increases during the 2008 financial crisis would have led to significantly greater
socioeconomic diversity at the public flagships that meet full need. As higher-income students
experienced actual price increases and reduced applications to the flagships, unaffected low- and
moderate-income students would not have adjusted their application behavior. Consequently,
they would have constituted a larger share of the applicant pool and proportion of admitted
students. However, our results indicate this did not occur.
         Our results have important implications for public policy. One common proposal to

address the complexity of the financial aid system is to simplify the Free Application for Federal

Student Aid (FAFSA), which is used to determine a student's eligibility for Pell Grant and other

forms of financial aid (cf. Scott-Clayton and Dynarski, 2007).33 Though simplifying the FAFSA

might increase participation in the financial aid system and college enrollment more generally, it

may not go far enough to eliminate sticker price shock. To get students to apply in the first place,

they need the ability to better forecast what their college costs will be at an early stage of the



33
  This is the system that is used for calculating financial aid at most, but not all, public flagship institutions. Many
private colleges also require the CSS Profile ­ simplifying FAFSA would have no impact on schools that rely on
that method for determining ability to pay.


                                                           29
admissions process to overcome sticker shock. We need to find better ways to communicate

pricing information and the availability of financial aid to complete students' understanding of

what college will really cost them so that they can make informed educational decisions.




                                                30
                                            References


Adams, C. J. (2017). "In race for test-takers, ACT outscores SAT-for now." Education Week.
      https://www.edweek.org/ew/articles/2017/05/24/ in-race-for-test-takers-act-outscores-sat-
      -for.html.

Angrist, J. and Pischke, J.S. (2009). "A Note on Bias in Just Identified IV with Weak
       Instruments." http://econ.lse.ac.uk/staff/spischke/mhe/josh/solon_justid_April14.pdf

Asimov, N. (2009). "UC president recommends huge tuition increases." San Francisco
      Chronicle. https://www.sfgate.com/education/article/ UC-president-recommends-huge-
      tuition-increases-3218630.php.

Barrow, L. and Davis, J. 2012. "The upside of down: Postsecondary enrollment in the Great
      Recession." Economic Perspectives, 36(4): 117-129.

Baum, C. F., Schaffer, M. E., and Stillman, S. (2007). "Enhanced routines for instrumental
      variables/generalized methods of moments estimation and testing." The Stata Journal,
      7(4): 465-506.

Bazzi, S. and Clemens, M. A. (2013). "Blunt Instruments: Avoiding Common Pitfalls in
       Identifying the Causes of Economic Growth." American Economic Journal:
       Macroeconomics, 5(2): 152-186.

Bettinger, E., Terry Long, B., Oreopoulos, P., and Sanbonmatsu, L. (2012). "The role of
       application assistance and information in college decisions: Results from the H&R Block
       FAFSA experiment." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3):1205-1242.

Bleemer, Z. and Zafar, B. (2018). "Intended college attendance: Evidence from an experiment on
      college returns and costs." Journal of Public Economics, 157:184-211.

Bound, John, Breno Braga, Gaurav Khanna, and Sarah Turner (2019). "Public Universities: The
      Supply Side of Building a Skilled Workforce." RSF: The Russell Sage Foundation
      Journal of the Social Sciences, 5(5): 43-66.

Burd, S. (2017). High-merit-aid public flagships see substantial shifts to wealthier students. In
       Stephen, B., editor, Moving on Up? What a Groundbreaking Study Tells Us About
       Access, Success, and Mobility in Higher Education, pages 33-34. New America.

Charles, K. C., Hurst, E., and Notowidigdo, M. J. (2018). "Housing Booms and Busts, Labor
       Market Opportunities, and College Attendance." American Economic Review, 108(10):
       2947-2994.

Chetty, R., Friedman, J., Saez, E., Turner, N., and Yagan, D. (2017). "Mobility report cards: The
       role of colleges in intergenerational mobility." Mobility Statistics and Student Outcomes
       by College and Birth Cohort. http://www.equality-of-opportunity.org/data/.



                                                 31
Chetty, R., Friedman, J., Saez, E., Turner, N., and Yagan, D. (2020). "Income Segregation and
       Intergenerational Mobility Across Colleges in the United States." Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, Forthcoming.

College Board (2018). Trends in College Pricing 2018. New York: College Board.

Deming, David J. and Walters, Christopher. R. (2017). "The Impact of Price Caps and Spending
      Cuts on U.S. Postsecondary Attainment." NBER Working Paper No. 23736.

Duke, A. (2009). "University of California students protest 32 percent tuition increase." CNN
      News. http://www.cnn.com/2009/US/11/19/california.tuition.protests/index. html.

Dynarski, Susan, C.J. Libassi, Katherine Michelmore, and Stephanie Owen (2018) "Closing the
      Gap: The Effect of a Targeted, Tuition-Free Promise on College Choices of High-
      Achieving, Low-Income Students. NBER Working Paper No. 25349.

Dynarski, Susan M. and Judith E. Scott-Clayton (2007). "College Grants on a Postcard: A
      Proposal for Simple and Predictable Federal Student Aid." Hamilton Project Discussion
      Paper 2007-01.

Gordon, L. and Khan, A. (2009). "UC regents approve fee hike amid loud student protests." Los
      Angeles Times. http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/lanow/2009/11/ uc-regents-approve-fee-
      hike-amid-loud-student-protests.html.

Gurantz, Oded, Jessica Howell, Mike Hurwitz, Cassandra Larson, Matea Pender, and Brooke
       White. (2019). "Realizing Your College Potential? Impacts of College Board's RYCP
       Campaign on Postsecondary Enrollment." (EdWorkingPaper: 19-40). Retrieved from
       Annenberg Institute at Brown University: https://edworkingpapers.com/ai19-40

Hemelt, S. V. and Marcotte, D. E. (2011). "The impact of tuition increases on enrollment at
      public colleges and universities." Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis,
      33(4):435- 457.

Hoxby, C. and Avery, C. (2013). "The missing 'one-offs': The hidden supply of high-achieving,
      low-income students." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.

Hoxby, C. and Turner, S. (2013). "Expanding College Opportunities for High-Achieving, Low
      Income Students." SIEPR Discussion Paper No. 12-014. https://siepr.
      stanford.edu/sites/default/files/publications/12-014paper_6.pdf.

Hoxby, C. and Turner, S. (2015). "What high-achieving low-income students know about
      college." American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 105(5):514-517.

Huntington-Klein, N. (2016). "The search: The effect of the college scorecard on interest in
      colleges." Unpublished Working Paper. Available at:



                                               32
       https://www.aeaweb.org/conference/2017/preliminary/paper/hf7A8bfB, accessed
       2/3/2020.

Hurwitz, M. and Smith, J. (2018). "Student responsiveness to earnings data in the college
      scorecard." Economic Inquiry, 56(2):1220-1243.

Kleibergen, F. and Paap, R. (2006). "Generalized reduced rank tests using the singular value
       decomposition." Journal of Econometrics, 133: 97-126.

Levine, P. B. (2014). "Transparency in college costs." Brookings Institution.
       http://www.brookings.edu/research/papers/2014/11/12-transparency-in-college-costs-
       levine.

Long, B. T. (2015). "The Financial Crisis and College Enrollment: How Have Students and
       Their Families Responded?" In Brown, J. and Hoxby, C.M. (Ed.) How the Financial
       Crisis and the Great Recession Affected Higher Education, University of Chicago Press.

Longmire & Company. (2013). "Your Value Proposition: How prospective students and parents
     perceive value and select colleges." https://www.longmire-
     co.com/documents/studies/Value_Proposition_Study_Report.pdf

Ma, Jennifer, Sandy Baum, Matea Pender, and CJ Libassi (2018), Trends in College Pricing
       2018, New York: The College Board.

Pallais, A. (2015). "Small differences that matter: Mistakes in applying to college." Journal of
        Labor Economics, 33(2):493-520.

Sallie Mae (2016). "How America pays for college 2016. Sallie Mae's national study of college
        students and parents." https://news.salliemae.com/files/doc_library/file/
        HowAmericaPaysforCollege2016FNL.pdf.

State Higher Education Executive Officers Association (2018). SHEF: FY 2018 State Higher
       Education Finance. Available at: https://sheeomain.wpengine.com/wp-
       content/uploads/2019/04/SHEEO_SHEF_FY18_Report.pdf, accessed 1/7/2020.

The College Board and Arts & Sciences Group (2012). studentPoll, 9(1).

Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education (2016). Knocking at the College Door:
      Projections of High School Graduates through 2032. Available at:
      https://knocking.wiche.edu/, accessed 1/7/2020.

Zinth, K. and Smith, M. (2012). "Tuition-Setting Authority for Public Colleges and
       Universities." Education Commission of the States.
       https://www.ecs.org/clearinghouse/01/04/71/10471.pdf




                                                33
                   Figure 5: Trends in SAT Score Sending Rates
                              to Flagship Institutions
                                            By Severity of the Recession




                                             By Meet-Full-Need Status




Notes: Percent of students sending scores to flagship institution is defined as the percent of students appearing in the College
Board SAT score send sample who send a score report to their home state's flagship.
 Table 1: Estimated Impact of Increases in Tuition and Fees on Likelihood of Students Sending
                         SAT Scores to Public Flagship Institutions

                                                       OLS                          IV
                                             Aggregate
 ln(in-state tuition and fees,                        -0.183                      -0.119
 lagged one year)                                    (0.051)                     (0.061)

 First Stage F-Statistic                                ---                        20.8

                                        Triple Difference
 ln(tuition)                                          -0.180                      -0.023
                                                     (0.041)                     (0.094)

 ln(tuition*"aid eligible")                            0.033                      -0.116
                                                      (0.038)                    (0.088)

 ln(tuition*meet-full-need)                            -0.047                     -0.139
                                                      (0.036)                    (0.073)

 ln(tuition*meet-full-need*"aid eligible")             0.015                      0.129
                                                      (0.042)                    (0.094)

 Sample Size                                        7,589,048                   7,589,048

 Kleibergen and Paap Wald Rank F Test                     ---                       7.9
Notes: Estimates are obtained from a model of the form of equations 1 through 3 and based on
the authors' analysis of College Board data on scores sent to students' in-state flagship university
among those who took the SAT and sent at least one score report to any college. Additional
explanatory variables include: the students' SAT math and verbal scores, maternal and paternal
education indicators, race/ethnicity, the one-year lagged county unemployment rate, and the
fraction of high school graduates in a student's state of residence who sent SAT scores to at least
one school. A student is "aid-eligible" if she resides in a zip code with median family income of
$75,000 or less per year. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
                 Table 2: Estimated SAT Score Send Elasticities Associated with
                  an Increase in Tuition and Fees at Public Flagship Institutions
                                              Doesn't Meet-full-need          Meets Full Need
                                               "Aid          "Aid           "Aid           "Aid
                               All          Ineligible"    Eligible"     Ineligible"     Eligible"

 Mean Score Sending
 Rate                        0.337            0.381          0.351         0.291          0.220

                                                              OLS
 Absolute Impact              -0.183          -0.180         -0.146        -0.227         -0.179
                             (0.051)         (0.041)        (0.052)       (0.057)        (0.055)

 Elasticity                  -0.543           -0.472        -0.416         -0.780         -0.814

                                                               IV
 Absolute Impact              -0.119          -0.023         -0.139        -0.162         -0.149
                             (0.061)         (0.094)        (0.068)       (0.060)        (0.070)

 Elasticity                   -0.353           -0.060         -0.396        -0.557        -0.677
Notes: The absolute impact is the effect of a change in tuition on the absolute rate of sending
scores to flagship institutions. The elasticity adjusts for the mean rate of score sending to flagship
institutions within each group. A student is considered "aid-eligible" if she resides in a zip code
with median family income $75,000 or less per year.
      Table 3: Absolute Impact of Increases in Tuition and Fees at Public Flagship Institutions on
                     SAT Score Sending among Different Population Subgroups

                                                             Doesn't
                                                           Meet-full-need           Meets Full Need

 Population                   Sample                      "Aid         "Aid         "Aid         "Aid
 Subgroup         Method       Size         All        Ineligible"   Eligible"   Ineligible"   Eligible"
                                          -0.299         -0.191       -0.198       -0.516       -0.532
                   OLS                    (0.100)        (0.041)      (0.045)      (0.068)      (0.057)
 SAT Total
                             1,487,920
 above Flagship
 Median
                                          -0.176         -0.011       -0.170      -0.454       -0.507
                    IV
                                          (0.122)        (0.083)      (0.092)     (0.068)      (0.077)
                                          -0.188         -0.165       -0.147      -0.224       -0.212
 At Least          OLS                    (0.049)         (0.035)     (0.043)     (0.051)      (0.046)
 One Parent
                             4,073,558
 with College
 Degree                                   -0.109         -0.028       -0.135      -0.166       -0.153
                    IV
                                          (0.055)        (0.069)      (0.065)     (0.057)      (0.057)
                                          -0.144         -0.146       -0.156      -0.142       -0.127
                   OLS                    (0.040)        (0.034)      (0.044)     (0.044)      (0.049)

 Whites Only                 4,184,386
                                          -0.163         -0.136       -0.139      -0.236       -0.172
                    IV                    (0.084)        (0.140)      (0.079)     (0.096)      (0.111)

                                          -0.081         -0.116       -0.074      -0.105       -0.072
 Under-            OLS                    (0.064)        (0.058)      (0.060)     (0.075)      (0.068)
 Represented                 2,026,872
 Minorities                               -0.005          0.035       -0.012       0.025       -0.032
                    IV
                                          (0.074)        (0.084)      (0.081)     (0.097)      (0.079)
                                          -0.321         -0.223       -0.190      -0.404       -0.323
                   OLS                    (0.084)        (0.060)      (0.067)     (0.072)      (0.071)
 Asian-
                              786,149
 American
                                          -0.198          0.123       -0.035      -0.255       -0.215
                    IV
                                          (0.148)        (0.228)      (0.206)     (0.115)      (0.125)
Notes: The absolute impact is the effect of a change in tuition on the absolute rate of sending
scores to flagship institutions.
                 Table 4: Estimated SAT Score Send Elasticities Associated with
               an Increase in Tuition and Fees at "Elite" Public Flagship Institutions
                                             Doesn't Meet-full-need          Meets Full Need
                                              "Aid          "Aid           "Aid           "Aid
                              All          Ineligible"    Eligible"     Ineligible"     Eligible"

                                                            OLS
 Absolute Impact             -0.136          -0.167        -0.100         -0.173          -0.122
 p-value (clustered)        (0.015)         (0.001)       (0.028)        (0.010)         (0.031)
 p-value (wild bootstrap)   [0.035]         [0.026]       [0.181]        [0.123]         [0.151]

                                                               IV
 Absolute Impact              -0.097          -0.085         -0.093         -0.130        -0.117
 p-value (clustered)         (0.071)         (0.378)        (0.080)        (0.046)       (0.119)
 p-value (wild bootstrap)    [0.269]         [0.558]        [0.268]        [0.149]       [0.365]
Notes: The models estimated to arrive at these elasticities are identical to those reported in
Tables 1 and 2 except the data are limited to students living in the 17 states with median math
and verbal combined SAT scores of greater than 1200. The sample size is 5,565,617. P-values
based on traditional, clustered standard errors are reported along with p-values estimated using
wild bootstrap methods that correct for the limited number of clusters.
           Table 5: Estimated Impact of Tuition Increases on SAT Scores at Public Flagships
                           and Enrollment at Different Types of Institutions

                                             Doesn't Meet-full-need            Meets Full Need
                                              "Aid           "Aid            "Aid           "Aid
                             All           Ineligible"     Eligible"      Ineligible"     Eligible"

                                                 All Students (N = 7,589,048)
 Public Flagship           -0.015            -0.020         -0.011         -0.031            0.005
 Enrollment                (0.009)           (0.010)       (0.010)         (0.011)          (0.015)

                                  All SAT Takers Enrolled in Public Flagships (N = 671,830)
 Public Flagship            -22.4           -18.7           -27.0          -16.0          -41.8
 Average Combined           (7.8)           (9.6)           (7.0)          (18.7)         (21.1)
 SAT Score

                                           High Achieving Students (N = 1,487,920)
 Public Flagship           -0.074            -0.059        -0.052         -0.114            -0.117
 Enrollment                (0.023)          (0.022)        (0.021)        (0.015)           (0.022)

 Public 4-Year             -0.048            -0.016         -0.049          -0.082          -0.086
 Non-Flagship              (0.023)           (0.020)        (0.024)         (0.017)         (0.021)
 Enrollment
 Public Out-of-State        0.013             0.002          0.005           0.033           0.045
 Flagship Enrollment       (0.011)           (0.011)        (0.009)         (0.008)         (0.015)

 Private 4-Year             0.075             0.033          0.080           0.116           0.115
 Enrollment                (0.024)           (0.019)        (0.021)         (0.016)         (0.015)

 Private, 4-Year MFN         0.009             -0.009         0.022           0.015            0.026
 Enrollment                 (0.009)            (0.009)       (0.011)         (0.009)          (0.015)
Notes: All estimates are obtained from OLS models of the same form as those reported in Table 1 using
National Student Clearinghouse data for all SAT score senders. "High achievers" are defined as those
whose combined SAT scores are above the "median" of students enrolled in the student's public flagship
institution. The "median" is defined to be the midpoint between the 25th and 75th percentile of combined
SAT scores, as reported in IPEDS.
Appendix 1: Timing of the Admissions Process and Lags Used in Our Econometric Analysis


        To understand the lagging of tuition and fees and state and county unemployment rates in
this specification, it is helpful to think about the typical timeline for college-going. Consider the
cohort of students graduating from high school in 2013. These students would (potentially) enroll
in college in September 2013. Most public institutions release their tuition and fees rates for the
2013-14 school year in July 2013. This is after the student decides whether to apply and enroll
because the student submits applications in December 2012 and decides where to enroll in April
2013.




        Most students will take the SAT during the spring of their junior year and/or the fall of
their senior year. They will send their SAT scores to colleges either at or right after the time of
SAT administration when they can use one of their four free score sends, or around the time they
submit their full applications, which requires paying around $10 per score-send. If students
decide where to apply and send scores in the fall of their senior year, the most recent price
information available to them corresponds to the 2012-13 school year. The actual 2013-14
college prices they will face are likely not released until July 2013, after they graduate high
school. However, if they make their college application and score-send decisions in the spring of
their junior year, only tuition and fees for 2011-12 would be available.
       In our preferred specification, we opt to use the 2012-13 prices (i.e. tuition and fees lagged
1 academic year relative to their matriculation/cohort year) as our explanatory variable which
assumes that students make application decisions in their senior year. However, we have tested
robustness to lagging two years, which assumes that students make application decisions in their
junior year, and the results are similar. We lag the county unemployment rate 1 year. For the 2013
cohort, this means that we use the county unemployment rate over the January 2012 to December
2012 period, which covers the entire spring junior year and fall senior year period over which
students are typically deciding where to send their SAT scores. In the IV specifications, we use
state appropriations from the student's junior year (appropriations from 2011-2012 for a student
graduating high school in June 2013).
                                   Appendix Figures

                  Figure A.1: Percent of High School Graduates Taking SAT
                           and Sending at Least One Score Report




Notes: The number of high school graduates in each state comes from Western Interstate
Commission for Higher Education (2016). The number of students taking the SAT and sending
at least one score comes from the College Board data sample as described in the text.
Figure A.2: Trends in Enrollment Rates at Flagship Institutions
                                        By Severity of the Recession




                                          By Meet-Full-Need Status




Notes: The enrollment rate reflects the percentage of students enrolled at their home state's flagship as a percentage
of students who sent an SAT score report to at least one institution.
               Appendix Table A.1: List of Flagship Institutions
AK   University of Alaska - Fairbanks
AL   University of Alabama
AR   University of Arkansas
CA   University of California - Berkeley
CO   University of Colorado at Boulder
CT   University of Connecticut
DE   University of Delaware
FL   University of Florida
GA   University of Georgia
HI   University of Hawaii at Manoa
IA   University of Iowa
ID   University of Idaho
IL   University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
IN   Indiana University - Bloomington
KS   University of Kansas
KY   University of Kentucky
LA   Louisiana State University and Agricultural & Mechanical College
MA   University of Massachusetts - Amherst
MD   University of Maryland ­ College Park
ME   University of Maine
MI   University of Michigan ­ Ann Arbor
MN   University of Minnesota ­ Twin Cities
MO   University of Missouri - Columbia
MS   University of Mississippi
MT   University of Montana
NC   University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
ND   University of North Dakota
NE   University of Nebraska - Lincoln
NH   University of New Hampshire
NJ   Rutgers University - New Brunswick
NM   University of New Mexico
NV   University of Nevada - Reno
NY   State University of New York at Buffalo
OH   Ohio State University
OK   University of Oklahoma - Norman
OR   University of Oregon
PA   Pennsylvania State University
RI   University of Rhode Island
SC   University of South Carolina - Columbia
SD   University of South Dakota
TN   University of Tennessee - Knoxville
TX   University of Texas at Austin
UT   University of Utah
VA   University of Virginia
VT   University of Vermont
WA   University of Washington - Seattle
WI   University of Wisconsin - Madison
WV   West Virginia University
WY   University of Wyoming
                    Table A.2: Alternative Specifications of the Absolute Impact of
        Increases in Tuition and Fees at Public Flagship Institutions on SAT Score Sending

                                                      Doesn't Meet-full-need          Meets Full Need

 Population                 Sample                       "Aid         "Aid         "Aid          "Aid
 Subgroup      Method        Size         All         Ineligible"   Eligible"   Ineligible"    Eligible"
    Low-                                -0.153          -0.166       -0.165       -0.101        -0.138
   Income        OLS                    (0.046)         (0.039)      (0.054)      (0.054)       (0.059)
 Definition:
                           7,589,048
    Self-
                                        -0.075         -0.074        -0.074       -0.054        -0.119
  Reported        IV                    (0.064)        (0.074)       (0.061)      (0.091)       (0.103)
 < $100,000
    Low-                                -0.180         -0.161        -0.202       -0.079        -0.155
   Income        OLS                    (0.051)        (0.043)       (0.055)      (0.064)       (0.059)
 Definition:
 Median Zip                7,589,048
                                        -0.113         -0.097        -0.158       -0.103        -0.175
    Code
                  IV                    (0.061)        (0.067)       (0.063)      (0.143)       (0.111)
   Income
  < $50,000
    Low-                                -0.182         -0.166        -0.203       -0.126        -0.197
   Income        OLS                    (0.182)        (0.166)       (0.203)      (0.126)       (0.197)
 Definition:
  No Parent                7,589,048
                                        -0.116         -0.095        -0.141       -0.114        -0.213
     with
                  IV                    (0.061)        (0.069)       (0.063)      (0.079)       (0.114)
     Any
   College
    States                              -0.189         -0.182        -0.235       -0.144        -0.180
    Where        OLS                    (0.058)        (0.048)       (0.061)      (0.058)       (0.059)
    Taking                 6,886,556
     SAT                                -0.137         -0.056        -0.190       -0.151        -0.159
 is Common        IV
                                        (0.066)        (0.102)       (0.065)      (0.071)       (0.074)
                                        -0.153         -0.172        -0.172       -0.142        -0.187
 Omit            OLS                    (0.051)        (0.044)       (0.104)      (0.056)       (0.107)
 California
                           6,309,284
 from
 Sample                                 -0.099         -0.018        -0.070       -0.133        -0.056
                  IV
                                        (0.070)        (0.093)       (0.110)      (0.076)       (0.115)
Notes: The absolute impact is the effect of a change in tuition on the absolute rate of sending
scores to flagship institutions.
                 Table A.3: Estimated Impacts of Increases in Cost of Attendance
                              at Public Flagship Institutions (Logs)

                                                         OLS                        IV

                                            Aggregate
 ln(cost of attendance, lagged one year)                 -0.159                   -0.467
                                                        (0.062)                  (0.288)

 First Stage F-Statistic                                  ---                      4.87

                                         Triple Difference
 ln(cost of attendance)                                  -0.087                   -0.256
                                                        (0.136)                  (0.303)

 ln(cost of attendance*"aid eligible")                   -0.255                   -0.615
                                                        (0.080)                  (0.914)

 ln(cost of attendance*meet-full-need)                   -0.041                   -0.440
                                                        (0.104)                  (0.270)

 ln(COA*meet-full-need*"aid eligible")                   -0.182                   -0.329
                                                        (0.069)                  (0.806)

 Kleibergen and Paap Wald Rank F Test                       ---                     0.19
Notes: Estimates are obtained from a model of the form of equations 1 through 3 and based on
the authors' analysis of College Board data on scores sent to students' in-state flagship university
among those who took the SAT and sent scores to at least one college. Additional explanatory
variables include: the students' SAT math and verbal scores, maternal and paternal education
indicators, race/ethnicity, the one-year lagged county unemployment rate, and the fraction of
SAT takers in a student's high school graduating cohort who sent any scores to schools. A
student is "aid eligible" if she resides in a zip code with median family income of $75,000 or less
per year. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
