                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               RESOLVING THE EXCESSIVE TRADING PUZZLE:
      AN INTEGRATED APPROACH BASED ON SURVEYS AND TRANSACTIONS

                                         Hongqi Liu
                                        Cameron Peng
                                        Wei A. Xiong
                                         Wei Xiong

                                     Working Paper 26911
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26911


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020




We thank Jingxuan Chen and Zi Ye for able research assistance. We are grateful to Lawrence Jin,
and seminar participants at Baruch, Chapman, CUHK Shenzhen, Imperial College, LSE, and
Princeton for helpful feedback. Cameron Peng acknowledges financial support from the Paul
Woolley Centre at LSE. Wei A. Xiong acknowledges support from the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Project Number 71703104). The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Hongqi Liu, Cameron Peng, Wei A. Xiong, and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Resolving the Excessive Trading Puzzle: An Integrated Approach Based on Surveys and
Transactions
Hongqi Liu, Cameron Peng, Wei A. Xiong, and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 26911
March 2020
JEL No. G02,G41,G53

                                           ABSTRACT

The behavioral finance literature has provided over a dozen explanations for the so-called
excessive trading puzzle ­ retail investors trade a lot even though more trading hurts their
performance. It is difficult to use transaction data to differentiate these explanations as they share
similar predictions by design. To confront this challenge, we design and administer a nation-wide
survey among retail investors to elicit their responses to an exhaustive list of trading motives. By
merging survey responses with account-level transaction data, we validate survey responses with
actual trading behaviors and compare the power of survey-based and transaction-based measures
of trading motives. A horse race among survey-based trading motives suggests that
overconfidence in having information advantage and gambling preference quantitatively
dominate other explanations. Moreover, other popular arguments such as neglect of trading cost
do not contribute to excessive trading.


Hongqi Liu                                                      Wei A. Xiong
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen                       Shenzhen Stock Exchange
School of Management and Economics                              2012 Shennan Blvd.
Longgang, Shenzhen                                              Shenzhen
China                                                           China
hongqiliu@cuhk.edu.cn                                           wxiong@szse.cn

Cameron Peng                                                    Wei Xiong
London School of Economics                                      Princeton University
Houghton Street                                                 Department of Economics
London                                                          Bendheim Center for Finance
WC2A 2AE                                                        Princeton, NJ 08450
United Kingdom                                                  and NBER
c.peng9@lse.ac.uk                                               wxiong@princeton.edu
       The field of behavioral economics has made significant advancement over the last few decades
by bringing sharp insights from psychology to explain many anomalies in individuals' economic
and financial decision makings.1 A byproduct of such rapid development, however, is that we often
face multiple behavioral biases ­ perhaps too many ­ for explaining each of these anomalies. For
example, consider the excessive trading puzzle, which suggests that retail investors appear to be
trading too much: they perform poorly relative to the market index before fees, transaction cost
makes their performance even worse, and those who trade the most often perform the worst (Odean
1999; Barber and Odean 2000 and 2013). Motivated by these puzzling observations, the literature
has proposed a number of behavioral explanations, e.g., overconfidence, realization utility,
gambling preference, sensation seeking, social interaction, and low financial literacy,2 beyond
standard arguments such as portfolio rebalancing and liquidity needs. The large set of behavioral
explanations we face is not satisfying: it is unlikely that all explanations are equally important, and
it is also possible that certain explanations may be subsumed by others. To further develop this
field, it is important to consolidate the multiple explanations for each anomaly so that we can
eventually develop a unified conceptual framework based on a small number of biases to explain
a wide range of investor behaviors.

       This task of consolidation is challenging because many of the existing explanations, by design,
share similar predictions on a targeted anomaly. While some explanations may offer different
predictions on more subtle dimensions, the power from testing these subtle predictions is often
constrained by the availability of administrative data. It is even harder to compare multiple
explanations at the same time, as constructing a large number of empirical proxies is often difficult,
if not implausible, within a single dataset. In response to this challenge, the recent literature has
turned to survey-based approaches by having investors self-examine and report the drivers of their
trading and investment decisions, e.g., Greenwood and Shleifer (2014), Choi and Robertson (2019),
and Chinco, Hartzmark and Sussman (2019). Survey-based approaches can quickly collect
information on multiple explanations and therefore have the advantage of permitting horse races.
However, there are also common concerns about the validity of survey responses ­ that




1
    See DellaVigna (2009) and Barberis (2018) for recent reviews of the literature.
2
    A more comprehensive review of the literature can be found in Table 1.

                                                                                                     1
respondents may not truthfully report their answers and that, even if they do, their answers may
not translate into actions, e.g., Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001) and Cochrane (2011 and 2017).

    In this paper, we adopt a new approach to address the excessive trading puzzle ­ by combining
information from two different sources: surveys and transactions. This integrated approach
enables us to overcome the challenges faced by the existing approaches that are based on either
administrative data or surveys alone. First, the use of surveys allows us to elicit investor responses
to a large set of trading motives, making it possible to have a serious comparison among competing
explanations for excessive trading. Some of them, such as belief in having information advantage
and influence of social interaction, are inherently difficult to infer from administrative data, but
surveys allow investors to provide responses to these subtle trading motives through introspection
and self-examination. To our knowledge, this is the first attempt to measure and compare such a
wide range of trading motives. Second, by combining survey responses with transaction data, we
are able to directly verify that survey responses are largely consistent with the actual trading
patterns they are designed to capture. This consistency provides further justification ­ not only to
our analysis of the excessive trading puzzle but also to other studies that are based on surveys and
experiments ­ for the use of surveys.

    More specifically, we design and administer a nation-wide survey in China through the
Investor Education Center at the Shenzhen Stock Exchange. Respondents are randomized across
regions and incentivized with monetary rewards. The survey asks a series of multiple-choice
questions related to financial literacy, return expectations, and, most importantly, an exhaustive
list of trading motives. The survey took place in September 2018 and gathered responses from
more than 10,000 investors. An overview of the survey responses already reveals some novel
findings about Chinese retail investors. For instance, contrary to conventional wisdom, Chinese
retail investors in our sample exhibit a high level of financial literacy, one that is comparable to a
sophisticated subset of American retail investors. Moreover, while overconfidence, gambling
preference, and realization utility are common among Chinese retail investors, other trading
motives such as sensation seeking appear to be less prevalent.

    To understand what drives the variation of trading volume across investors, we merge the
survey with account-level transaction data at the Shenzhen Stock Exchange. This gives rise to a


                                                                                                    2
unique advantage of our setting: we are able to link an investor's survey responses her actual
trading behavior and examine their consistency. We provide four pieces of evidence to show that
survey responses are consistent with actions: 1) survey-based measures of extrapolation predict
the tendency to buy stocks with prices that have recently gone up, 2) survey-based measures of
gambling preference predict the tendency to buy lottery-like stocks, 3) survey-based measures of
risk aversion are negatively associated with holding more volatile stocks, and 4) survey-based
measures of return expectations are positively associated with changes in stock holdings.

    After validating survey responses, we examine the relationship between survey-based trading
motives and turnover. As a baseline, we first regress turnover on each trading motive in univariate
regressions. This exercise allows us to confirm that some of the previous explanations for
excessive trading also hold true in our setting. We then examine the relative importance of each
trading motive in a horse race by including all of them as explanatory variables. Comparing the
horse-race results to the baseline reveals a number of novel findings.

    First, two trading motives stand out in the horse race to quantitatively dominate others:
gambling preference and the belief of having information advantage. For both trading motives, the
explanatory power is sizable: while the standard deviation of monthly turnover across all investors
in our sample is 126%, gambling preference can explain up to 21% and the belief of having
information advantage can explain up to 25%. These two channels contribute to an annualized
transaction fee of 0.6% and 0.7%, respectively, implying substantial investment consequences
borne by retail investors who display either or both of the two trading motives.

    Second, we provide further evidence in support of these two channels. In particular, we find
that, consistent with gambling preference, gamblers trade smaller, high-beta, more volatile, and
more positively skewed stocks. At the same time, the stocks they buy subsequently perform worse.
Furthermore, we find that investors who report to have an information advantage do not deliver
better performance in their trading. This suggests that their belief in having information advantage
is unwarranted: they are over-confident about their own information.

    Third, several trading motives turn from significant in univariate regressions to insignificant
in the horse race. For instance, we have constructed two measures of sensation seeking, one for
novelty seeking and the other for volatility seeking. While both measures are significantly positive

                                                                                                  3
in univariate regressions, in the horse race their significance is largely subsumed by other trading
motives. In comparison, the coefficients of gambling preference and overconfidence in having
information advantage are essentially unchanged across specifications. This contrast highlights the
appeal and need of a horse race: by having an apples-to-apples comparison across a large set of
behavioral biases, we can narrow down to the few that are the most important.

    Fourth, in both the baseline regressions and the horse race, we report a number of "null" results
for some prelavent explantions of excessive trading. In our setting, low financial literacy, social
interaction, and neglect of trading cost do not appear to contribute to excessive trading. Perhaps
the most consistent, yet surprising set of results concerns neglect of trading cost. We have
constructed three different measures for neglect of trading cost, but none of them can explain
turnover with the "correct" sign: the coefficients are either insignificant or marginally significant
with the opposite sign. Furthermore, in a randomized experiment, we give half of the respondents
a "nudge" to reduce trading by having them read a message with pictures illustrating how excessive
trading hurts their investment performance due to transaction cost. The treatment group, however,
do not exhibit any difference in turnover after the "nudge", further questioning the role of neglect
of trading cost in driving excessive trading.

    Our analysis above highlights how surveys could help consolidate the large set of behavioral
explanations for excessive trading. However, for a given explanation, the survey-based measure
may be more noisy and have less explanatory power than the corresponding transaction-based
measure. To make this comparison, we construct a measure for gambling preference based on
transactions, which we call gambling behavior. Specifically, following the approach used by
Kumar (2009), we measure an investor's gambling behavior by examining the lottery-like features
of the stocks she tends to buy. Indeed, compared to the survey-based gambling preference, the
transaction-based gambling behavior quadruples in its explanatory power for turnover. However,
when regressing it on other survey-based trading motives, we find that, while the transaction-based
gambling behavior is positively associated with the survey-based gambling preference, it is also
correlated with other alternative trading motives. This contrast nicely highlights the pros and cons
of these two different approaches. On the one hand, when carefully designed, surveys can provide
a direct measure of a specific trading motive, but, as discussed by Bertrand and Mullainathan
(2001), they may also be subject to measurement noise at the individual level and are thus less

                                                                                                   4
powerful. On the other hand, although transaction-based measures can be more powerful in
explaining the observed investor behavior, they may simultaneously capture multiple trading
motives and are less reliable in isolating a particular economic mechanism. By combining these
two methods together, our integrated approach offers a more powerful tool to consolidate the large
number of behavioral biases/mechanisms offered by the behavioral finance literature.

     As reviewed by Barber and Odean (2013), there is an extensive literature that analyzes the
excessive trading puzzle from both theoretical and empirical sides. We will systematically
introduce these mechanisms and the related studies in Section 1.3. Our paper differs from these
prior studies in its scope and its approach. While most of the existent papers focus on one or two
trading motives, we examine a large number of mechanisms at the same time, by directly
measuring these motives through investors' own perspectives rather than indirectly inferring from
administrative data. This horse race allows us to not only confirm or reject certain mechanisms but
also to speak to each mechanism's relative importance.

     Several studies have also combined survey data with administrative data to study the excessive
trading puzzle, e.g., Dorn and Huberman (2005), Glaser and Weber (2007), and Dorn and
Sengmueller (2009). Each of these studies elicits responses about one or two trading motives and
then examines whether survey responses can explain the respondents' trading or portfolio choices.3
In the absence of a horse race among different mechanisms, significant effects associated with
survey response to one mechanism may be a reflection of other mechanisms, as in the case of
sensation seeking in our analysis. Furthermore, by systematically comparing survey responses and
transaction data, our analysis is able to demonstrate that, while survey responses may be noisy at
the individual level, they are consistent with actual trading behavior at the aggregate level. In this
regard, our paper shares a similar theme as Giglio et al. (2019), which studies the relationship
between portfolio decision and return expectations by combining survey expectations with mutual
fund holdings data at Vanguard. However, our paper is different in several important dimensions:
research questions (trading volume vs. equity holdings), survey designs (trading motives vs. return
expectations), and transaction data (transactions of individual stocks vs. holdings of mutual funds).


3
  Specifically, Dorn and Huberman (2005) focus on risk aversion and perceived financial knowledge, Glaser and
Weber (2007) examine two forms of overconfidence, over-placement and miscalibration, and Dorn and Sengmueller
(2009) aim at sensation seeking.

                                                                                                           5
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 1, we illustrate the survey design, the
procedure to collect survey responses, and some stylized facts about Chinese retail investors based
on the survey's results. In Section 2, by merging the survey data with transaction data, we validate
that survey responses are consistent with trading behavior. We then compare a large number of
survey-based trading motives in a horse race. In Section 3, we extend our empirical analysis by
providing additional evidence on a selected number of trading motives. In Section 4, we discuss
the pros and cons of survey-based and transaction-based measures. We conclude in Section 5.


1. The Survey

    In this section, we first elaborate on our survey design, and then explain the procedure of
survey distribution and data collection. Finally, we discuss some basic facts about the trading
motives of Chinese retail investors based on the survey's results.


1.1. Survey Design

    The survey is designed to test and differentiate among a large set of trading motives, which
provides theoretical foundations for many existing theories of trading volume. A summary of all
the trading motives we consider can be found in Table 1. For each motive, we phrase the
corresponding question(s) to map as closely as possible to the underlying concept, and we do so
often by going back to the original paper that proposes the particular motive. A trading motive
may take different forms of representation. For instance, overconfidence comes in at least two
forms: over-placement, i.e., people have overly rosy views of their abilities relative to other people,
and miscalibration of uncertainty, i.e., people are too confident in the accuracy of their beliefs. In
such cases, we include at least one question for each form. A detailed description of how we design
each question can be found in the Appendix.

    Ideally, for each trading motive, we would like the survey question(s) to capture all aspects of
the motive, but we are also concerned that a long and complex survey may confuse respondents or
discourage them from answering the questions truthfully. To ensure the quality of survey responses,
we design all the questions to be multiple-choice so that respondents do not have to fill in an
answer themselves. More specifically, we include two types of qualitative questions. The first


                                                                                                     6
("agreement") type asks respondents whether they agree or disagree with a certain statement that
describes a particular trading motive, and the second ("frequency") type asks respondents how
often they consider a particular motive when they trade. For the agreement type of questions,
respondents can choose one from the following seven options: "strongly agree", "agree", "neutral",
"disagree", "strongly disagree", "do not know", and "decline to answer". For the frequency type,
they also have seven options: "always", "often", "sometimes", "rarely", "never", "do not know",
and "decline to answer". We also hope to obtain quantitative answers for certain trading motives
(e.g., estimates of transaction fees to measure neglect of trading cost). In such cases, we provide
specific ranges of value for the respondents to choose from.

    It is worth noting that, while we ask the respondents to assess whether a trading motive matters
to their trading or how often they consider a certain motive, we do not ask them to evaluate the
relevance of that motive to their frequency of trading ­ our subject of interest ­ relative to other
motives. This is different from the approach taken by Choi and Robertson (2019). In their survey,
they ask correspondents how well a theory describes the way they make decisions on, for instance,
what fraction of their portfolio to invest in equities and whether to own any stocks in their
portfolios. In other words, they ask investors themselves to evaluate and compare the relevance of
different theories in describing their decision making. In contrast, we do not delegate this task to
the respondents but keep it to ourselves ­ later by regressing individual-level turnover on a variety
of different trading motives. This is made possible by the fact that we are able to trace a
respondent's survey responses to her actual trading behavior.

    Moreover, our empirical strategy addresses a number of methodological concerns raised by
Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001) about the use of subjective survey data in economic analysis.
They argue that survey responses are noisy at the individual level due to various factors ­ e.g.,
white noise, phrasing and ordering of the questions, and cognitive dissonance ­ which can
significantly contaminate the inference process. For instance, differences in responses across time
to the same question may capture time fixed effects (e.g., overall market sentiment), whereas
differences in responses across questions may be attributed to the phrasing and ordering of the
survey questions. As a result, they conclude that changes in survey responses "do not appear useful
in explaining changes in behavior" and recommend that survey responses are useful as explanatory



                                                                                                   7
variables for "explaining differences in behavior across individuals". This is precisely the approach
we take in this paper. We return to issues related to measurement errors in Section 4.

    The survey contains four main parts. The first part contains eight questions measuring
financial literacy. These questions include the classic "big three" questions, e.g., Lusardi and
Mitchell (2007, 2011), as well as several other widely used questions to measure financial literacy.
At the end of this section, we also ask respondents to self-assess how many questions they have
answered correctly. This allows us to construct a measure for overconfidence based on financial
literacy. The second part represents the core of the survey, where we ask respondents to answer a
series of questions related to various trading motives. We postpone a more detailed discussion
about this part to Section 1.3. The third part asks about their basic demographic characteristics,
including name, gender, date of birth, province, city, education, income, wealth, phone number,
brokerage firm, and broker branch. While many of these variables serve as control variables in
subsequent analysis, they also provide crucial identifying information for us to locate each
correspondent in the transaction database. Finally, for a randomly selected group of respondents
(the treatment group), we also include a fourth "nudge" section by presenting an extra picture that
illustrates how excessive trading may negatively affect their portfolio returns by incurring a large
transaction cost. We discuss the results of this experiment in more detail in Section 3.3.


1.2. Data

    We administered the survey through the Investor Education Center of the Shenzhen Stock
Exchange (SZSE). As part of its regular operation, the Investor Education Center surveys domestic
retail investors on an annual basis to assess their financial literacy and trading motives. In 2018,
we began to collaborate with the center to redesign the survey with the aforementioned research
question in mind. Our target sample size was 10,000, a size that provides sufficient statistical
power while remains feasible to implement. To ensure that the survey sample was nationally
representative, we randomized across branch offices of China's ten largest brokers. Specifically,
we selected 500 branch offices across 29 provinces (and regions) and required each branch office
to collect at least 20 valid responses. The number of branch offices allocated to each province
(region) was proportional to the trading volume from that province (region) in 2017.



                                                                                                   8
     The survey took place in September 2018, and respondents were given a total of two weeks
to complete the survey. 4 A valid response must be completed within 30 minutes. Respondents
could open the survey using their personal computers or on their smartphones.5 We collected an
initial sample of 12,856 respondents, exceeding the target sample size of 10,000 by a fair margin.
Table 2 reports the distribution of respondents across brokers and provinces. As designed, the
respondents are evenly distributed across the ten brokers, with only slight variation: Guotai Junan
Securities is more represented (11.8%) while China Galaxy Securities is less represented (8.2%).
In terms of geographic variation, areas that are more financially developed (e.g., Guangdong,
Zhejiang, Jiangsu, and Shanghai) are more represented in our sample.

     Table 3 reports a more detailed summary of the sample's demographic characteristics. Overall,
the sample is balanced in gender and highly educated; more than half of the respondents have a
college or higher degree. Respondents are primarily middle-aged: almost half of them are between
30 to 50. They are also quite wealthy: the median annual income is around 200,000 RMB and the
median household wealth is around 500,000 RMB, both far exceeding the national median. Overall,
our sample represents a relatively sophisticated, wealthy set of retail investors, which means that
any results we find may not be simply interpreted as an average effect. Instead, to the extent that
rich and sophisticated investors are less affected by behavioral biases in their portfolio decision
making, our results may serve as a lower bound.

     Finally, while we feel confident that the use of monetary incentives and the brand names of
our respective institutions should on average invite high-quality responses, we nevertheless cannot
avoid having a few respondents who quickly clicked through the survey without spending much
time on the questions, especially given the survey's large scale. We eliminate these responses by
examining the total amount of time spent on the survey. Figure 1 plots the distribution: it takes a

4
  The distribution of the survey proceeded in the following way. The SZSE center first distributed the link to the survey
to each broker's parent office. After receiving the link, the parent office then distributed it to the pre-selected branches,
where the local client manager then redistributed the survey to their clients (investors). While we do not observe direct
conversations between client managers and investors, we suspect much of the communication happened via phone
calls and WeChat messages. Once an investor had completed the survey, the client manager recorded down her name,
phone number, and the name of the branch. This information was then sent back to us for verification purposes.
5
  To boost response rate, we put up the logos of both SZSE and Shenzhen Finance Institute on the front page of the
survey. We also explicitly included a confidentiality agreement to make respondents feel more secure about their
answers. Finally, we used monetary rewards as incentives. Specifically, among those who have completed the survey,
20 would be randomly selected to receive a gift card worth 500 RMB (around 80 USD) and 1000 to receive a gift card
worth 50 RMB (around 8 USD).

                                                                                                                           9
median investor about 8 minutes to complete the survey, and 95% of respondents finish within 20
minutes. When we look into the relationship between time spent on the survey and financial
literacy score, we find that respondents who spend more than 3 minutes consistently score above
5 (out of 8). However, the score drops sharply for those who spend less than 3 minutes, suggesting
that they may have shirked. In subsequent analysis, we dropped these observations, which reduces
our sample size to 11,268.


1.3. Survey Results

Financial literacy

     Table 4 reports the summary statistics for the eight questions on financial literacy. In addition
to the classic "big three" questions on interest rates, inflation, and diversification, as in Lusardi
and Mitchell (2014), we also include five other questions that capture additional dimensions of
financial literacy (or investment literacy). These questions are related to the concept of risks and
volatility (Question 4), the definitions of shareholders, the price-to-earnings ratio, and mutual
funds (Question 5, 7, and 8, respectively), and the relationship between interest rates and bond
prices (Question 6).

     Overall, respondents exhibit a very high level of financial literacy. Panel A shows that, out of
all the eight questions, seven of them have a correct rate above 75%. The only exception is the
question about the relationship between interest rates and bond prices, with a correct rate of 55%.
Panel B shows that more than 80% of respondents correctly answered at least six questions. In fact,
one-third of them answered all eight questions correctly. Panel B shows the distribution of self-
assessed scores, which has a similar distribution to that of the actual scores. Therefore, contrary to
the stereotype that Chinese retail investors are mostly "mom-and-pop" investors who know very
little about financial markets, investors in our sample display a high level of financial literacy.6

Overconfidence


6
  Lusardi and Mitchell (2014) show that among eight countries including Germany, Netherlands, and U.S., the fraction
of respondents who correctly answer all "big three" questions ranges from 3% (Russia) to 57% (Germany). In contrast,
70.4% of investors correctly answer all "big three" questions in our survey. One possible reason for this difference is
that their surveys typically draw respondents from the general population, whereas ours is among investors already
participating in the stock market.

                                                                                                                   10
    Overconfidence is an important concept in behavioral finance and has been adopted by various
models to explain a wide range of anomalies in financial markets, including excessive trading, use
of leverage, price momentum and reversals, and asset bubbles, e.g., Kyle and Wang (1997), Daniel,
Hirshleifer, and Subramanyam (1998), Odean (1998), Gervais and Odean (2001), Scheinkman and
Xiong (2003), and Barber et al. (2019). The literature has also suggested that overconfidence may
adopt several closely related, albeit distinct, forms: over-placement of ability, miscalibration of
uncertainty, and over-precision of information. We have designed questions to capture each of
these forms.

    Over-placement of one's own ability is perhaps the most direct form of overconfidence. We
construct two measures of this form, one by the difference between self-assessed and actual
performance in 2017 and the other by the difference between the self-assessed financial literacy
score and the actual score. A similar measure is also used by Dorn and Huberman (2005) and
Barber et al. (2019) to measure perceived financial knowledge. In Table 5, Panel A reports the
summary statistics for both measures. In constructing over-placement of performance, self-
assessed performance is one's self-reported rank of her investment performance among all
investors in 2017; actual performance is measured by the actual rank in the population. Since we
have not yet merged survey responses with transaction data, Panel A only reports the distribution
of self-assessed performance and suggests that the respondents are rather optimistic about their
performance: almost two thirds of them believe that their performance is better than average, while
only a quarter believe that their performance is below average. Panel A also reports the second
measure, called over-placement of literacy. Overall, its distribution is slightly tilted towards the
left, suggesting that, on average, respondents do not overestimate their level of financial
sophistication. This is perhaps not that surprising given the sample's overall high level of financial
literacy.

    Overconfidence may also show up as miscalibration of uncertainty, as suggested by Alpert
and Raiffa (1982). Ben-David, Graham, and Harvey (2013) show that 80% confidence intervals
provided by firm executives for the subsequent year's stock market return only cover 36% of the
realizations and use the surveyed confidence interval to measure the executives' overconfidence.
We include a similar measure of miscalibration by the difference between the estimates of upside
returns and downside returns. This measure is based on two questions where we ask investors to

                                                                                                   11
estimate how much the stock market will go up (down) with 10% probability within the next year;
the difference between these two estimates gives the 80% confidence interval. As reported by
Panel A of Table 5, while a rational benchmark suggests that the upside and downside returns
should exhibit a difference of 76%, the majority of the respondents report a much narrower range.
In aggregate, we find evidence for over-placement of performance and miscalibration, but not for
over-placement of literacy.

    Overconfidence may also show up as over-precision about one's own information. We will
describe this measure slightly later when we discuss information related questions.

Extrapolation

    The behavioral finance literature has also emphasized the tendency for investors to extrapolate
past returns as a key driver of stock return predictability, e.g., Barberis, Shleifer and Vishny (1998),
Barberis et al. (2018), and Jin and Sui (2019), and excessive trading, e.g., Hong and Stein (1999)
and Barberis et al. (2018). In Table 5, Panel B reports the summary statistics for two questions
concerning whether investors form expectations about future returns based on past returns. These
two questions elicit investors' extrapolative beliefs in two scenarios. In the first scenario, a stock's
price keeps going up, and in the second scenario, a stock's price keeps going down. Respondents
are then asked whether they believe the stock's price will rise or fall in the future. In both scenarios,
more respondents believe in price continuation than reversal, suggesting that Chinese investors on
average exhibit extrapolative beliefs.

Neglect of trading cost

    Barber and Odean (2000) and Barber, Lee, Liu and Odean (2009) show that trading causes
retail investors in the U.S. and Taiwan to underperform relative to the overall market and more
than 60% of their under-performance is directly due to commissions and transaction taxes. While
overconfidence and other behavioral biases may cause investors to trade despite the trading cost,
these findings also suggest the possibility that those investors who trade a lot may have neglected
the various fees and taxes associated with trading. There are at least two possible sources for
neglect of trading cost. The first one is simply due to underestimation ­ investors systematically
underestimate the fee rate due to their lack of financial sophistication. The second one is due to


                                                                                                      12
(lack of) "salience" (Bordalo et al. 2012): even if investors do have the full knowledge about
trading cost, it still matters very little to their trading because the amount associated with each
transaction is small and negligible.7

     To capture these two forms of neglect of trading cost, we have constructed three different
measures. Panel C of Table 5 reports the summary statistics. First, we directly ask investors to
estimate the total transaction cost associated with a round-trip buy and sell at 10,000 RMB. The
results show that respondents significantly underestimate trading cost: while on average, such a
round-trip transaction should incur a fee of 15 to 26 RMB, depending on the fee rate charged by
the particular broker, almost 70% of the respondents report an estimate below the lower bound.
The second question asks how often an investor considers transaction cost when she trades stocks.
Similarly, more than half of the respondents say that they never or rarely do so. The third question
targets the implicit cost of the bid-ask spread by asking whether the respondent agrees that bid-ask
spread is a form of trading cost. Around 60% of respondents agree while 23% disagree. Overall,
there is strong evidence that retail investors in China underestimate or neglect trading cost.

     Finally, if neglect of trading cost is due to (the lack of) "salience", then presenting transaction
cost in a more salient manner or more frequently reminding investors of their existence may lead
investors to trade less. To test this hypothesis, we give a random sample of respondents such a
"nudge" and compare their turnover to other investors before and after the survey. For the treated
group, we increase the salience of trading cost by presenting it in annualized terms and reminding
them about the negative impact of excessive trading to their overall performance. We discuss these
results later in Section 3.3.

Gambling preference

     Barberis and Huang (2008) show that the cumulative prospect theory of Tversky and
Kahneman (1992) can lead investors to have a preference for gambling stocks, i.e., stocks with
positively skewed returns. In particular, this gambling preference is driven by the so-called
probability weighting, through which investors over-weight the probability of tail events. Kumar

7
  Several papers show that manipulating the salience of a stock's purchase price affects the level of the disposition
effect (e.g. Frydman and Rangel 2014, Birru 2015, Frydman and Wang 2019). Other papers find that manipulating
the salience of taxes affects consumer responsiveness to taxes (e.g., Chetty, Looney, and Kroft 2009, Taubinsky and
Rees-Jones 2017).

                                                                                                                 13
(2009) and Boyer, Mitton, and Vorkink (2010) provide empirical evidence supporting the presence
of such gambling preference. These existing studies tend to focus on the implication of gambling
preference for stock selection. To the extent that gambling stocks change over time due to
fluctuations of volatility and tail distribution of individual stocks, gambling preference may also
contribute to excessive trading by leading some investors to chase gambling stocks and thus trade
with other investors (Barber and Odean 2000).

    In Table 6, Panel A presents the responses on two questions on gambling preference. The first
question asks whether the respondent aims to select the few blockbusters stocks so that he or she
could get rich quickly. This question deliberately tones down the fact that picking a blockbuster is
a small probability event. In contrast, the second question contains a more objective description
by asking whether the respondent views trading stocks as buying lotteries in that they are willing
to exchange small losses for the small probability of a big gain. These two questions reveal not
only the respondent's gambling preference but also her assessment of tail probability. According
to the cumulative prospect theory, investors may over-weight small probability events such as
choosing future blockbusters. Thus, loosely speaking, the first question aims to identify
"behavioral" gamblers ­ those who overweight the small probability of a big gain, while the second
question measure "rational" gamblers ­ those who acknowledge that a big gain is a rare event.
Overall, for each question, about one third of the respondents agree or strongly agree with that
statement. In what follows, we differentiate these two questions by labeling the first one as
gambling preference with probability weighting and the second one as without probability
weighting.

Realization utility

    Shefrin and Statman (1985), Odean (1999), Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001), and Grinblatt and
Han (2005) argue that trading can arise as a result of the widely observed disposition effect. In
order to provide a robust explanation to the disposition effect, Barberis and Xiong (2009, 2012)
and Ingersoll and Jin (2013) propose a theory of realization utility, which posits that trading causes
investors to realize enjoyment from selling winning stocks and pains from liquidating losing stocks.
Frydman et al. (2014) provide evidence from neural data to support the relevance of realization
utility in financial decision making.


                                                                                                   14
    In Table 6, Panel B reports the summary statistics for two questions on realization utility.
Similar to the questions on extrapolative beliefs, these two questions ask respondents to make
investment decisions under two hypothetical scenarios. In the first scenario, the respondent is given
a stock whose price has gone up since purchase and is then asked which of the two actions would
make her happier: selling the stock or holding on to it. In the second scenario, the respondent
instead faces a stock whose price has gone down since purchase and is asked which action would
make her more painful. According to realization utility, selling winners is more pleasing than
holding on to them while selling losers is more painful. Survey responses for the two questions are
mixed. In the first question, consistent with realization utility, more respondents say selling
winners makes them happier. In the second question, however, more respondents say they find
holding losers more painful. In what follows, we differentiate these two questions by labeling the
first one as realization utility for winners and the second one as for losers.

Sensation seeking

    Grinblatt and Keloharju (2009) argue that sensation seeking, a measurable psychological trait
linked to gambling, risky driving, drug abuse, and a host of other behaviors, is an important
motivation for trading. Dorn and Sengmueller (2009) provide supportive evidence that sensation
seeking drives the trading of retail investors. Brown et al. (2018) further argue that sensation
seeking may even affect the trading of hedge fund managers. We have designed two questions to
capture two distinct dimensions of sensation seeking: novelty seeking, which says that people
derive utility from doing something new, and volatility seeking, which says that people derive
utility from doing something risky. In Table 6, Panel C reports the summary statistics for these two
questions.   Overall, answers to these two questions exhibit a similar distribution, but the
correspondents in general do not exhibit a strong tendency of sensation seeking.

Information

    Economists have long argued that access to private information is a key reason for investors
to trade in financial markets. However, the classic no-trade theorem, e.g., Milgrom and Stokey
(1982), posits that when all investors are rational and share the same prior beliefs, asymmetric
information cannot cause them to trade due to the concern of adverse selection. Instead, theories
of financial market trading with asymmetric information, e.g., Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) and

                                                                                                  15
Kyle (1985), typically involve the presence of noise traders, who may trade at losses, so that
rational traders may trade despite the potential concern of adverse selection.

    Are retail investors in China rational investors with genuine information advantage or noise
traders who believe they hold superior information even though they do not? We have included
two questions in the survey to elicit a respondent's perception of her information. The first question
measures one's belief in having information advantage by asking how often they believe they
know stocks better than other investors. A positive response to this question may be associated
with genuine information advantage, but it could also reflect misperceived information advantage
due to overconfidence. This latter possibility potentially reflects a tendency for investors to
exaggerate their own information but not the information of others. Various theoretical models
have used this tendency, e.g., Kyle and Wang (1997), Odean (1998), and Scheinkman and Xiong
(2003), to specify investor overconfidence, which is the third form of overconfidence that we
mentioned earlier. In our empirical analysis, we can differentiate genuine information advantage
from perceived information advantage by examining the respondent's actual trading performance.

    The second question measures one's fear/alert of potential adverse selection concerns by
asking how often they worry that others know stocks better than themselves do. This question
potentially measures dismissiveness about others' information, a form of investor bias that offers
distinct implications from overconfidence for equilibrium prices and trading volume (Eyser, Rabin
and Vayanos 2019). Panel A of Table 7 shows that about 18% of the respondents say that they
often or always believe they have an information advantage, while 47% of the respondents never
or rarely believe that they face an information disadvantage.

Social interaction

    Shiller (1984) argues that investing in speculative assets is a social activity, because investors
enjoy discussing investments and gossiping about others' successes or failures in investing. As a
result, investors' trading behavior would be influenced by social movements. Hong, Kubik, and
Stein (2004) provide evidence that stock-market participation is influenced by social interaction,
as social households, those who interact more with neighbors, are more likely to invest in the stock
market than non-social households. Han, Hirshleifer, and Walden (2019) develop a model to show
that social interaction exacerbates excessive trading among investors.

                                                                                                   16
    We have designed two questions to capture social interactions, one asking how often the
respondent is influenced by family, friends, and other acquaintances and the other asking how
often the respondent is influenced by her investment advisors. Panel B of Table 7 shows that while
around 14% of the respondents say that they are often or always influenced by their family, friends,
or other acquaintances, only 8% say their investment advisors often or always have an influence
on their trading.

Other trading motives

    In Table 7, Panel C reports the responses on two questions related to liquidity needs and
rebalancing motives. Overall, only about 11% of the correspondents say portfolio rebalancing
often or always affects their trading, whereas about 17% say liquidity needs often or always affect
their trading. Consistent with prior literature, investors do not appear to be considering these
rational trading motives.

    Panel D of Table 7 reports three standard questions that we use to measure risk aversion.
Following Lusardi and Mitchell (2011), we elicit investors' risk attitude by asking if they would
be willing to give up their current stable jobs for other jobs with higher expected income but also
higher uncertainty in three hypothetical scenarios. While about 34% of the investors are unwilling
to take the job with the slightest risk, 26% of the investors are willing to take the riskiest job.

Comparison with U.S. investors

    While our study primarily focuses on using survey responses to understand why Chinese retail
investors trade so much, it is of general interest to know how U.S. retail investors ­ who are often
believed to be more sophisticated than their Chinese counterparts ­ would respond to our survey.
To do such comparison, we translate the original survey into English with slight modifications
(tailored to American investors) and run the survey on Amazon MTurk among a small sample of
400 U.S. investors. On the one hand, we find that U.S. investors care more about trading cost, rely
more on their investment advisors, and are more alert to being at an information disadvantage.
These differences may be attributed to several features of the U.S. stock market: higher transaction
fees charged by brokers, the popularity of investment advisors, and the dominant role played by
institutional investors. On the other hand, contrary to conventional wisdom, U.S. retail investors


                                                                                                      17
exhibit stronger biases on several fronts: they are more subject to realization utility, display a
stronger preference for gambling, and are more prone to sensation seeking. A more detailed
discussion about these differences is included in the Appendix.


2. A Horse Race Based on Survey Responses

     In this section, we use survey responses to differentiate various explanations for the excessive
trading puzzle. We start by merging the respondents' survey responses with their transaction data
in Section 2.1. In Section 2.2, we address some of the common concerns associated with surveys
by showing that survey responses are consistent with actual trading behavior. In Section 2.3, we
examine all trading motives separately to understand each one's explanatory power for turnover.
Finally, in Section 2.4, we run a horse race among all trading motives to see which ones stand out
in a multivariate setting.


2.1. Merging Surveys with Transactions

     In the third part of our survey, we ask respondents to provide key demographic information
including name, date of birth, broker name, and branch name. This allows us to uniquely identify
a substantial fraction of the respondents in the transaction database of the Shenzhen Stock
Exchange. Specifically, out of the 11,268 respondents left in our sample, we are able to uniquely
identify 6,013 investors.8 We narrow our focus to investors who were active around the time of
our survey. Our transaction data sample covers from January 2018 to June 2019, which nicely
splits around the time of our survey in September 2018. We further require an investor to have
held at least one stock in the Shenzhen Stock Exchange during the sample period to be included in
subsequent analysis.9 This further reduces the sample size to 4,423 ­ our main sample.

     Table 8 compares the average characteristics between the main sample and the population of
Chinese investors, where the population's characteristics are obtained using the centralized


8
  In the Appendix, we report the distribution of the subset of correspondents across various demographic groups and
show that it is almost identical to that of the original sample.
9
  An investor may hold non stock position in the sample due to various reasons: they could be holding mutual funds
or ETFs, or they could be holding stocks trading at the Shanghai Stock Exchange, etc. As a robustness check, we also
include investors who took the survey but didn't hold any stocks during the period from 2018:01 to 2019:06 and code
their turnover as zero. Including these observations does not change our results; see the Appendix for more detail.

                                                                                                                18
database at the Shenzhen Stock Exchange. While over 70% of the investor population is male, the
gender ratio is much more balanced in our main sample with 54% male investors. Consistent with
our previous discussion, investors in our main sample are slightly younger, more educated, and
have a shorter investment experience than the national averages. In terms of trading characteristics,
our main sample has a larger account size, slightly lower turnover rate, and better performance.
Therefore, while our main sample's distribution tilts towards the more sophisticated investors, it
nonetheless largely captures the overall trading patterns of the investor population.

     To make different trading motives comparable with each other in the subsequent analysis, we
encode all the measures of trading motives into dummy variables. A detailed description about the
construction of these dummy variables can be found in the Appendix. In a nutshell, for the
agreement type of questions, we code "strongly agree" and "agree" as 1 and other answers as 0;
for the frequency type of questions, we code "always" and "often" as 1 and other answers as 0;
and for quantitative questions, we typically use zero as the cut-off value. Table 9 reports the
summary statistics of these dummy variables and their pairwise correlations. It is worth noting that
for questions targeted at the same trading motive, their paiwise correlation is generally high, which
suggests that their responses are internally consistent.


2.2. Validating Survey Responses

     There are several widely-held concerns in using survey response to test economic hypotheses.
First, respondents may not take the survey seriously and truthfully report what they really think or
believe. Second, even if their responses are truthful, they may not act in a way that is consistent
with their responses. Indeed, because most existent papers are limited to the use of either survey
data or transaction data, a systematic test of the external validity of survey responses of investors
is still missing from the literature.10

     Ideally, we would like to validate responses to all of the questions in the survey, but this is
neither efficient nor plausible due to the nature of some questions. For instance, while the survey
has several questions on sources of information and the influence of social interaction, it is difficult,


10
  A notable exception is Giglio et al. (2019), who examine the relationship between survey expectations and mutual
fund holdings and find that survey expectations do affect the respondents' mutual fund holdings. In contrast, the scope
of our analysis is not only confined to survey expectations but also a variety of other types of survey responses.

                                                                                                                   19
if not impossible, to infer these aspects from transaction data without any additional administrative
data and/or making strong assumptions. Given these limitations, we validate survey responses only
for questions with an empirical counterpart that can be constructed from the transaction data that
we have access to. This set of questions concerns extrapolation, gambling preference, risk aversion,
and return expectation. In addition to having straightforward implications about trading behavior,
they span a wide range of trading motives ­ belief formation, preferences, and return expectations.
For brevity, in the main part of this paper, we are primarily concerned with gambling preference
and extrapolative beliefs. We briefly discuss other results and include more details in the Appendix.

Gambling preference

    We start by measuring gambling behavior from transaction data. Gambling preference
motivates investors to buy assets with positively skewed returns. While it seems straightforward
to measure gambling behavior based on return skewness, the literature, e.g., Kumar (2009), argues
that return skewness is difficult to compute and is not a metric sufficiently intuitive to investors.
Instead, salient stock characteristics such as realizations of extreme returns would attract investors
with gambling preference. This argument is particularly compelling as it is well connected with
our earlier discussion that gambling preference is originated from an investor's overweighting of
tail outcomes, e.g., Barberis and Huang (2008). Realizations of extreme returns would likely
stimulate an investor with gambling preference to extrapolate extreme returns into the future.

    Motivated by this argument, we take advantage of a unique regulation in the Chinese stock
market: the daily price limits rule. This rule imposes that daily stock returns of individual stocks
cannot exceed 10%, and we use the total count of up-limit hits (i.e., the number of days with prices
hitting the upper-price limit) in a preceding period to proxy for a stock's positive return skewness.
As hitting the daily upper-price limit puts a stock in the headlines of the stock exchange, this event
is highly salient and attracts attention from investors. Thus, we measure an investor's gambling
behavior by the volume-weighted count of up-limit hits based on all the stocks she bought over
either a month or a quarter.

    Table 10 reports the results when regressing transaction-based gambling behavior on survey-
based gambling preference. Panel A uses the total count of up-limit hits over the preceding one-
month horizon, while Panel B uses one quarter as the horizon. Recall that we include two survey

                                                                                                   20
questions of gambling preference, one without reminding the respondent that large stock returns
have small probabilities and thus capturing gambling preference with probability weighting, while
the other specifically reminding her so and thus capturing gambling preference without probability
weighting. Interestingly, we find that survey responses to the first question have a significant,
positive correlation with gambling behavior in transaction data. In other words, those who report
to have gambling preference (with probability weighting) exhibit stronger gambling behavior. On
average, the stocks they purchase have a larger count of up-limit hits by around 0.1 (0.2) times in
the preceding month (quarter), and this relationship holds in both the pre-survey and post-survey
periods. In contrast, the relationship between gambling preference (without probability weighting)
and gambling behavior is much weaker, suggesting that gamblers are precisely those who
incorrectly assess the tail probabilities of large stock returns.

Extrapolation

    Next, we validate that survey-based measures of extrapolative beliefs are consistent with
actual extrapolative behavior. Similar to before, we measure extrapolative behavior as the volume-
weighted past return among all the stocks bought by an investor. Table 11 reports the results when
regressing transaction-based extrapolative behavior on survey-based extrapolative beliefs, where,
in measuring extrapolative behavior, Panel A uses past one-month return and Panel B uses past
one-quarter return. Indeed, investors who report to have extrapolative beliefs exhibit stronger
extrapolative behavior: on average, the stocks they purchase experience 1% higher returns in the
preceding month and more than 2% higher returns in the preceding quarter, and this holds in both
pre-survey and post-survey samples. Moreover, both measures of extrapolation ­ one concerning
an upward trend and the one concerning a downward trend ­ have equally strong explanatory
power for extrapolative behavior, which further validates the robustness of survey responses.

Risk aversion and survey expectations

    We perform two additional exercises to validate survey-based measures of risk aversion and
return expectations, using a method similar to before. First, we find that, consistent with Dorn and
Huberman (2005), survey-based measures of risk aversion are negatively associated with holding
stocks with higher volatility, where volatility is measured as the volatility of daily stock returns in
the preceding month or quarter. Second, we also find that, consistent with Giglio et al. (2019),

                                                                                                    21
survey-based expectations about future stock market returns are positively associated with an
increase in stock holdings, but the magnitude, as in Giglio et al. (2019), is relatively small. More
details about these exercises can be found in the Appendix.

     Finally, we note that, throughout the validation exercises, while the statistical relationship
between survey responses and trading behavior is highly significant, the R-squared is generally
small. For instance, in Table 10, across all specifications, the t-statistic for gambling preference
(with probability weighting) remains around 4, but the R-squared is consistently below 1%. This
suggests that, while survey responses are in aggregate consistent with actions, much of their
variation is left unexplained. This variation could be due to measurement errors or white noise in
survey responses, or a result of other factors driving trading behavior. We will further discuss this
important issue later in Section 4.


2.3. Baseline Results on Turnover

     After validating the usefulness of survey responses, we proceed to examine the relationship
between survey-based trading motives and turnover. We primarily focus on using survey responses
to explain post-survey turnover.11 Table 12 reports the summary statistics of their turnover and
portfolio returns in the post-survey sample from October 2018 to June 2019, a 9-month window
after the survey. When needed, however, we also extend the window to cover the 9 months before
the survey, spanning our full sample from January 2018 to June 2019.

     Table 12 shows that excessive trading is pronounced among Chinese retail investors. First,
they trade a lot: the median monthly turnover rate in our sample is almost one, suggesting that they
fully reshuffle their portfolios almost once every month.12 Second, their performance is poor: while
the monthly return of the Shenzhen Composite Index is about 0.6% from October 2018 to June
2019, the median net return in our sample is only 0.1%. Third, those who trade more perform


11
   If we measure turnover at the time of or before the survey, then the exercise is subject to the concern that some
common shocks may have affected both survey responses and trading behavior. For instance, a positive shock to one's
recent return may lead her to report a higher self-assessed performance ­ resulting in more over-placement of
performance ­ and to trade more.
12
   As we remove accounts that do not hold any stock positions in the Shenzhen Stock Exchange during this period
from our analysis of turnover, the reported turnover rate is upward biased. Nevertheless, including those accounts
without positions does not affect the qualitative relationship between survey responses and turnover, which is the main
focus of our analysis.

                                                                                                                   22
worse: the correlation between turnover and raw returns is -0.07 while the correlation between
turnover and net returns is -0.16. These negative correlations are statistically significant and
confirm the key findings of Odean (1999) and Barber and Odean (2000).

       Table 13 presents the baseline results, where in each column we regress turnover on a
particular survey-based trading motive. Most regressions are univariate, except for a few instances
where we need to control for some additional characteristics.

       Columns (1) to (3) report the results on three measures of overconfidence ­ over-placement
of performance, over-placement of literacy and miscalibration of uncertainty. Out of these three
measures of overconfidence, the only one that is significantly and positively related to turnover is
over-placement of performance: in Column (1), conditional on having the same past performance,
investors who self-report to have higher performance tend to trade more subsequently. Column (1)
also shows that past performance positively predicts future turnover. In Column (2), financial
literacy positively predicts future turnover. This finding is in sharp contrast to a widely held view
that excessive trading may be driven by the lack of financial knowledge. Therefore, further
improving investors' financial literacy, a policy often advocated in emerging economies such as
China, may not be effective in reducing their excessive trading. Furthermore, Column (2) shows
that over-placement of literacy does not predict future turnover. In Column (3), miscalibration
does not significantly predict future turnover. This set of results is broadly consistent with Glaser
and Weber (2007), who find that over-placement predicts more trading, but miscalibration does
not.

       Columns (4) to (6) report the results on neglect of trading cost. Surprisingly, for all the three
measures we have constructed, none of them significantly predicts future turnover with the correct
sign: in Columns (4) and (5), the coefficients are close to zero and insignificant; in Column (6),
investors who do not understand the bid-ask spread as a form of trading cost trade less. The result
in Column (4) is particularly puzzling, because the measure is constructed directly using the
estimate of fees in a round-trip transaction and should clearly identify those investors who
underestimate trading cost.13 The fact that we cannot find any supporting evidence despite having

13
   Transaction fees are rather standard and almost homogeneous across different brokers. While some variation across
brokers still remains, in our construction we use a rather conservative bound to identify those who underestimate
trading cost. In addition, we control for difference in fees across brokers with branch fixed effect.

                                                                                                                23
constructed three measures for neglect of trading cost gives us pause about its role in explaining
investor trading. We will come back to this issue with more analysis in Section 3.3.

    Columns (7) to (8) report the results on extrapolative beliefs. For the two measures of
extrapolation of positive and negative returns, we do not find a strong relationship between
extrapolative beliefs and turnover. One possibility is that extrapolation generates trading only in a
bullish market (Barberis et al. 2018; Liao, Peng, and Zhu 2020), but the period we examine is
relatively quiet with the market going up by just a few percentage points. Another possibility is
that extrapolation alone cannot explain volume and needs to be combined with some additional
forces to generate a trading frenzy (Barberis et al. 2018; Liao, Peng, and Zhu 2020). We leave
these issues to future research.

    Columns (9) and (10) report the results on gambling preference. We find that, consistent with
the conjecture in Barber and Odean (2000) and the implications of Barberis and Huang (2008),
investors who overweight small probability trade significantly more. In contrast, those who
acknowledge that stocks are like lotteries and picking the next blockbuster is a small probability
event do not trade more. This contrast suggests that investors' assessment of tail probability plays
a key role in explaining excessive trading. Also note that this result is also consistent with the
patterns in Table 10, where only investors who overweight small probability tend to buy lottery-
like stocks. Interestingly, those who acknowledge stocks are like lotteries do not have such a
tendency.

    Columns (11) and (12) report the results on realization utility, which suggest an asymmetry
between the two measures. The first measure ­ the one that proxies for taking pleasure in selling
winners ­ positively predicts future turnover, whereas the second measure ­ the one that proxies
for feeling painful in selling losers ­ does not predict future turnover. This pattern is consistent
with the implications of realization utility (Barberis and Xiong 2012), as investors with realization
utility are more willing to let go of stocks once they exceed the purchase prices and to hold on to
stocks after their prices fall from the purchase prices.

    Columns (13) and (14) report the results on sensation seeking. Both the "novelty-seeking" and
the "volatility-seeking" measures positively predict future turnover with a large coefficient. These



                                                                                                  24
results are consistent with the findings by Grinblatt and Keloharju (2009) and Dorn and
Sengmueller (2009) that investors most prone to sensation seeking trade more frequently.

     Columns (15) and (16) report the results on perceived information advantage and dismissive
of others' information. Column (15) suggests that those who believe in having an information
advantage tend to trade more, whereas Column (16) suggests that those who dismiss others'
information do not trade more. As we discussed earlier, the first measure captures a particular form
of overconfidence as perceived information advantage,14 as modelled by Kyle and Wang (1997),
Odean (1998), and Scheinkman and Xiong (2003), while the second measure captures the
dismissiveness modelled by Eyster, Rabin and Vanayos (2019). Thus, these results suggest that
perceived information advantage leads to high volume, while dismissiveness of others'
information does not.

     Finally, Columns (17) and (18) concern two measures of social influence, one from family
and friends, and the other from investment advisors. Interestingly, investors who are more
influenced by their family, friends, and investment advisors tend to trade less, not more. This
pattern does not lend support to the aforementioned literature arguing that social interaction
contributes to the spread of investor sentiment and excessive trading.

     To sum up, Table 13 confirms several of the previous explanations for trading volume: over-
placement of performance, gambling preference, sensation seeking, and perceived information
advantage. Which of these explanations are most relevant? Are some of the explanations subsumed
by others? Addressing these issues requires putting all of them in a horse race, which we pursue
below. Table 13 also highlights a number of "null" results that cast doubt on several prominent
explanations of excessive trading: lack of financial literacy, neglect of trading cost, dismissiveness
about others' information, and social interaction.


2.4. Horse-Race Results on Turnover

     While the baseline results confirm several of the previous explanations for trading volume, it
remains unclear whether their respective explanatory power will survive once they are all included


14
 Note that this interpretation assumes that those who claim to have information advantage do not do so in reality.
We will verify this interpretation later in Section 3.2.

                                                                                                              25
in the same regression. Table 14 presents the full regression results. In addition to including all the
survey-based trading motives, we also include 1) basic demographic characteristics such as gender,
income, wealth, and education, 2) return expectations to control differences in optimism and
pessimism, and 3) recent performance to control for "mood".15 Compared to Table 13, Table 14
reveals a number of notable observations.

     First, several trading motives that are significant in the baseline regressions become
insignificant or only marginally significant in the horse race. They include over-placement of
performance, sensation seeking for novelty, sensation seeking for volatility, social influence, and
advisor influence. The results for the two sensation seeking measures are particularly striking:
while both measures are highly significant in univariate regressions, their significance largely
disappears after controlling for other factors. This contrast nicely highlights the advantage of our
setting that allows for direct comparison across different mechanisms.

     Second, two trading motives that stand out in the horse race: gambling preference (with
probability weighting) and overconfidence in the form of perceived information advantage. Both
coefficients are quantitatively large and significant at either the 1% or 5% level. Notably, their
magnitude is essentially unchanged from the univariate regressions in Table 13. The finding of
overconfidence as a key driver of turnover nicely supports the large volume of prior studies in the
behavioral finance literature emphasizing the roles of overconfidence. Even more interestingly,
our finding highlights that only a particular form of overconfidence ­ through perceived
information advantage ­ rather than other forms, such as over-placement of performance or
literacy and miscalibration of uncertainty, is most relevant in explaining trading. This form of
overconfidence also confirms the specification adopted by Kyle and Wang (1997), Odean (1998)
and Scheinkman and Xiong (2003) in modeling investor overconfidence in financial markets.

     Our finding of gambling preference as a key driver of investor trading is surprising, given that
the literature tends to associate gambling preference as an important mechanism for understanding
investor demand lottery-like stocks. Our finding suggests that gambling preference may also lead
investors to trade lottery-like stocks with the fluctuations of volatility and tail distribution of


15
  We also have a specification that includes branch fixed effects to control for clustering at the branch level. Results
are essentially unchanged and reported in the Appendix.

                                                                                                                    26
individual stocks. We will present additional evidence to support these two highlighted trading
motives as key drivers of excessive trading in Section 3.

    Finally, consistent with the finding of Barber and Odean (2001), we also report a significant
gender effect: on average, the monthly turnover of male investors is 23% higher than female
investors. Barber and Odean (2001) attribute this difference to overconfidence: men trade more
because they are more overconfident. Interestingly, the gender effect in Table 14 persists even
after controlling for various forms of overconfidence, suggesting the gender effect may go beyond
overconfidence. We leave it for future research to explore.

    To conclude this section, we discuss two limitations of our horse race. First, it is possible that
the importance of each mechanism is time-varying, and, without a panel of survey responses, we
can only capture a snapshot of their relative importance. For instance, realization utility may
contribute to excessive trading more in a market boom than in a market downturn (Barberis and
Xiong 2012, Liao, Peng, and Zhu 2020). However, we show, in the Appendix, that the explanatory
power of each motive remains very stable during the 18-month window around the survey,
suggesting relatively persistent importance in time-series. Second, and relatedly, it is also possible
that some retail investors learn to de-bias themselves from past mistakes and the importance certain
mechanisms may decay over time (Seru, Shumway, and Stoffman 2010). While our cross-sectional
setting does not allow us to directly speak to the issue of learning, we note that some recent
evidence suggests that retail investors do not appear to learn from their prior mistakes (e.g., Anagol,
Balasubramaniam, and Ramadorai 2019).


3. Additional Evidence on Different Mechanisms

   In this section, building on the results in Section 2, we conduct additional analysis to further
reinforce the highlighted trading motives. Sections 3.1 and 3.2 further analyze the two positive
results, gambling preference and perceived information advantage, respectively. Section 3.3
focuses on one "null" result: neglect of trading cost.


3.1. Gambling Preference




                                                                                                   27
    We start by discussing the magnitude of the explanatory power of gambling preference for
turnover. So far, we have coded the survey responses into dummy variables, but this may reduce
their explanatory power. To address this concern, Table 15 reports a more detailed summary of
trading characteristics when investors are sorted into five groups based on their answers to the
"gambling preference" question. While this single-sorting approach ignores the correlations with
gambling preference with other trading motives, it provides a more granular look at the explanatory
power of gambling preference. Note that the coefficient of gambling preference is virtually
unchanged from the univariate regression in Table 13 to the horse race in Table 14, suggesting that
the effect is not affected by other trading motives.

    Panel A shows the distribution of turnover for each of the five groups. There is a nice,
monotonically increasing pattern across the five groups that differ in the extent the investors agree
with the gambling preference. This monotonic pattern is present not just in the mean and the
median of the monthly turnover rate, but also across various percentiles in the distribution,
indicating that this pattern is not driven by some outliers. On average, the difference between
"strongly agree" and "strongly disagree" is about 21%, suggesting sizable economic significance
­ a monthly turnover rate of 21% translates into an annualized transaction fee of 0.6%.

    Is the trading associated with gambling preference excessive? Panel B reports portfolio returns
for the five groups of investors and shows that this is the case: the five groups exhibit similar raw
returns before fees. In fact, the "strongly agree" group on average earns -0.4% lower monthly
returns than the "strongly disagree", albeit the difference is not statistically significant. The lack
of superior performance and the large transaction cost together suggest their trading is excessive.

    Finally, we examine the characteristics of stocks purchased by the five groups of investors in
Panel C. Investors with survey-based gambling preference tend to buy stocks with positive
skewness, larger counts of daily up-limit hits, higher past volatility and past returns, and smaller
size, and larger market beta. These stocks also perform worse subsequently, confirming that
investors with gambling preference trade in the wrong direction and their trading is excessive.


3.2. Perceived Information Advantage




                                                                                                   28
    We now further analyze perceived information advantage in Table 16, again by sorting
investors into five groups based on their answers to the question on how often they think they have
an information advantage over others. Panel A presents the monthly turnover rate of these groups.
Similar to before, investors who "always" think they have an information advantage exhibit higher
turnover than those who "never" think so for almost all the distribution percentiles we look at. The
magnitude is also similar: the difference in monthly turnover rate between "always" and "never"
groups is about 25%, implying an annual transaction fee of 0.7%.

    Is the perceived information advantage supported by superior performance in portfolio returns?
Panel B suggests that this is not the case: the five groups exhibit similar performance before fees,
indicating that those who report to have an information advantage do not outperform others in
selecting better stocks. Accounting for trading fees would make their net performance clearly
worse. Thus, the perceived information advantage reflects a form of overconfidence, rather than
better information.


3.3. Neglect of Trading Cost

    In both the baseline and horse-race regressions, none of the survey variables for neglect of
trading cost can positively predict future turnover with significance. This contradicts the popular
view that Chinese retail investors trade so much because they neglect trading cost. While some of
them indeed lack the full knowledge of the cost incurred in trading, awareness of trading cost is a
key factor in explaining the cross-sectional pattern of turnover across investors. The regression
results reported in Tables 13 and 14 even suggest an opposite pattern in one of the measures that
investors with less awareness of trading cost trade less. This pattern may reflect a reverse selection
that investors who trade more incur more cost and thus know more about the cost. To further isolate
the effect of awareness of trading cost, we have also implemented a randomized experiment.

    Among all of 500 brokerage branches we distributed the survey to, we randomly selected 250
branches to include an additional "nudge". The "nudge" asks the respondent to read a short article
that highlights the negative consequences of excessive trading. As shown in Figure 2, the article
contains a detailed calculation of how much investors lose from frequent trading, together with a
quote from Warren Buffett advising investors to buy and hold. We also include a "validation"
question after the article by asking the respondent to calculate the total trading cost of a given level
                                                                                                     29
of turnover. The answer to this question helps to filter out those who have actually read the article
and therefore been treated.

     We study the effect of this "nudge" in a difference-in-difference framework, and the results
are reported in Table 17. Column (1) shows that the interaction term is small and insignificant,
suggesting that the treatment and control groups exhibit similar turnover rate one month after the
survey. We repeat this exercise in Columns (2) and (3) by expanding the window to 3 months and
6 months before and after the survey, and the interaction term remains insignificant. Overall, these
results suggest that the nudge had no effect on reducing trading. One might argue that the "nudge"
was not sufficiently strong and the treated group may not have read the article carefully. We find
similar results among a subsample of investors who are identified as treated according to their
answers to the "validation" question.

     Taken together, our analysis suggests that investors in our sample engage in excessive trading
despite their awareness of the substantial cost incurred by trading. This finding has important
policy implications. Policy makers across the world, including China's stock market regulator, the
China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC), often consider Tobin taxes as a policy tool to
curb speculative trading in stock markets. To the extent that trading cost is not a key driver of
excessive trading, our finding casts doubt on the effectiveness of Tobin taxes.16


4. Comparing Survey-based and Transaction-based Measures

     In our analysis so far, we have taken survey responses as direct measures of trading motives
and use them to study why investors trade so much. These survey-based measures have some clear
advantages over transaction-based measures. First, well designed surveys provide relatively clean
measures of trading motives. Second, survey responses allow researchers to measure a large set of
trading motives at the same time, including those that are hard to measure from administrative data.
There are also strong concerns about survey data. The primary concern, the one we have already
addressed through various validation exercises, is that survey responses may not capture actual
trading behavior. A second concern is that survey responses are noisy ­ perhaps on average

16
  There is rather mixed evidence of the effects of Tobin taxes in reducing speculative trading and price volatility. See
Song and Xiong (2018) for a detailed review of the CSRC's policy interventions in the stock market and Deng, Liu
and Wei (2018) and Cai et al (2019) for studies of effects of increasing stamp tax for stock trading in China.

                                                                                                                    30
respondents do answer truthfully, but their responses at the individual level may be noisy. This is
a valid concern. For instance, in Table 10, while the relationship between survey-based gambling
preference and transaction-based gambling behavior is statistically significant, the R-squared is
rather small across all specifications.

     The concern about noise in survey responses motivates a follow-up question: do transaction-
based behavioral measures have stronger power than survey-based measures? We now address this
question by comparing survey-based and transaction-based measures of gambling behavior. Table
18 reports the results when we sort investors into different groups based on their gambling behavior
directly measured from transaction data in the pre-survey sample period. This transaction-based
measure turns out to be much more powerful in explaining turnover in the post-survey sample: the
difference in the monthly turnover rate between the top and bottom groups is 97%, quadrupling
the magnitude of 21% reported in Table 15 based on the survey-based measure of gambling
behavior. In addition, the difference in other trading characteristics between the top and bottom
groups is also larger in magnitude than the respective value reported in Table 15.

     If this transaction-based measure of gambling preference is so powerful, why don't we use it
directly instead of relying on the survey-based measure? To address this question, we regress the
transaction-based measure of gambling behavior on all survey-based trading motives and report
the results in Table 19. It is reassuring to see that the survey-based measure of gambling preference
is indeed the most powerful explanatory variable in this regression. However, a number of other
survey-based trading motives are also significantly correlated with the transaction-based measure
of gambling behavior. For instance, investors with perceived information advantage also gamble
more. Therefore, although the transaction-based measure of gambling behavior is more powerful
in explaining trading, this measure is partially correlated with other trading motives and its
explanatory power may not soley come only from gambling preference.17

     Taken together, our comparison shows a trade-off between survey-based and transaction-
based measures of trading motives. Survey-based measures have stronger power from the


17
  The transaction-based measure of gambling behavior may also contain effects from other omitted variables. For
example, one possible omitted variable is investor attention ­ investors who pay more attention to the stock market
are more likely to be drawn to lottery-like stocks as they appear more often in the news. While these investors may
exhibit gambling-like behavior, it is the attention to the stock market that explains their frequent trading.

                                                                                                               31
economic perspective of having qualitative tests of different trading motives, even though they
may contain more noise and thus have weaker power from the statistical perspective of explaining
cross-individual variation of trading. Transaction-based measures have stronger statistical power,
albeit they may reflect multiple mechanisms and their economic interpretations are thus not as
sharp as survey-based measures.


5. Conclusion

    We design and administer a nation-wide survey to study why retail investors trade so much.
The survey is designed to capture an exhaustive list of trading motives that are prevalent in the
literature, and in doing so, we are able to offer serious comparison across a large set of explanations
for trading volume. The key innovation in our approach is to combine survey data and transaction
data, allowing us to not only validate survey responses, but also to offer a comparison between
survey-based and transaction-based approaches.

    Based on this integrated approach, we highlight a number of new findings. First, we find
systematic evidence that survey responses are consistent with actual trading behavior. Second,
overconfidence (in having information advantage) and gambling preference quantitatively
dominate other trading motives in explaining frequent trading. Third, popular arguments such as
neglect of trading cost, low financial literacy, and social interaction do not contribute to excessive
trading. Finally, by discussing the pros and cons of survey-based and transaction-based approaches,
we argue that our integrated approach can address the concerns each particular approach faces.




                                                                                                    32
References

Anagol, Santosh, Vimal Balasubramaniam, and Tarun Ramadorai, 2019, Learning from Noise:
Evidence from India's IPO lotteries, Working paper.
Alpert, M., & Raiffa, H. (1982). A Progress Report on the Training of Probability Assessors.
Banerjee, Abhijit V., 1992, A Simple Model of Herd Behavior, Quarterly Journal of Economics
107, 797­817.
Barber, Brad M., Xing Huang, Kwangmin Ko, and Terrance Odean, 2019, Leveraging
Overconfidence, Working Paper.
Barber, Brad M., Yi-Tsung Lee, Yu-Jane Liu, and Terrance Odean, 2009, Just How Much Do
Individual Investors Lose by Trading?, Review of Financial Studies 22, 609­632.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2000, Trading Is Hazardous to Your Wealth: The Common
Stock Investment Performance of Individual Investors, Journal of Finance 55, 773­806.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2013, The Behavior of Individual Investors, in George
Constantinides ed.: Handbook of the Economics of Finance (Elsevier).
Barberis, Nicholas, 2018, Psychology-Based Models of Asset Prices and Trading Volume,
Handbook of Behavioral Economics: Applications and Foundations 1 (North-Holland).
Barberis, Nicholas, Robin Greenwood, Lawrence Jin, and Andrei Shleifer, 2018, Extrapolation
and Bubbles, Journal of Financial Economics 129, 203­227.
Barberis, Nicholas, and Ming Huang, 2008, Stocks as Lotteries: The Implications of Probability
Weighting for Security Prices, American Economic Review 98, 2066­2100.
Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, A Model of Investor Sentiment,
Journal of Financial Economics 49, 307­343.
Barberis, Nicholas, and Wei Xiong, 2009, What Drives the Disposition Effect? An Analysis of a
Long-Standing Preference-Based Explanation, Journal of Finance 64, 751­784.
Barberis, Nicholas, and Wei Xiong, 2012, Realization Utility, Journal of Financial Economics
104, 251­271.
Ben-david, Itzhak, John R. Graham, and Campbell R. Harvey, 2013, Managerial Miscalibration,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 128, 1547­1584.
Benos, Alexandros V., 1998, Aggressiveness and Survival of Overconfident Traders, Journal of
Financial Markets 1, 353­383.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2001, Do People Mean What They Say?
Implications for Subjective Survey Data, American Economic review 91, 67­72.
Birru, Justin, 2015, Confusion of Confusions: A Test of the Disposition Effect and Momentum,
Review of Financial Studies 28, 1849­1873.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer, 2012, Salience Theory of Choice Under
Risk, Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 1243­1285.
Boyer, Brian, Todd Mitton, and Keith Vorkink, 2010, Expected Idiosyncratic Skewness, Review
of Financial Studies 23, 169­202.

                                                                                               33
Brown, Stephen, Yan Lu, Sugata Ray, and Melvyn Teo, 2018, Sensation Seeking and Hedge Funds,
Journal of Finance 73, 2871­2914.
Cai, Jinghan, Jibao He, Wenxi Jiang, and Wei Xiong, 2019, The Whack-A-Mole Game: Tobin
Taxes and Trading Frenzy, Working Paper.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft, 2009, Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence,
American Economic Review 99, 1145­1177.
Chinco, Alex, Samuel M. Hartzmark, and Abigail B. Sussman, 2019, Risk-Factor Irrelevance,
Working Paper.
Choi, James J., and Adriana Z. Robertson, 2019, What Matters to Individual Investors? Evidence
from the Horse's Mouth, Working Paper.
Cochrane, John H., 2011, Presidential Address: Discount Rates, Journal of Finance 66, 1047­
1108.
Cochrane, John H., 2017, Macro-Finance, Review of Finance 21, 945­985.
Da, Zhi, Xing Huang, and Lawrence J. Jin, 2019, Extrapolative Beliefs in the Cross-Section: What
Can We Learn from the Crowds?, Working Paper, 1­54.
Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1998, Investor Psychology and
Security Market Under- and Overreactions, Journal of Finance 53, 1839­1885.
Dellavigna, Stefano, 2009, Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field, Journal of
Economic Literature 47, 315­372.
Deng, Yongheng, Xin Liu, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2018, One Fundamental and Two Taxes: When
Does a Tobin Tax Reduce Financial Price Volatility?, Journal of Financial Economics 130, 663­
692.
Dorn, Daniel, and Gur Huberman, 2005, Talk and Action: What Individual Investors Say and What
They Do, Review of Finance 9, 437­481.
Dorn, Daniel, and Paul Sengmueller, 2009, Trading as Entertainment?, Management Science 55,
591­603.
Eyster, Erik, Matthew Rabin, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2019, Financial Markets Where Traders
Neglect the Informational Content of Prices, Journal of Finance 74, 371­399.
Friedman, Milton, and L.J. Savage, 1948, The Utility Analysis of Choices Involving Risk, Journal
of Political Economy 56, 279­304.
Frydman, Cary, Nicholas Barberis, Colin Camerer, Peter Bossaerts, and Antonio Rangel, 2014,
Using Neural Data to Test a Theory of Investor Behavior: An Application to Realization Utility,
Journal of Finance 69, 907­946.
Frydman, Cary, and Antonio Rangel, 2014, Debiasing the Disposition Effect by Reducing the
Saliency of Information about a Stock's Purchase Price, Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization 107, 541­552.
Frydman, Cary, and Baolian Wang, 2020, The Impact of Salience on Investor Behavior: Evidence
from a Natural Experiment, Journal of Finance 75, 229­276.



                                                                                             34
Gao, Xiaohui, and Tse-Chun Lin, 2014, Do Individual Investors Treat Trading as a Fun and
Exciting Gambling Activity? Evidence from Repeated Natural Experiments, Review of Financial
Studies 28, 2128­2166.
Gervais, Simon, and Terrance Odean, 2001, Learning to Be Overconfident, Review of Financial
Studies 14, 1­27.
Giglio, Stefano, Matteo Maggiori, Johannes Stroebel, and Steve Utkus, 2019, Five Facts about
Beliefs and Portfolios, Working Paper.
Glaser, Markus, Markus Nöth, and Martin Weber, 2004, Behavioral Finance, Blackwell Handbook
of Judgement and Decision Making, 527­546.
Glaser, Markus, and Martin Weber, 2007, Overconfidence and Trading Volume, Geneva Risk and
Insurance Review 32, 1­36.
Graham, John R, Campbell R Harvey, and Hai Huang, 2009, Investor Competence, Trading
Frequency, and Home Bias, Management Science 55, 1094­1106.
Greenwood, Robin, and Andrei Shleifer, 2014, Expectations of Returns and Expected Returns,
Review of Financial Studies 27, 714­746.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Bing Han, 2005, Prospect Theory, Mental Accounting, and Momentum,
Journal of Financial Economics 78, 311­339.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Matti Keloharju, 2001, How Distance, Language, and Culture Influence
Stockholdings and Trades, Journal of Finance 56, 1053­1073.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Matti Keloharju, 2009, Sensation Seeking, Overconfidence, and Trading
Activity, Journal of Finance LXIV, 549­578.
Grinblatt, Mark, Matti Keloharju, and Juhani Linnainmaa, 2011, IQ and Stock Market
Participation, Journal of Finance 66, 2121­2164.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1980, On the Impossibility of Informationally
Efficient Markets, American Economic Review 70, 393­408.
Han, Bing, David Hirshleifer, and Johan Walden, 2019, Social Transmission Bias and Investor
Behavior, Working Paper.
Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey D Kubik, and Jeremy C Stein, 2004, Social Interaction and Stock-Market
Participation, Journal of Finance 59, 137­163.
Hong, Harrison, José Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong, 2008, Advisors and Asset Prices: A Model of
the Origins of Bubbles, Journal of Financial Economics 89, 268­287.
Hong, Harrison, and Jeremy C. Stein, 1999, A Unified Theory of Underreaction, Momentum
Trading, and Overreaction in Asset Markets, Journal of Finance 54, 2143­2184.
Ingersoll, Jr., Jonathan E., and Lawrence J. Jin, 2013, Realization Utility with Reference-
Dependent Preferences, Review of Financial Studies 26, 723­767.
Jin, Lawrence J., and Pengfei Sui, 2019, Asset Pricing with Return Extrapolation, Working Paper,
1­59.
Kelley, Eric K., and Paul C. Tetlock, 2013, How Wise Are Crowds? Insights from Retail Orders
and Stock Returns, Journal of Finance 68, 1229­1265.

                                                                                             35
Kelly, Morgan, and Cormac O Grada, 2000, Market Contagion: Evidence from the Panics of 1854
and 1857, American Economic Review 90, 1110­1124.
Kumar, Alok, 2009, Who Gambles in the Stock Market?, Journal of Finance 64, 1889­1933.
Kyle, Albert S., 1985, Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading, Econometrica 53, 1315­1335.
Kyle, Albert S., and F. Albert Wang, 1997, Speculation Duopoly with Agreement to Disagree:
Can Overconfidence Survive the Market Test?, Journal of Finance 52, 2073­2090.
Liao, Jingchi, Cameron Peng, and Ning Zhu, 2020, Price and Volume Dynamics in Bubbles,
Working Paper.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell, 2007, Baby Boomer Retirement Security: the Roles
of Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth, Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 205­
224.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell, 2011, Financial Literacy around the World: An
Overview, Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10, 497­508.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell, 2014, The Economic Importance of Financial Literacy:
Theory and Evidence, Journal of Economic Literature 52, 5­44.
Markowitz, Harry, 1952, Portfolio Selection, Journal of Finance 7, 77­91.
Milgrom, Paul, and Nancy Stokey, 1982, Information, Trade and Common Knowledge, Journal
of Economic Theory 26, 17­27.
Odean, Terrance, 1998, Volume, Volatility, Price, and Profit When All Traders Are Above
Average, Journal of Finance 53, 1887­1934.
Odean, Terrance, 1999, Do Investors Trade Too Much?, American Economic review 89, 1279­
1298.
Pool, Veronika K., Noah Stoffman, and Scott E. Yonker, 2015, The People in Your Neighborhood:
Social Interactions and Mutual Fund Portfolios, Journal of Finance 70, 2679­2732.
Seru, Amit, Tyler Shumway, and Noah Stoffman, 2010, Learning by Trading, Review of Financial
Studies 23, 705-739.
Scheinkman, José A., and Wei Xiong, 2003, Overconfidence and Speculative Bubbles, Journal of
Political Economy 111, 1183­1219.
Shefrin, Hersh, and Meir Statman, 1985, The Disposition to Sell Winners Too Early and Ride
Losers Too Long: Theory and Evidence, Journal of Finance 40, 777­790.
Shefrin, Hersh, and Meir Statman, 2000, Behavioral Portfolio Theory, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 35, 127­151.
Shiller, Robert J., 1984, Stock Prices and Social Dynamics, Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 2, 457­510.
Shiller, Robert J., 1989, Comovements in Stock Prices and Comovements in Dividends, Journal
of Finance 44, 719­729.
Shiller, Robert J., 2000, Measuring Bubble Expectations and Investor Confidence, Journal of
Psychology and Financial Markets 1, 49­60.

                                                                                            36
Song, Zheng (Michael), and Wei Xiong, 2018, Risks in China's Financial System, Annual Review
of Financial Economics 10, 261­286.
Taubinsky, Dmitry, and Alex Rees-Jones, 2018, Attention Variation and Welfare: Theory and
Evidence from a Tax Salience Experiment, Review of Economic Studies 85, 2462­2496.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman, 1992, Advances in Prospect Theory: Cumulative
Representation of Uncertainty, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 5, 297­323.
Van Rooij, Maarten, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob Alessie, 2011, Financial Literacy and Stock
Market Participation, Journal of Financial Economics 101, 449­472.




                                                                                         37
                            8
                            6
              Percent
              4             2
                            0




                                            0           10                      20              30
                                                    Minutes taken to complete the survey
                            7           6
              Score on financial literacy
              4           5 3




                                            0   5       10           15          20        25   30
                                                    Minutes taken to complete the survey


Figure 1: Relationship Between Financial Literacy Score and Minutes Taken to Complete the Survey




                                                                                                     38
Figure 2: The Treatment that Nudges Investors to Reduce Trading due to Transaction Cost




                                                                                          39
Theory                          Forms of representation                                   Papers
                                                                                          Odean (1998), Benos (1998), Glaser and Weber (2007), Dorn and
                                1. over-placement
Overconfidence                                                                            Huberman (2005), Graham, Harvey and Huang (2009), Ben-David,
                                2. miscalibration of uncertainty
                                                                                          Graham, and Harvey (2013)
                                1. upward trend to continue
Extrapolation                                                                             Barberis et al. (2018), Jin and Sui (2019), Da et al. (2019), Liao,Peng, and
                                2. downward trend to continue
                                                                                          Zhu (2020)
                                1. transaction fees
Neglect of trading cost                                                                   Barber and Odean (2000), Barber, Lee, Liu and Odean (2009)
                                2. bid-ask spread
                                                                                          Friedman and Savage (1948), Markowitz (1952), Shiller (1989, 2000),
                                1. overweight small probability (behavioral)
Gambling preferences                                                                      Barber and Odean (2000), Shefrin and Statman (2000), Barberis and Huang
                                2. understand small probability (rational)
                                                                                          (2008), Kumar (2009), Barber et al. (2008)
                                1. utility from realizing gains
Realization utility                                                                       Barberis and Xiong (2009, 2012), Ingersoll and Jin (2013), Frydman et al.
                                2. disutility from realizing losses
                                                                                          (2014)
                                1. novelty seeking
Sensation seeking                                                                         Grinblatt and Keloharju (2009), Dorn and Sengmueller (2009), Gao and
                                2. volatility seeking
                                                                                          Lin (2014)
                                1. belief in having information advantage                 Kyle (1985), Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), Gervais and Odean (2001),
Private information
                                2. fear for being at information disadvantage             Scheinkman and Xiong (2003)

                                1. advisor influence                                      Shiller (1989), Banerjee (1992), Kelly and Grada
Social/advisor influence
                                2. social influence                                       (2000), Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2004a, 2004b), Hong, Scheinkman, and
                                                                                          Xiong (2008), Pool, Stoffman, and Yonker (2015)
                                1. numeracy; 2. inflation; 3. diversification; 4.
                                                                                          Van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie (2011), Grinblatt, Keloharju, and
Financial literacy              assets' risk; 5. stock; 6. bond; 7. PE ratio; 8. mutual
                                                                                          Linnainmaa (2011)
                                fund
Liquidity and rebalance needs                                                             Kyle (1985)
                                                      Table 1: Summary of Theories on Trading Volume
Panel A: By Broker                                   Observations         Percentage
Guotai Junan Securities                                  1,519             11.80%
CITIC Securities                                         1,410             11.00%
Haitong Securities                                       1,390             10.80%
China Merchants Securities                               1,372             10.70%
Huatai Securities                                        1,350             10.50%
Guosen Securities                                        1,252             9.80%
China Securities                                         1,203             9.40%
Shenwan Hongyuan Securities                              1,169             9.10%
GF Securities                                            1,111             8.70%
China Galaxy Securities                                  1,051             8.20%


                              Panel B: By Province/Region

Guangdong                                                1,674             13.10%
Zhejiang                                                 1,201             9.40%
Jiangsu                                                  1,138             8.90%
Shanghai                                                 1,135             8.90%
Hubei                                                     629              4.90%
Beijing                                                   622              4.90%
Fujian                                                    600              4.70%
Hunan                                                     572              4.50%
Shandong                                                  542              4.20%
Henan                                                     531              4.10%
Sichuan                                                   530              4.10%
Anhui                                                     463              3.60%
Jiangxi                                                   388              3.00%
Hebei                                                     385              3.00%
Liaoning                                                  331              2.60%
Chongqing                                                 284              2.20%
Heilongjiang                                              250              2.00%
Guangxi                                                   230              1.80%
Shanxi                                                    222              1.70%
Shaanxi                                                   198              1.50%
Others                                                    931              7.20%
Total                                                   12,856              100%
        Table 2: Distribution of Survey Respondents across Brokers and Provinces
                                                Investor
Gender                          Survey         Population           Income              Survey
Male                           54.00%            71.70%             <20K                3.80%
Female                         46.00%            28.30%             20K to 100K         17.20%
                                                                    100K to 200K        29.50%
Education                                                           200K to 500K        29.50%
Middle School or below          8.60%            7.30%              500K to 1M          12.60%
High School                    15.60%            24.70%             1M to 2M            4.20%
Professional School            21.90%            26.00%             2M to 10M           2.10%
College                        44.90%            23.60%             10M and above       1.20%
Graduate school and above       9.20%            3.40%
Age                                                                 Wealth
20 to 30                       27.80%            21.30%             <20K                4.80%
30 to 40                       29.10%            27.40%             20K to 100K         12.30%
40 to 50                       19.90%            24.50%             100K to 500K        27.50%
50 to 60                       14.80%            15.10%             500K to 1M          22.30%
>60                             8.50%            11.70%             1M to 2M            21.90%
                                                                    2M to 10M           6.50%
                                                                       10M and above      4.80%
            Table 3: Distribution of Survey Respondents across Different Demographic Groups




                                                                                                  42
                                   Panel A: Correct rate by question
                                                                                         Correct
    Question
                                                                                          rate
1. Suppose you had $100 in a savings account and the interest rate was 2%
per year. After 5 years, how much do you think you would have in the
account if you left the money to grow?                                                   88.4%
2. Imagine that the interest rate on your savings account was 1% per year
and inflation was 2% per year. After 1 year, how much will you be able to
buy with the money in this account?                                                      91.5%

3. Do you agree with the following statement? Buying an individual stock
is usually less risky than buying a stock mutual fund.                                   86.2%


4. Normally, which asset displays the highest fluctuation over time?                     95.2%

5. Which of the following statements is correct? If somebody buys a stock
of firm B in the stock market....                                                        76.3%

6. Normally, when the market interest rate falls, the price of an existing
bond will ....                                                                           54.7%


7. What is the P/E ratio?                                                                75.8%


8. Which of the following statements about mutual funds is correct?                      90.3%




                            Panel B: Distribution of financial literacy score
                                                                                           Self-
    Score                                                                       Actual
                                                                                         assessed
0                                                                               0.40%    0.60%
1                                                                               0.70%    0.70%
2                                                                               1.70%    1.80%
3                                                                               2.30%    4.60%
4                                                                               5.10%    6.90%
5                                                                               8.90%    13.00%
6                                                                               17.90%   16.20%
7                                                                               30.10%   17.70%
8                                                                               33.00%   32.70%
N/A                                                                             0.00%    5.80%
                        Table 4: Survey Responses on Questions on Financial Literacy




                                                                                                    43
Panel A: Overconfidence
1. What fraction of retail investors do you think earned
                                                               <10%         10-20%     20-30%   30-40%     40-50%          50-60%    60-70%     70-80%     80-90%   >90%     N/A
higher returns than you in 2017?
                                                              11.80%        13.80%     15.80%   13.50%     12.40%          10.40%     5.80%      3.80%     2.20%    3.40%   7.20%
2. Actual score-Self-assessed score                              <-4           -4        -3        -2         -1             0          1          2         3       4       >4
                                                               0.80%        1.80%      5.40%    11.40%     19.70%          35.10%    17.70%      5.60%     1.70%    0.60%   0.40%
3. Upside return-Downside return                                 0%           5%        10%      15%         20%            25%       30%        35%        40%     45%     >50%
                                                              32.70%        14.90%     9.20%     6.90%      5.20%          5.20%      4.30%      3.40%     3.10%    2.50%   12.70%


Panel B: Extrapolation
1. After a stock's price keeps rising for a while, I usually believe that the price             Strongly                                        Strongly
                                                                                                            Agree          Neutral   Disagree               N/A
will rise even further in the future.                                                            Agree                                          Disagree
                                                                                                 4.80%     26.90%          39.30%    22.80%      1.30%     5.00%
2. After a stock's price keeps falling for a while, I usually believe that the price            Strongly                                        Strongly
                                                                                                            Agree          Neutral   Disagree               N/A
will fall even further in the future.                                                            Agree                                          Disagree
                                                                                                 4.40%     29.10%          41.90%    18.20%      1.30%     5.30%


Panel C: Neglect of trading cost
1. Estimating the cost of a round-trip buy and sell at the value of 10,000 RMB                    0-5        5-10          10-15      15-20      20-25     25-30    30-35    >35
                                                                                                17.30%     27.70%          23.60%    12.80%      8.40%     3.70%    2.10%   5.50%
2. How often do you consider transaction cost when you trade?                                    Never      Rarely    Sometimes       Often     Always      N/A
                                                                                                14.60%     37.70%          27.00%    13.80%      4.60%     2.50%
3. The bid-ask spread is one form of transaction cost (The bid-ask spread is the                                        Don't         Don't
                                                                                                 Agree     Disagree                               N/A
difference between the lowest ask price and the highest bid price).                                                   Understand      Know
                                                                                                59.80%     23.10%          8.50%      7.20%      1.40%
                                                                       Table 5: Survey Responses on Questions on Beliefs
Panel A: Gambling preference
1. When I trade stocks, I aim to select those stocks whose price would rise       Strongly                                             Strongly
                                                                                                 Agree          Neutral    Disagree               N/A
sharply in a short period time so that I can make a lot of money quickly.          Agree                                               Disagree
                                                                                  10.40%        25.40%          33.90%     23.00%       4.60%     2.70%
2. When I trade stocks, I often think of them as lotteries: I am willing to       Strongly                                             Strongly
                                                                                                 Agree          Neutral    Disagree               N/A
accept small losses in exchange for the possibility of a big upside.               Agree                                               Disagree
                                                                                  5.50%         24.90%          27.20%     32.50%       7.30%     2.70%

Panel B: Realization utility
1. Normally, if the price of a stock in your portfolio rose substantially since
you bought it, which of these two actions would make you feel happier:              Sell         Same            Hold     No Feeling     N/A
holding on to the stock, or selling that stock?
                                                                                  37.20%        23.70%          25.30%      9.20%       4.50%
2. Normally, if the price of a stock in your portfolio dropped substantially
since you bought it, which of these two actions would make you feel more            Sell         Same            Hold     No Feeling     N/A
painful: holding on to the stock, or selling that stock?
                                                                                  22.90%        28.00%          32.10%     12.20%       4.80%


Panel C: Sensation seeking
                                                                                  Strongly                                             Strongly
1. I feel excited about getting to know new stocks and new firms.                                Agree          Neutral    Disagree               N/A
                                                                                   Agree                                               Disagree
                                                                                   5.90%        20.30%          43.90%     21.00%       3.20%     5.70%
                                                                                  Strongly                                             Strongly
2. I feel excited about the stock market moving up and down.                                     Agree          Neutral    Disagree               N/A
                                                                                   Agree                                               Disagree
                                                                                   5.40%        23.40%          36.70%     26.20%       4.30%     4.10%
                                                        Table 6: Survey Responses on Questions Related to Preferences




                                                                                                                                                          45
Panel A: Information
1. When you decide to trade a stock, how often do you believe that you know the stock better than others?   Never    Rarely   Sometimes     Often      Always   N/A
                                                                                                            8.70%    27.90%    40.30%      14.50%      3.20%    5.40%
2. When you decide to trade a stock, how often do you worry that other investors know about the stock
                                                                                                            Never    Rarely   Sometimes     Often      Always   N/A
better than you do?
                                                                                                            18.20%   28.90%    32.30%      12.60%      2.50%    5.60%


Panel B: Social interaction
3. When you decide to trade a stock, how often are you influenced by your family members, friends, or
                                                                                                            Never    Rarely   Sometimes     Often      Always   N/A
other acquaintances?
                                                                                                            11.60%   31.20%    40.00%      11.80%      1.70%    3.80%
4. When you decide to trade a stock, how often are you influenced by your investment advisors?              Never    Rarely   Sometimes     Often      Always   N/A
                                                                                                            17.80%   35.00%    35.80%       7.20%      1.20%    3.10%


Panel C: Others
1. When you decide to trade a stock, how often is it that you need to rebalance your portfolio?             Never    Rarely   Sometimes     Often      Always   N/A
                                                                                                            9.60%    30.50%    44.50%       9.50%      1.70%    4.20%
2. When you decide to trade a stock, how often is it because you need money somewhere else?                 Never    Rarely   Sometimes     Often      Always   N/A
                                                                                                            7.00%    25.90%    45.00%      14.40%      2.60%    5.10%


Panel D: Risk aversion

1. Suppose you are the only income earner in the family, and you have a good job guaranteed to give you
your current income every year for life. You are given the opportunity to take a new, equally good job.               Yes        No       Don't Know    N/A
With a 50% chance it will double your income, and with a 50% chance, it will cut your income by 20%.
Would you take the new job?
                                                                                                                     51.60%    34.10%      11.30%      3.00%

2. Suppose the chances were 50% that it would double your income and 50% that it would cut it by 1/3.                 Yes        No       Don't Know    N/A
Would you take the new job?
                                                                                                                     45.30%    37.50%      13.80%      3.40%

                                                                                                                      Yes        No       Don't Know    N/A
3. Suppose the chances were 50% that it would double your income and 50% that it would cut it by 1/2.
Would you take the new job?
                                                                                                                     26.00%    57.40%      13.20%      3.50%

                                                       Table 7: Survey Responses on Questions on Information and Other Trading Motives
                                                          Main Sample       Population
Gender
Male                                                         54.40%              71.70%
Female                                                       45.60%              28.30%


Education
Middle School or blow                                        5.10%               7.30%
High School                                                  17.60%              24.70%
Professional School                                          24.40%              26.00%
College                                                      38.50%              23.60%
Graduate school and above                                    6.10%               3.40%
Others                                                       8.40%               14.80%


Age
<30                                                          26.10%              21.30%
30 to 40                                                     27.40%              27.40%
40 to 50                                                     22.40%              24.50%
50 to 60                                                     16.00%              15.10%
>60                                                          8.10%               11.70%


Investment age (in years)
<2                                                           21.20%              10.00%
2-6                                                          26.20%              29.80%
6-10                                                         17.40%              18.00%
>10                                                          35.10%              42.20%


Trading characteristics in 2017
Max investment (in thousand RMB)                              1,250               639
Turnover                                                       8.3                9.4
Return Rate                                                  -1.20%              -3.90%
            Table 8: Summary Statistics for the Main Sample and the Population
                 Variable          Mean     1        2        3        4        5        6        7        8        9       10       11       12       13       14       15       16      17      18       19       20      21
     Over-placement,
1                                  0.67   1.00
     performance
2    Over-placement, literacy      0.24   0.03     1.00

3    Miscalibration                0.69   0.08     0.02     1.00
     Underestimation of
4                                  0.69   (0.02)   0.02     0.00     1.00
     transaction cost
     Do not consider
5                                  0.53   0.03     (0.01)   0.01     0.11     1.00
     transaction cost
     Do not think bid-ask
6                                  0.33   (0.01)   (0.01)   (0.05)   (0.08)   (0.06)   1.00
     spread is a cost
7    Extrapolation, up             0.32   (0.01)   0.04     0.02     0.00     0.08     (0.09)   1.00

8    Extrapolation, down           0.34   0.00     0.04     0.02     0.00     0.07     (0.10)   0.62     1.00

     Gambling preference, with
9                                  0.37   (0.01)   0.04     (0.01)   (0.02)   0.05     (0.09)   0.25     0.21     1.00
     prob. weighting
     Gambling preference,
10                                 0.30   (0.01)   0.04     0.01     0.02     0.07     (0.10)   0.24     0.21     0.40     1.00
     without prob. weighting
11   Realization utility, winner   0.36   (0.03)   0.02     0.05     0.07     0.01     (0.09)   (0.01)   0.05     0.04     0.07     1.00

12   Realization utility, loser    0.22   0.01     0.02     (0.01)   0.03     0.04     (0.08)   0.06     0.06     0.04     0.04     0.22     1.00

13   Sensation seeking, novelty    0.24   (0.03)   0.03     0.00     0.03     0.08     (0.12)   0.19     0.18     0.18     0.24     0.07     0.12     1.00

     Sensation seeking,
14                                 0.29   0.00     0.04     0.03     0.03     0.05     (0.12)   0.22     0.23     0.22     0.26     0.09     0.13     0.42     1.00
     volatility
     Perceived information
15                                 0.18   0.06     0.07     0.01     (0.02)   (0.03)   (0.03)   (0.01)   0.01     (0.06)   (0.09)   (0.02)   (0.02)   0.01     0.02     1.00
     advantage
     Dismissive of others'
16                                 0.14   (0.02)   0.03     (0.03)   (0.05)   (0.11)   0.08     (0.03)   0.01     0.02     (0.01)   (0.01)   (0.04)   (0.02)   (0.03)   0.14     1.00
     information
     Affected by family and
17                                 0.13   (0.01)   0.02     (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.02)   0.07     (0.01)   (0.01)   0.06     0.05     0.01     (0.02)   0.00     (0.03)   0.01     0.22     1.00
     friends
     Affected by investment
18                                 0.07   (0.01)   0.01     (0.01)   (0.02)   0.00     0.03     0.01     0.00     0.00     0.02     0.02     (0.02)   0.03     0.01     0.03     0.15     0.32   1.00
     advisors
19   Portfolio rebalance           0.17   0.01     0.02     (0.02)   (0.07)   (0.07)   0.07     (0.07)   (0.06)   (0.06)   (0.07)   (0.07)   (0.02)   (0.01)   (0.02)   0.20     0.17     0.12   0.08     1.00

20   Liquidity                     0.10   0.00     0.03     (0.07)   (0.07)   (0.10)   0.08     (0.04)   (0.03)   0.05     (0.01)   (0.07)   (0.02)   (0.03)   (0.02)   0.09     0.22     0.21   0.10     0.29     1.00

21   Risk aversion                 0.34   0.02     (0.01)   0.01     0.01     0.00     0.06     0.02     0.02     0.00     (0.01)   (0.03)   (0.01)   (0.03)   (0.02)   (0.01)   (0.02)   0.00   (0.03)   (0.05)   (0.01)   1.00

                                                         Table 9: Summary Statistics of Dummy Variables Based on Survey Responses
                                                                   Panel A: Volume-weighted Past One-month Count of Up-limit Hits Based on Initial Buys
                                                                          Full sample                                                 Pre-survey                                    Post-survey
                                                                     (2018:01 to 2019:06)                                       (2018:01 to 2018:09)                            (2018:10 to 2019:06)
   Gambling preference, with probability weighting      0.112***     0.109***                                     0.087***      0.086***                             0.142***   0.139***
                                                        (3.875)       (3.768)                                      (3.640)       (3.608)                             (3.660)     (3.573)
   Gambling preference, without probability weighting                               0.038       0.019                                            0.025     0.018                              0.051     0.029
                                                                                   (1.257)      (0.653)                                         (1.013)   (0.727)                            (1.237)   (0.698)
   Male                                                                -0.034                   -0.033                            -0.011                   -0.01                 -0.035                -0.034
                                                                      (-1.164)                 (-1.140)                          (-0.444)                 (-0.403)              (-0.884)               (-0.866)
   Controls                                               NO            YES          NO          YES                 NO            YES             NO       YES        NO         YES          NO       YES
   R2                                                    0.004         0.023        0.000       0.019               0.004         0.017          0.000     0.014      0.004       0.02        0.000     0.016
   N                                                     4,145         4,145        4,145       4,145               3,435         3,435          3,435     3,435      3,550      3,550        3,550     3,550


                                                                   Panel B: Volume-weighted Past One-quarter Count of Up-limit Hits Based on Initial Buys
                                                                          Full sample                                                 Pre-survey                                    Post-survey
                                                                     (2018:01 to 2019:06)                                       (2018:01 to 2018:09)                            (2018:10 to 2019:06)
   Gambling preference, with probability weighting      0.209***     0.199***                                     0.174***      0.169***                             0.256***   0.239***
                                                        (4.550)       (4.299)                                      (4.354)       (4.240)                             (4.066)     (3.774)
   Gambling preference, without probability weighting                              0.091*       0.055                                           0.103**   0.086**                             0.071     0.024
                                                                                   (1.897)      (1.144)                                         (2.389)   (1.994)                            (1.107)   (0.373)
   Male                                                                -0.051                   -0.049                            -0.04                   -0.039                 -0.051                 -0.05
                                                                      (-1.084)                 (-1.051)                          (-0.996)                 (-0.949)              (-0.798)               (-0.784)
   Controls                                               NO            YES          NO          YES                 NO            YES             NO       YES        NO         YES          NO       YES
   R2                                                    0.005         0.025        0.001       0.021               0.006         0.017          0.002     0.013      0.005      0.021        0.000     0.017
   N                                                     4,145         4,145        4,145       4,145               3,435         3,435          3,435     3,435      3,550      3,550        3,550     3,550
                                                                                  t-statistics in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                                  Table 10: Validating Gambling Preferences Using Gambling Behavior

Note: This table studies the relationship between investors' gambling preferences and past number of up-limit hits of stocks they buy. The dependent variables are buy volume (in RMB) weighted
average of past one-month (Panel A) or one-quarter (Panel B) # of up-limit hits of stocks an investor purchases during various sample periods. A stock purchase is considered as an initial buy if
the investor holds zero share of the stock before the purchase. Each panel presents OLS regression results based on three sample periods: full (Jan. 2018 to June 2019), pre-survey (Jan. 2018 to
Sept.2018), and post-survey (Oct. 2018 to June 2019). The key independent variables are dummies that indicate investors' gambling preferences. Gambling preference (behavioral) equals one if
an investor answers "Strongly agree" or "Agree" when asked if she aims to make a lot of money quickly through stock investment and zero otherwise. Gambling preferences (rational) equals one
if an investor answers "Strongly agree" or "Agree" when asked if she often think of stocks as lotteries and zero otherwise. See Table 6 for the exact phrase of the survey questions. Control variables
include age, wealth, income, trading experience, account size, and education. T-statistics based on robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
                                                                       Panel A: Volume-weighted Past One-month Return Based on Initial Buys
                                                    Full sample                                                              Pre-survey                                       Post-survey
                                              (2018:01 to 2019:06)                                                   (2018:01 to 2018:09)                                (2018:10 to 2019:06)
 Extrapolation, up           0.011**       0.011**                                                0.012***         0.013***                                   0.011*     0.011*
                              (2.170)       (2.134)                                                (2.689)          (2.902)                                   (1.668)    (1.704)
 Extrapolation, down                                        0.014***       0.013***                                                  0.012***     0.012***                           0.014**    0.014**
                                                             (2.751)        (2.640)                                                   (2.655)      (2.691)                            -2.142     -2.142
 Male                                     -0.014***                        -0.014***                               -0.012***                      -0.012***             -0.014**                -0.014**
                                           (-2.854)                         (-2.816)                                (-2.740)                      (-2.697)              (-2.284)                (-2.237)
 Controls                      NO            YES              NO              YES                    NO               YES                 NO        YES        NO         YES          NO         YES
 R2                            0.001        0.017            0.002           0.018                  0.002            0.016                0.002     0.016      0.001      0.017       0.001       0.017
 N                             4,142        4,142            4,142           4,142                  3,432            3,432                3,432     3,432      3,550      3,550       3,550       3,550


                                                                       Panel B: Volume-weighted Past One-quarter Return Based on Initial Buys
                                                    Full sample                                                              Pre-survey                                       Post-survey
                                              (2018:01 to 2019:06)                                                   (2018:01 to 2018:09)                                (2018:10 to 2019:06)
 Extrapolation, up           0.020**       0.020**                                                0.019***         0.022***                                   0.026**   0.028***
                              (2.406)       (2.419)                                                (2.999)          (3.446)                                   (2.451)    (2.597)
 Extrapolation, down                                        0.021***        0.020**                                                  0.020***     0.021***                           0.021**    0.021**
                                                             (2.615)        (2.532)                                                   (3.112)      (3.316)                           (2.032)     (2.091)
 Male                                     -0.028***                        -0.028***                               -0.037***                      -0.036***             -0.030***               -0.029***
                                           (-3.685)                         (-3.638)                                (-5.848)                      (-5.801)              (-3.113)                (-3.031)
 Controls                      NO            YES              NO              YES                    NO               YES                 NO        YES        NO         YES          NO         YES
 R2                            0.001        0.023            0.002           0.023                  0.003            0.033                0.003     0.033      0.002      0.021       0.001       0.02
 N                             4,136        4,136            4,136           4,136                    3,428            3,428           3,428        3,428      3,544      3,544       3,544       3,544
                                                                              t-statistics in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                           Table 11: Validating Gambling Preferences Using Extrapolative Behavior

Note: This table studies the relationship between investors' extrapolative beliefs and past returns of stocks they buy. The dependent variables are buy volumes (in RMB) weighted average of past
one-month (Panel A) or one-quarter (Panel B) returns of stocks an investor purchases during various sample periods. A stock purchase is considered as an initial buy if the investor holds zero
share of the stock before the purchase. Each panel presents OLS regression results based on three sample periods: full (Jan. 2018 to June 2019), pre-survey (Jan. 2018 to Sept. 2018), and post-
survey (Oct. 2018 to June 2019). The key independent variables are dummies that indicate investors' extrapolative beliefs. Extrapolation-up (Extrapolation-down) equals one if an investor answers
"Strongly agree" or "Agree" when asked if she believes stock price will rise (drop) even further in the future after it keeps rising (dropping) for a while. Otherwise, extrapolation-up (Extrapolation-
down) equals zero. See Table 5 for the exact phrase of the survey questions. Control variables include age, wealth, income, trading experience, account size, and education. T-statistics based on
robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.

                                                                                                                                                                                                          50
                              Panel A: Summary Statistics
                  Min          P25         Median         P75           Max     Mean    Std Dev
Turnover         0.00%       12.10%        46.60%       121.60%      650.60%   94.20%   125.70%
Raw returns     -12.60%      -1.80%         0.30%        2.20%        10.00%   -0.10%    3.80%
Net returns     -12.90%      -2.10%         0.10%        2.00%         9.60%   -0.30%    3.80%

                              Panel B: Correlation Matrix
                               Raw           Net
               Turnover
                              returns      returns
Turnover           1
Raw returns    -0.07***         1
Net returns    -0.16***      0.99***          1
                 t-statistics in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
              Table 12: Summary Statistics of Turnover and Portfolio Returns




                                                                                                  51
                                              (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)         (6)          (7)        (8)
Actual performance in 2017                 5.302***
                                            (6.570)
Over-placement, performance                15.357**
                                            (2.499)
Financial literacy, dummy                                11.596***
                                                           (2.904)
Over-placement, literacy                                   1.995
                                                           (0.440)
Miscalibration                                                          -0.203
                                                                       (-0.050)
Underestimation of trading cost                                                       -1.676
                                                                                     (-0.409)
Do not consider trading cost                                                                        -4.271
                                                                                                    (-1.125)
Do not think bid-ask spread is a cost                                                                          -16.069***
                                                                                                                (-4.299)
Extrapolation, up                                                                                                             5.288
                                                                                                                             (1.281)
Extrapolation, down                                                                                                                     4.686
                                                                                                                                        (1.178)
R2                                           0.013         0.002         0.000         0.000         0.000       0.004        0.000     0.000


                                              (9)           (10)         (11)          (12)           (13)        (14)         (15)      (16)
Gambling preference, with probability
                                           10.180**
weighting
                                            (2.569)
Gambling       preference,      without
                                                           1.316
probability weighting
                                                           (0.316)
Realization utility, winner                                             6.974*
                                                                        (1.741)
Realization utility, loser                                                             0.245
                                                                                      (0.054)
Sensation seeking, novelty                                                                        13.196***
                                                                                                    (2.827)
Sensation seeking, volatility                                                                                  13.538***
                                                                                                                (3.133)
Perceived information advantage                                                                                             20.936***
                                                                                                                             (3.927)
Dismissive of others' information                                                                                                       3.111
                                                                                                                                        (0.820)
R2                                           0.002         0.000         0.001         0.000         0.002       0.002        0.004     0.000


                                             (17)           (18)
Social influence                          -16.061***
                                           (-3.247)
Advisor influence                                         -15.478**
                                                          (-2.465)
R2                                          0.002          0.001


                                               t-statistics in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                      Table 13: Baseline Results on Turnover
                        Dependent variable: Average Monthly Turnover Ratio (%) from 2018/10-2019/6

Actual performance in 2017                  4.989***                     Gamble, with probability weighting      12.148**
                                             (5.726)                                                              (2.842)
Over-placement, performance                  11.929*                     Gamble, without probability weighting    -3.846
                                             (1.937)                                                              (-0.831)
Financial literacy, dummy                    8.265**                     Sensation, novelty                        6.538
                                             (1.979)                                                              (1.279)
Over-placement, literacy                      -3.450                     Sensation, volatility                     5.366
                                             (-0.779)                                                             (1.155)
Miscalibration                                -2.884                     Perceived information advantage         15.954***
                                             (-0.697)                                                             (2.889)
Do not consider trading cost                  -4.334                     Dismissive of others' information         1.897
                                             (-1.107)                                                             (0.487)
Underestimation of trading cost               -3.570                     Social influence                         -8.870*
                                             (-0.878)                                                             (-1.733)
Do not know bid-ask spread                  -10.395**                    Advisor influence                       -11.379*
                                             (-2.765)                                                             (-1.744)
Extrapolation, up                             -1.378                     Portfolio rebalance needs               13.537**
                                             (-0.261)                                                             (2.332)
Extrapolation, down                           0.306                      Liquidity needs                          -5.889
                                             (0.062)                                                              (-0.966)
Realization utility, winner                  7.171*                      Risk Aversion                            -3.349
                                             (1.763)                                                              (-0.742)
Realization utility, loser                    -4.156                     Expected 1-year market return            0.740*
                                             (-0.908)                                                             (1.877)
Gender: male                               23.440***                     Controls                                  YES
                                             (6.306)                     N                                         4,398
                                                                          R2                                       0.066
                                    t-statistics in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                             Table 14: Regression Results Using the Full Set of Trading Motives




                                                                                                                             53
                                              Panel A: Monthly Turnover                                                 Panel B: Monthly Raw Returns
                                                 (2018:10 to 2019:06)                                                       (2018:10 to 2019:06)
                           P10       P25           P75              P90           Median            Mean                Median               Mean
1. Strongly disagree       1%        9%           109%             215%            36%              84%                 0.42%               -0.09%
2. Disagree                0%        12%          106%             231%            42%              86%                 0.27%               -0.02%
3. Neutral                 1%        12%          126%             250%            45%              95%                 0.34%               0.04%
4. Agree                   2%        14%          124%             264%            52%              99%                 0.24%               -0.15%
5. Strongly agree          2%        13%          136%             282%            57%              106%                0.02%               -0.33%


5-1                        0%        5%            27%             66%            21%**            21%**                -0.40%              -0.24%
Annual transaction fee    0.00%     0.10%         0.80%           1.90%           0.60%            0.60%



                                             Panel C: Characteristics of Stocks Bought
                                                       (2018:10 to 2019:06)
                         Up-limit                 Past                                                        Future
                          Hits      Past Vol    Return        Size          Beta                    B/M       Return
1. Strongly disagree      0.60        3.25       9.71        43.73          0.93                    0.62      -0.03
2. Disagree               0.75        3.39       11.58       35.21          0.96                    0.62      -0.87
3. Neutral                0.83        3.49       11.94       26.92          0.99                    0.61      -1.53
4. Agree                  0.89        3.56       12.45       26.29          1.00                    0.61      -1.36
5. Strongly agree         0.92        3.55       12.74       26.65          1.02                    0.62      -1.77


5-1                      0.32***    0.30***       3.03**         -17.08**         0.09***             0       -1.74**
                                                t-statistics in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                            Table 15: Additional Analysis of Gambling Preference
                                         Panel A: Monthly Turnover                                  Panel B: Monthly Raw Returns
                                            (2018:10 to 2019:06)                                        (2018:10 to 2019:06)
                          P10     P25         P75          P90       Median       Mean              Median               Mean
1. Never                  1%     10%         108%         232%         41%         83%               0.31%              -0.07%
2. Rarely                 0%      9%         112%         233%         43%         86%               0.35%              -0.07%
3. Sometimes              1%     13%         123%         261%         47%         96%               0.30%              0.01%
4. Often                  3%     18%         151%         302%         54%        112%               -0.02%             -0.15%
5. Always                 6%     14%         147%         256%         58%        109%               0.25%              -0.06%


5-1                       5%      5%          40%         24%        17%**        25%**              -0.06%             0.01%
Annual transaction fee   0.10%   0.10%      1.10%        0.70%         0.50%       0.70%
                                 Table 16: Additional Analysis of Perceived Information Advantage




                                                                                                                                   55
                                 Turnover around the survey
                                     1 -month      3-month      6-month
                                     window        window       window
                 After*Treated         -0.60         -3.75        -5.30

                                      (-0.16)       (-0.97)      (-1.23)

                 Treated               -0.90         0.60         -1.35

                                      (-0.31)        -0.22       (-0.50)

                 After                 -1.45         0.05       12.15***

                                      (-0.70)        -0.02        -4.07

                 Controls              YES           YES          YES

                 R2                    0.021        0.026         0.023

                 N                     5,397        5,668         6,083
Table 17: Comparing Turnover Before and After the Survey for the Control and Treatment Groups
                  Panel A:                                                                   Panel B:
               Monthly Turnover                                                  Characteristics of Stocks Bought

              Mean        Median           Up-limit Hits      Past Vol      Past Return         Size          Beta        B/M       Future Return

1(lowest)     60.37        29.43                0.7              3.3           10.65            36.46         0.94         0.66         -0.91
2             80.76        38.69                0.67            3.36           10.28            35.14         0.95         0.62         -0.91
3             71.91        29.49                 0.8            3.41           11.18            29.79         0.99         0.61         -0.81
4             92.69        43.92                0.74            3.48           10.13            23.37         1.04         0.58         -0.88
5(highest)    157.29       98.45                1.12            3.78           14.63            20.13         1.02         0.59         -2.02
5-1          96.92***    69.02***             0.42***          0.48***        3.97***        -16.34***       0.09***     -0.07***     -1.11**
                         Table 18: Trading Characteristics for Investors Sorted on Transaction-Based Gambling Behavior
   Dependent variable: Volume-weighted Past One-month Count of Up-limit Hits Based on Initial Buys, 2018:01-2018:09

Actual performance in 2017                -0.009**                     Gamble, with probability weighting      0.071***
                                           (-2.533)                                                            (3.598)
Over-placement, performance                 0.002                      Gamble, without probability weighting    -0.011
                                           (0.071)                                                             (-0.482)
Financial literacy, dummy                   -0.031                     Sensation, novelty                       -0.032
                                           (-1.478)                                                            (-1.518)
Over-placement, literacy                    -0.014                     Sensation, volatility                    0.022
                                           (-0.633)                                                            (1.030)
Over-precision                              0.017                      Belief in information advantage         0.049**
                                           (0.942)                                                             (2.097)
Do not consider trading cost               0.040**                     Dismiss information disadvantage         -0.001
                                           (2.221)                                                             (-0.031)
Underestimation of trading cost             -0.005                     Affected by family and friends           -0.005
                                           (-0.276)                                                            (-0.178)
Do not know bid-ask spread                -0.043**                     Affected by investment advisors          0.025
                                           (-2.436)                                                            (0.647)
Extrapolation, up                           0.003                      Portfolio rebalance needs               -0.039*
                                           (0.133)                                                             (-1.741)
Extrapolation, down                         -0.001                     Liquidity needs                          0.021
                                           (-0.045)                                                            (0.679)
Realization utility, winner                 0.015                      Risk Aversion                            0.004
                                           (0.843)                                                             (0.205)
Realization utility, loser                  0.009                      Expected 1-year market return            0.000
                                           (0.409)                                                             (0.266)
Gender: male                                0.011                      Controls                                 YES
                                           (0.623)                     N                                        3,528
                                                                        R2                                      0.031
                                  t-statistics in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

     Table 19: Regressing Transaction-based Gambling Behavior on Survey-based Trading Motives
