                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   A FISHERIAN APPROACH TO FINANCIAL CRISES:
                  LESSONS FROM THE SUDDEN STOPS LITERATURE

                                        Javier Bianchi
                                     Enrique G. Mendoza

                                     Working Paper 26915
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26915


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020




This paper was prepared for the May 2019 conference on Frontiers of Business Cycle Research
hosted by the Penn Institute for Economic Research. We thank our discussant, Mark Aguiar, and
also Jonathan Heathcote and Vincenzo Quadrini for helpful comments and suggestions. Valuable
research assistance by Eugenio Rojas and Sergio Villalvazo is also gratefully acknowledged. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Javier Bianchi and Enrique G. Mendoza. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Fisherian Approach to Financial Crises: Lessons from the Sudden Stops Literature
Javier Bianchi and Enrique G. Mendoza
NBER Working Paper No. 26915
March 2020
JEL No. E3,E37,E44,F41,G01,G18

                                          ABSTRACT

Sudden Stops are financial crises defined by a large, sudden current-account reversal. They occur
in both advanced and emerging economies and result in deep recessions, collapsing asset prices,
and real exchange-rate depreciations. They are preceded by economic expansions, current-
account deficits, credit booms, and appreciated asset prices and real exchange rates. Fisherian
models (i.e. models with credit constraints linked to market prices) explain these stylized facts as
an outcome of Irving Fisher's debt-deflation mechanism. On the normative side, these models
feature a pecuniary externality that provides a foundation for macroprudential policy (MPP). We
review the stylized facts of Sudden Stops, the evidence on MPP use and effectiveness, and the
findings of the literature on Fisherian models. Quantitatively, Fisherian amplification is strong
and optimal MPP reduces sharply the size and frequency of crises, but it is also complex and
potentially time-inconsistent, and simple MPP rules are less effective. We also provide a new
MPP analysis incorporating investment. Using a constant debt-tax policy, we construct a crisis
probability-output frontier showing that there is a tradeoff between financial stability and long-
run output (i.e., reducing the probability of crises reduces long-run output).


Javier Bianchi
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55401
javieribianchi@gmail.com

Enrique G. Mendoza
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
egme@sas.upenn.edu
1       Introduction
The Mexican crisis of 1994 was a harbinger of a series of financial crises that have since affected
both emerging and advanced economies. The defining feature of these crises is a large, sudden
reversal in the current account, which is a country's broadest measure of net foreign financing.
Because of the sudden loss of access to international capital markets, these events are known
as Sudden Stops.1 As we document in the next section, by the end of 2016 there had been 58
Sudden Stop events worldwide, 35 in emerging markets and 23 in advanced economies.
    Sudden Stops have been the focus of a large theoretical and empirical literature since the mid-
1990s. More recently, following the 2008 Global Financial Crisis (GFC), a growing literature has
been studying macroprudential regulation as a way to avert financial crises. In this article, we
start by reviewing the stylized facts of Sudden Stops, with a new event analysis spanning the
1979-2016 period and including advanced and emerging economies. Then, we provide a short
survey of the findings of the empirical literature on the use and effectiveness of macroprudential
policies to date. The paper then moves on to review the literature that examines the quantitative
implications, both positive and normative, of a class of Sudden Stops models labeled Fisherian
models. In these models, Sudden Stops are the result of financial amplification driven by the
debt-deflation mechanism proposed in the seminal work on the Great Depression by Fisher (1933)
and also emphasized in the classic studies by Minsky (1992) and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997).
    The central element of a Fisherian model is an occasionally binding credit constraint that
limits borrowing capacity to a fraction of the market value of the goods or assets pledged as
collateral. This constraint is essential to the Fisherian debt-deflation mechanism: when the
constraint binds, agents fire-sale the goods or assets that serve as collateral, and as they do
so, they drive down the value of those goods or assets, which tightens the constraint further
and forces further fire sales. From a normative perspective, the constraint entails a pecuniary
externality that creates scope for macroprudential policy (MPP): individual borrowers do not
internalize how their borrowing decisions made in "good times" affect the size of the deflation in
collateral values and the reduction in the economy's borrowing capacity during a Sudden Stop
(Bianchi, 2011; Bianchi and Mendoza, 2018). As a result, private agents undervalue the social
marginal cost of borrowing, and hence they "overborrow." Optimal MPP thus calls for tightening
access to credit in a procyclical fashion, a feature consistent with newly introduced regulation
such as the Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCyB).
   In addition to reviewing the findings of the existing literature, we conduct a new analysis
examining MPP tradeoffs involving capital accumulation. To date, most studies quantifying MPP
    1
     Oral tradition has it that this nickname originated in a comment from the audience at a presentation by the
late Rudi Dornbusch on the Mexican crisis, making the point that like in the familiar Douglas Adams quote, with
the sharp current-account reversals "it is not the fall that kills you, it is the sudden stop at the end."



                                                       1
tradeoffs have focused only on consumption-smoothing tradeoffs. Filling this gap is important
because policy discussions on MPP emphasize the potentially costly tradeoff between capital
accumulation, long-run output, and financial stability.
    We propose a new version of a widely used Fisherian two-sector model with tradable and
nontradable goods, extended to introduce production of investment goods using both tradables
and non-tradables as inputs. In the model, households consume tradables and non-tradables,
make investment decisions, and face a Fisherian constraint that limits their debt to a fraction
of the market value of the capital stock. Bothh the real exchange rate and the market price
of capital (i.e., the value of collateral) are determined by the relative price of non-tradables to
tradables and are central for the financial amplification mechanism.
    We show that by raising the cost of borrowing above the risk-free rate, MPP also raises the
effective opportunity cost of capital and reduces investment. Introducing a simple MPP rule in
the form of a constant debt tax, allows regulators to reduce leverage and hence the magnitude
and frequency of crises, but it also reduces output and investment in a manner akin to a capital
income tax. In some states, reducing both consumption and investment is efficient, but in others
it is not. Using simple MPP rules therefore induces costly investment and output tradeoffs of
over- or under-regulating credit.
    We calibrate the model to data and examine the model's quantitative implications. First, we
study long-run cyclical properties and Sudden Stop dynamics in the absence of regulation. Then,
we illustrate the costly tradeoffs of simple rules governing debt taxes. This includes a long-run
crisis probability-output loss frontier that shows pairs of losses in long-run output and reduction
in crisis probability attained with different constant debt tax rates. In addition, we examine the
incentives of optimal policy to use debt taxes or adjust debt decisions in the short run.
    We also use the model to analyze regulatory loan-to-value (LTV) ratios as an alternative
MPP tool. We show that their incidence on incentives to borrow and invest is similar to that
of debt taxes but they are not equivalent instruments. In particular, there is no LTV regulation
policy that can replicate the equilibrium of a given debt tax policy. At the same levels of credit
and consumption obtained with a given debt tax at some date t, regulatory LTVs support higher
collateral values, which also imply different prices and allocations in previous periods. This
result is important because to date there is little research analyzing the macro implications of
LTV regulation as an MPP tool, and yet, as we document in Section 2, empirical studies show
that borrower-targeted instruments (i.e., LTVs) are an effective MPP tool, while evidence is at
best mixed for lender-targeted instruments akin to debt taxes.2
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 conducts an empirical analysis of
Sudden Stops using a cross-country dataset and reviews the evidence on MPP use and effective-
   2
    Debt taxes in Fisherian models are equivalent to lender-based regulation using capital requirements or capital
controls (e.g., Bianchi, 2011; Mendoza and Rojas, 2019).

                                                        2
ness. Section 3 reviews the main elements and findings of the quantitative literature on Fisherian
models of Sudden Stops, both positive and normative. Section 4 proposes the new model we use
to analyze MPP tradeoffs related to capital accumulation and to compare LTV regulation with
debt taxes. Section 5 examines the quantitative implications of the model. Section 6 concludes.



2     Empirical Evidence
This Section of the paper examines the stylized facts of Sudden Stops and reviews the empirical
literature on the use and effectiveness of macroprudential policies. The goals are to provide a
quantitative characterization of the movements in macroeconomic variables that define Sudden
Stops and to summarize the existing evidence on the performance of macroprudential policies
aimed at preventing financial crises, many of which, since the 1980s, have been Sudden Stops.


2.1    Stylized Facts of Sudden Stops
Sudden Stops (SS) are economic fluctuations defined by a set of empirical regularities associated
with a large, sudden reversal of capital inflows (i.e., a sudden "loss of access" to international
financial markets). Empirical studies on this subject originated in the seminal contributions by
Milesi Ferretti and Razin (2000), Calvo et al. (2004), and Calvo et al. (2006), which motivated
several authors to conduct further studies, resulting in a large empirical literature that includes
many well-known contributions (e.g., Edwards, 2004; Rothenberg and Warnock, 2006; Forbes
and Warnock, 2012; Calvo et al., 2013; Eichengreen et al., 2017). Most empirical studies apply
event analysis tools to cross-country panel datasets, using one or more filters to identify Sudden
Stop events. A sufficiently large increase in the current account GDP ratio (ca/y ) is widely used
as the main identification filter, because the current account is the broadest measure of the flow
of credit of an economy vis-a-vis the rest of the world, and hence a large increase in ca/y indicates
a sharp contraction in credit (both private and public) from abroad . This filter is often used
together with a second filter that detects if the Sudden Stop is systemic across countries (e.g.,
using the EMBI+ index for emerging markets), and in some instances, other filters, such as large
output drops to capture Sudden Stops with deep recessions (e.g., Calvo et al., 2013) are added.
    We revisit here the analysis of the empirical regularities of Sudden Stops with a similar
methodology but apply it to a panel dataset that includes data up to 2016 and covers both
emerging and advanced economies. We adopt the same event analysis specification as in Korinek
and Mendoza (2014), who used data ending in 2012. This specification defines Sudden Stops
as year-on-year increases in ca/y that are in the 95th percentile of the frequency distribution of
annual changes in ca/y of a particular county. It also includes a filter for systemic Sudden Stops,
which is the market-wide EMBI for emerging markets or the VIX index for advanced economies.

                                                 3
We present the results using both current-account and systemic filters for consistency with the
more recent literature, but the event plots characterizing the stylized facts of Sudden Stops in
macro data are very similar if we use only the ca/y filter. We use annual data for 35 emerging
market (EM) economies and 23 advanced economies (AE) covering the 1979-2016 period, and
construct five-year event windows for the HP-filtered cyclical components of macroeconomic data
centered on the date of Sudden Stops. The plots show as separate curves the median for EMs
and AEs.
   The event analysis yields five key stylized facts, which are consistent with the findings from
the existing literature:

  1. Across all countries, a typical SS event features a current-account reversal of 3.7 percentage
     points of GDP. The reversals are larger in EMs (4.4 percentage points) than in AEs (2.7
     percentage points), as shown in panel (a) of Figure 1. Moreover, SS events are preceded
     by growing current-account deficits and followed by surpluses of about 0.7 percent of GDP
     that persist two years later. Hence, the credit inflow from the rest of the world expands
     in the run-up to a Sudden Stop, then it sharply reverts when a Sudden Stop hits, and two
     years later it is still deppresed.

  2. SS events are infrequent, but they are twice as likely to occur in emerging than in advanced
     economies. We found 51 Sudden Stops in total (2.4 percent frequency), of which 36 occurred
     in EMs (2.9 percent frequency) v. 15 in AEs (1.7 percent frequency). Hence, Sudden
     Stops are rare events that co-exist with typical business cycles. Current accounts are
     countercyclical over the business cycle but with much smaller increases than what we
     observe in Sudden Stops.

  3. SS events are clustered around "big events." They are not randomly distributed over time.
     As Figure 2 shows, there are several years in which no Sudden Stops occur, while we
     observe 14 Sudden Stops in 1982 and 1983, when the Sovereign Debt Crisis of the early
     1980s exploded, 13 in 1998 and 1999, when the Asian crisis occurred, and seven in 2009,
     with the Global Financial Crisis.

  4. SS events are associated with sharp economic downturns, preceded by expansions, and
     followed by protracted recessions (see panels (b) and (c) of Figure 1). For all countries
     combined, GDP and consumption are 2.5 and 1.6 percent below trend respectively. In EMs
     (AEs), GDP and consumption are 3.6 (1.1) and 1.5 (1.6) percent below trend, respectively.
     Moreover, compared with the expansions that precede Sudden Stops, these downturns
     represent sharp reversals. Relative to the year before a Sudden Stop hits, the deviations
     from trend in GDP and consumption for all countries fall by 4.4 and 4 percentage points,
     respectively, and again the reversals are larger for EMs than AEs. Keep in mind, however,

                                                4
     that business cycles are also larger in EMs, so relative to the standard deviations of cyclical
     components, they are comparable. Investment (panel (d) of Figure 1) shows a similar
     pattern, but with larger changes, since investment is also more volatile over the business
     cycle. For all countries, investment is nearly 11 percentage points below trend when a
     Sudden Stop hits, and this represents a reversal of nearly 19 percentage points relative to
     the year before. Two years after SS events, all three macro-aggregates remain significantly
     below trend. Across EMs and AEs, GDP and consumption are 1.5 to 2 percent below trend
     and investment 3.3 to 5.5 percent below trend. This result is in line with the findings from
     Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) indicating that recoveries from recessions triggered by financial
     crises are slow.

  5. SS are associated with falling real equity prices and depreciated real exchange rates (again
     with larger declines in EMs), and they are preceded (followed) by higher (lower) equity
     prices and real exchange rates (see panels (e) and (f) of Figure 1). Hence, the sharp credit
     reversal reflected in the current-account reversal coincides with deflation in relative prices,
     both equity prices and relative consumer prices. This is an important observation, for it
     indicates that relative price deflation is an empirical regularity of Sudden Stops and hence
     should be considered in the design of models aiming to explain this phenomenon.

    It is worth noting also that growth accounting of the recessions associated with Sudden Stops
shows that conventional measures of capital and labor account for a small fraction of the large
declines in GDP (Mendoza, 2010; Meza, 2008; Calvo et al., 2006). Hence, the output drops would
seem to be mostly due to large technology shocks as measured by standard Solow residuals. Those
studies showed also, however, that sharp declines in factor utilization and large increases in the
relative prices of imported inputs can explain the large decline in Solow residuals.




                                                5
               (a) Current Account                                                         (b) GDP

    3.00                                                           4.00
                                                                                                                Emerging
    2.00                                                           3.00                                         Advanced

                                                                   2.00
    1.00
                                                                   1.00
    0.00
%




                                                               %
                                                                   0.00
    -1.00
                                                                   -1.00
    -2.00
                                                                   -2.00
    -3.00                                 Emerging                 -3.00
                                          Advanced
    -4.00                                                          -4.00
         t-2    t-1      t          t+1              t+2                t-2        t-1          t         t+1              t+2


                (c) Consumption                                                          (d) Investment

    5.00                                                           15.00
                                          Emerging                                                              Emerging
    4.00                                  Advanced                 10.00                                        Advanced

    3.00
                                                                     5.00
    2.00
                                                                     0.00
%




                                                               %




    1.00
                                                                    -5.00
    0.00
                                                                   -10.00
    -1.00

    -2.00                                                          -15.00

    -3.00                                                          -20.00
         t-2    t-1      t          t+1              t+2                 t-2        t-1             t     t+1              t+2


                (e) Equity Prices                                               (f) Real Exchange Rate

    1.40                                                           1.05
                                          Emerging
    1.30                                  Advanced
                                                                   1.00
    1.20

    1.10                                                           0.95
    1.00

    0.90                                                           0.90

    0.80
                                                                   0.85
    0.70                                                                       Emerging
                                                                               Advanced
    0.60                                                           0.80
        t-2    t-1       t          t+1              t+2               t-2         t-1          t         t+1              t+2




                             Figure 1: Sudden Stops Dynamics




                                                           6
                                                   0
                                                       1
                                                           2
                                                               3
                                                                   4
                                                                       5
                                                                           6
                                                                               7
                                                                                   8
                                                                                       9
                                                                                                  10
                                                1981
                                                1982
                                                1983
                                                1984
                                                1985
                                                1986
                                                1987
                                                1988
                                                1989
                                                1990
                                                1991
                                                1992
                                                1993
                                                1994
                                                1995
                                                1996
                                                1997




7
                                                1998
                                                1999
                                                2000
                                                2001
                                                2002
                                                2003
                                                2004
                                                2005
                                                2006
                                                2007
                                                2008




    Figure 2: Number of Sudden Stops per Year
                                                2009
                                                2010
                                                2011
                                                2012
                                                2013
                                                2014
                                                2015
                                                                                       Emerging
                                                                                       Advanced




                                                2016
2.2     Macroprudential Policy Use and Effectiveness
Empirical studies of Sudden Stops complement a related empirical literature documenting the
deep recessions and price corrections that follow the collapse of credit booms (e.g., Mendoza and
Terrones, 2008; Mendoza and Terrones, 2012; Schularick and Taylor, 2009) and the historical
characteristics of financial crises (Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009). Together with the recent GFC
experience, the evidence documented in all of these studies highlights the importance of imple-
menting policies aimed at reducing the frequency and magnitude of financial crises, which are
now grouped under the label of macroprudential policy.
    To be sure, financial policies that can be regarded as macroprudential are not new. There are
examples of policies aimed at managing aggregate credit dating back to the 1930s. In addition,
since the aftermath of the Emerging Markets Crisis in the late 1990s, several emerging economies
introduced financial regulation that is now considered macroprudentia. Yet it was only in the
aftermath of the 2008-2009 GFC that a wide consensus was reached on the desirability of us-
ing macroprudential policies. Several countries accordingly adopted new financial policies and
institutional changes, international organizations endorsed their use and contributed to their
implementation (e.g., the countercyclical capital buffer, known as CCyB, included in the BIS's
Basel III regulatory framework), and new institutions were created to implement and coordinate
them (e.g., the Financial Stability Board and the European Systemic Risk Board).3
    In the paragraphs that follow, we summarize the macroprudential policies that have been
more commonly used since the 1990s and the existing evidence on their effectiveness so far. The
aim is to provide an empirical background for the normative analysis that we conduct later in
this paper. A number of comprehensive empirical studies have analyzed macroprudential policies
and their effectiveness in emerging and advanced economies (e.g., Cerutti et al., 2015; Buch et
al., 2018; Ahnert and Kakhbod, 2017; Cordella et al., 2014; Acharya et al., 2017). We base the
description provided here on the work of Cerutti et al. (2015) and the survey by Galati and
Moessner (2018).
    Using data from two IMF surveys, Cerutti et al. (2015) constructed time-series, cross-sectional
indexes of 12 macroprudential policy instruments. They grouped the instruments into borrower-
targeted (BTI) and financial intermediary-targeted (FIT). The former consist of regulatory loan-
to-value (LTV) and debt-to-income (DTI) ratios on new loans, and the latter consist of ten
instruments, including countercyclical capital buffers, bank leverage ratios and limits on foreign
currency loans (see Annex 1 in Cerutti et al., 2015, for full details). The overall macroprudential
index (MPI) is defined as the sum of the scores on all twelve instruments in a given year and
country (120 countries from 2000 to 2013). For a given country, it assigns a value of 1 to each
   3
    The first widely cited use of the term "macroprudential" is generally attributed to the discussion by Borio
(2003) on the need to revamp financial regulation with a macroprudential perspective because of the financial
turbulence observed during the 1990s emerging markets crisis.


                                                      8
instrument that the country has, from the year the instrument was introduced to the year it was
removed. Similar indexes are defined separately for the BTI and FTI.
    The evolution of the MPI since 2000 highlights the growing importance of macroprudential
policy. The average MPI across all countries rose from 1.1 in 2000 to nearly 2.5 in 2013. The
increase has been common to advanced, emerging, and developing economies, although emerging
markets show higher average MPIs than advanced economies throughout the sample period (1.3
v. 0.8 in 2000, 2.6 v. 1.9 in 2013). By 2013, 90 percent of the 120 countries in the sample had
implemented at least one macroprudential policy instrument. Instruments targeting financial
institutions are the most common, but since the mid-2000s borrowed-targeted instruments have
gained relevance. By 2013, 35 percent of the countries had adopted borrower-oriented LTV
and/or DTI regulations. As we review below, this is perhaps in response to the stronger evidence
on the effectiveness of borrower-oriented instruments.
    While the data studied by Cerutti et al. (2015) shows that macroprudential instruments are
now widely used, the survey by Galati and Moessner (2018) documents that the empirical lit-
erature studying their effectiveness has produced mixed results. On one hand, there is strong
evidence across several studies on the effectiveness of LTVs and DTIs for moderating credit
and asset price growth, particularly in housing markets, in emerging and advanced economies
and across exchange rate regimes (see, for example, Cerutti et al., 2015; Claessens and Kose,
2013; Kuttner and Shim, 2016). On the other hand, evidence on the effectiveness of financial
institutions-based instruments is less conclusive. For instance, Cerutti et al. (2015) find that
taken as a group, these policies reduce credit growth in emerging economies, but in advanced
economies the effect is not statistically significant. Similarly, a variety of studies looking at
specific instruments using different methodologies and/or sample periods often find conflicting
results. Moreover, they generally find that while in some cases the financial institution-targeted
instruments are effective in expansions, they are much less helpful at dampening credit con-
tractions in bad times. In particular, Dell'Ariccia et al. (2012) found that macroprudential
instruments reduce both the overall frequency of credit booms and the frequency with which
booms end up in crises. Kuttner and Shim (2016) found that hiking housing taxes reduces the
growth of house prices, but a tax cut does not have a statistically significant effect. These results
are interesting because, as we show later in the paper, the normative analysis of Sudden Stops
models calls for the use of macroprudential policy during credit expansions as a way to reduce
the frequency and magnitude of financial crises.
    One of the most widely studied financial institution-targeted macroprudential policy instru-
ments is capital controls. This is natural because, as we documented earlier, since the 1980s
financial crises characterized by large reversals in international credit flows (i.e., Sudden Stops)
have affected a large number of countries. The large current-account deficits that precede Sudden
Stops indicate that a rapid expansion in foreign capital inflows plays an important role in these

                                                 9
crises, hence the interest in using capital controls as a macroprudential policy instrument. Galati
and Moessner (2018) report that the empirical evidence on the effectiveness of macroprudential
capital controls is also inconclusive and mixed.4 Ostry et al. (2012) find that they affect the com-
position of capital flows, while Beirne and Friedrich (2014) find only a limited effect on aggregate
capital inflows. Forbes and Warnock (2012) find that macroprudential capital controls weaken
some indicators of financial fragility such as leverage, credit growth, and gross inflows in the
banking sector, but they do not have a significant effect on net capital inflows.5 These empirical
findings are interesting in light of some of the findings of theoretical work showing that domestic
debt taxes are equivalent to capital controls in workhorse models with Fisherian constraints,
and hence the effectiveness of macroprudential policy does not hinge on discriminating foreign
from domestic credit sources (Bianchi, 2011; Mendoza and Rojas, 2019).6 It is worth noting also
that leakages in capital controls do not necessarily call for softer regulation, and in fact, optimal
policy may call for even stronger regulation (Bengui and Bianchi, 2018).
    Looking forward, the CCyB introduced with the Basel III Global Regulatory Framework will
also become a widely-studied macroprudential policy tool. The CCyB calls for an "add-on"
capital buffer during large credit expansions, as defined by a "reference guide" suggested to be
the deviation from the Hodrick-Prescott trend in aggregate credit to the private sector as a share
of GDP.7 The CCyB is activated when this deviation from trend rises above a given activation
threshold, then it is tightened linearly if credit continues to expand up to a maximum, and
then it is removed linearly as the deviation from trend reverts to the activation threshold. The
activation threshold and the maximum are left to the discretion of country regulators, but 2 and
10 percentage points are recommended. Similarly, the values that the add-on buffer can take
and the rate at which they are tightened in the upswing and weakened in the downswing are
left to the discretion of country authorities. Implementation by BIS member countries was to
be completed by the end of 2018. As of February 2018, nine countries had active CCyBs or
announced the forthcoming activation of their CCyBs, including the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Hong Kong, Iceland, Lithuania, Norway, the Slovak Republic, Sweden and the United Kingdom.
We will have to wait a few years to have enough data for conducting a systematic evaluation of
the CCyB's effectiveness. Some quantitative experiments of procyclical MPP rules linked to the
credit-GDP ratio suggest, however, that while these rules contribute to dampen credit cycles,
they are much less effective than optimal policy rules at reducing the magnitude and frequency
   4
     Not all forms of capital controls are macroprudential. As Galati and Moessner (2018) explain, capital controls
are macroprudential only if their governance rules state the aim of reducing system-wide financial vulnerabilities.
   5
     An interesting point made by Yeyati (2011) is that a skeptical but inconsistent argument regarding capital
controls is that: "Not only are they ineffective but, in addition, they raise domestic interest rates." As he points
out, it is precisely the fact that domestic interest rates rise that makes capital controls effective.
   6
     In the analysis of these authors, a reserve requirement or a tax on foreign borrowing by banks is equivalent
to a tax on households borrowing from domestic banks.
   7
     See https://www.bis.org/bcbs/ccyb/ for full details.



                                                        10
of crises (see Bianchi and Mendoza, 2018; Mendoza and Rojas, 2019).
    In summary, the empirical literature to date on the effectiveness of macroprudential policy
instruments shows generally mixed results. The only instruments for which the evidence is
unambiguous are borrower-targeted instruments (e.g., LTVs, DTIs, housing taxes). In addition,
macroprudential instruments are effective at hampering credit growth in booms but less effective
at containing credit collapse in bad times. Macroprudential capital controls alter the composition
of capital inflows and weaken some measures of banking fragility but do not affect aggregate and
net capital inflows. We also acknowledge, however, that endogeneity and identification issues
are major challenges for empirical work in this area. To the extent that MPP is deployed to
curb what would be an excessive credit expansion, as theoretical models predict, this is likely
to bias the results toward ineffectiveness.8 Moreover, while the empirical literature typically
identifies the effects of financial regulation instruments used with a systemic focus (i.e., across
the financial system as a whole), it does not identify whether the policy instruments are used in a
prudential form (i.e., in ex-ante fashion relating the current value of the instrument to potential
future outcomes). In the normative theory discussed later, MPP instruments explicitly aim to
make credit more expensive in "good times" so as to induce agents to internalize the social
cost of future financial crises associated with increased borrowing ex-ante. We see the growing
widespread use of macroprudential policies in line with the shifting paradigm and the availability
of richer micro data as particularly fertile ground for more research on these issues.


3         The Fisherian Approach to Sudden Stops
The Fisherian theory of financial crises provides a quantitative framework for explaining the
stylized facts of Sudden Stops and for designing and assessing macroprudential policies. This
Section of the paper provides a brief, generic description of Fisherian models. The goal is
to describe the essential elements that drive the transmission mechanism of financial crises in
these models and their normative implications. The next Section will discuss in detail the
specifics and quantitative implementation of a particular model aimed at studying the tradeoffs
of macroprudential policy in a setup with capital accumulation.
    The defining element of Fisherian models of Sudden Stops is an occasionally binding collat-
eral constraint that limits borrowing capacity not to exceed a measure of pledgeable collateral
that depends on market prices.9 The constraint is occasionally binding because whether it binds
is a state-contingent equilibrium outcome that depends on the optimal plans formulated by the
models' agents, the realizations of exogenous shocks and the values of aggregate variables, partic-
ularly equilibrium prices. Pledgeable collateral is defined as a (potentially time-varying) fraction
    8
        For a forceful argument of the empirical challenges that need to be overcome, see Werning (2012).
    9
        Chapter 12 of Uribe and Schmitt-Groh´  e (2017) provides a useful textbook presentation of these models.

                                                          11
t of the market value of an agent's income or assets. Most models assume a representative-agent
small open economy in which debt takes the form of a negative position in an internationally-
                                                                                     b
traded one-period bond bt+1 sold at a world-determined (possibly stochastic) price qt  (i.e., the
                                   b 10
gross real interest rate is Rt  1/qt ).
    Most of the literature uses collateral constraints that are directly imposed on the optimization
problems of agents, rather than an endogenous outcome of an explicitly-modeled contract. This
is common practice in a branch of the macro literature on financial frictions, as in the seminal
studies by Aiyagari and Gertler (1999) and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). There are, however,
studies of Fisherian models in which the collateral constraint is explicitly derived from a contrac-
tual setup, typically as a result of limited enforcement or costly state verification (e.g., Bianchi
and Mendoza, 2018; Mendoza and Quadrini, 2010).
    It is worth noting also that both the financial-amplification mechanism and the pecuniary-
externality argument underpinning the normative implications of these models apply to a wider
class of financial-frictions models in which market prices determine borrowing capacity. For
instance, the classic financial accelerator model of Bernanke and Gertler (1989), in which an
external financing premium as a function of net worth endogenously emerges as an outcome of an
optimal contract, features a similar pecuniary externality because net worth is valued at market
prices and borrowers do not internalize the effect of their actions on those prices. Models like
those studied by Lorenzoni (2008), Stein (2012), Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010) and Brunnermeier
and Sannikov (2014) also feature credit frictions and related pecuniary externalities affecting the
efficiency of competitive equilibria.
      The majority of the existing research focuses on two types of constraints:

  1. Loan-to-value (LTV) or stock constraints : Pledgeable collateral is an asset k (e.g., land,
     equity, housing, etc) with a market price qt and the borrowing constraint is:

                                          b
                                         qt bt+1  t qt kt+j ,    j = 0, 1.                                (1)

        The timing of the assets posted as collateral in the right-hand-side of the constraint depends
        on assumptions about the nature of credit contracts and their enforcement. For instance,
        Mendoza and Smith (2006) use kt+1 based on the model of margin loans proposed by
        Aiyagari and Gertler (1999), in which the assets that an agent buys at date t are used
        as collateral. Bianchi and Mendoza (2018) use kt based on the incentive-compatibility
        constraint of an optimal debt contract with limited enforcement that is set at the beginning
        of each date t before the asset market opens (see Appendix A5 of Bianchi and Mendoza,
        2018 for details). Constraints with either timing specification have been extensively used,
 10
      See Mendoza and Quadrini (2010) for an example of a Sudden Stops model with heterogeneous agents.


                                                     12
       including in models with capital accumulation and working-capital financing added to the
       credit constraint (Mendoza, 2010), models of learning and financial innovation (Boz and
       Mendoza, 2014), exchange-rate policy (Fornaro, 2018), studies on the effects of financial
       policies and financial integration (Durdu and Mendoza, 2006; Mendoza and Smith, 2014;
       Jeanne and Korinek, 2018; Reyes-Heroles and Tenorio, n.d.), and models of self-fulfilling
       Sudden Stops (Schmitt-Groh´   e and Uribe, 2017).

   2. Debt-to-income (DTI) or flow constraints: Debt cannot exceed a given fraction of income,
      including income from tradable and non-tradable sectors, denoted y T and y N , respectively:

                                             b          T
                                            qt bt+1  t yt + pN  N
                                                             t yt .                                         (2)

       This DTI constraint was proposed by Mendoza (2002) in a study examining the feedback
       between real-exchange-rate movements and borrowing capacity. This type of income-based
       constraint is typical in household financing (e.g., DTI's on mortgages required by entities
       like Fannie Mae or Freddie Mae or those used for credit scoring for auto and credit-card
       loans). The constraint limits debt denominated in units of tradables to the value of pledge-
       able collateral expressed in the same units.11 From a contractual point of view, the reason
       why non-tradable goods enter as collateral is that foreigners can seize them from a default-
       ing borrower and sell them in the domestic market in exchange for tradable goods. The
       literature has extensively used this formulation of the credit constraint in models of reserve
       accumulation (Durdu et al., 2009; Arce et al., 2019), macroprudential policy (Bianchi,
       2011), real-exchange-rate stabilization policies (Benigno et al., 2013), ex-post intervention
       with industrial policy (Hernandez and Mendoza, 2017), self-fulfilling crises (Schmitt-Groh´  e
       and Uribe, 2018), noisy news and regime-switching shocks (Bianchi et al., 2016), trend
       shocks (Flemming et al., 2019; Seoane and Yurdagul, 2019), imperfect enforcement in
       capital-flow management policies (Bengui and Bianchi, 2018), models with banks inter-
       mediating capital inflows in T units to fund domestic loans in units of the domestic CPI
       (Mendoza and Rojas, 2019), and models of exchange-rate policy with nominal rigidities
       and credit frictions (Ottonello, 2015; Coulibaly, 2018; Farhi and Werning, 2016).


3.1     Fisherian Debt-Deflation Amplification Mechanism
The models we study here are labeled "Fisherian" because when the collateral constraint binds,
they display dynamics driven by the classic debt-deflation mechanism first proposed in the work
of Fisher (1933): agents fire sale goods and/or assets in order to meet their obligations, but as
  11
     Assuming the law of one price holds and no foreign inflation, this is equivalent to assuming the debt is in
hard currency but backed partially by income in domestic currency, and hence the setup captures in part the
liability dollarization phenomenon.

                                                      13
they do so the prices of those goods or assets fall. Since the Fisherian constraint links borrowing
capacity to prices, the decline in prices further tightens the constraint, forcing further fire sales.
This feedback mechanism amplifies the effects of shocks relative to states of nature in which the
credit constraint does not bind. These models differ from other models with credit constraints,
because while a binding credit constraint always implies a negative effect on aggregate demand,
due to the direct (or balance-sheet) effect of the constraint on demand for consumer goods, only
models in which market prices enter in the credit constraint feature Fisherian amplification.
Moreover, some Fisherian models also include adverse supply-side effects due to declining values
of marginal products of inputs in response to price deflation (e.g., Durdu et al., 2009), binding
credit limits for working capital (e.g., Bianchi and Mendoza, 2018), and falling investment in
response to collapsing equity prices (e.g., Mendoza, 2010). In addition, some models include
international spillovers driven by international asset trading and short-selling constraints or mark-
to-market capital requirements (e.g., Mendoza and Smith, 2006; Mendoza and Quadrini, 2010).
     A tractable analytic characterization of Fisherian amplification is difficult to obtain in gen-
eral, because of the lack of closed-form solutions typical of dynamic general-equilibrium models
and the non-linearities implied by the occasionally binding credit constraint. One exception is
the perfect-foresight analysis of the DTI model with endowment incomes examined in Mendoza
(2005) and extended to examine equilibrium multiplicity in Schmitt-Groh´        e and Uribe (2018)
and intermediation of capital inflows in Mendoza and Rojas (2019). In these models, a rep-
resentative agent consumes a CES composite commodity (c(cT , cN )) that combines tradables
and non-tradables. The agent and chooses consumption and optimal bond holdings so as to
maximize a standard intertemporal utility function subject to the DTI constraint and a budget
constraint with a time-varying income of tradables and a fixed endowment of non-tradables. In
Mendoza (2005), the competitive equilibrium of the economy is given by sequences of allocations
{ cT    N                        N
   t , ct , bt+1 }t0 and prices pt t0
                                      that satisfy the following conditions:

                                                               +1
                                              1-         cT
                                                          t
                                     pN
                                      t   =               N
                                                                                                  (3)
                                                         ct

                                    uT (t) = R [uT (t + 1)] + µt                                  (4)

                      q b bt+1  - yt
                                   T
                                     + pN
                                        t y
                                            N
                                              ,          with equality if µt > 0,                 (5)

                                              cN
                                               t = y
                                                     N
                                                                                                  (6)

                                       cT    T    b
                                        t = yt - q bt+1 + bt ,                                    (7)

where µt is the non-negative Lagrange multiplier on the credit constraint, uT (t)  u (ct )ct /cT
                                                                                               t ,
and  and  are parameters of the CES aggregator c(.) such that  is the tradables share



                                                 14
parameter and 1/(1 +  ) is the elasticity of substitution between cT      N 12
                                                                   t and ct .

    The above equilibrium conditions have two immediate implications that are important for
the analysis that follows: First, (3) and (6) imply that at equilibrium, the price of non-tradables
is an increasing function of the allocation of tradables consumption, so that the equilibrium price
can be denoted pN (CtT ). Second, if the credit constraint binds, CtT is given by the solutions to
the following nonlinear equation in CtT formed by conditions (3), (5) holding with equality, (6)
and (7):
                                CtT = (1 + )yt  T
                                                  + pN (CtT )y N + bt .                         (8)

Assuming no-Ponzi-game condition, the intertemporal resource constraint for tradables is
                                                            
                                             R - t cT
                                                    t   =         R-t yt
                                                                       T
                                                                         + b0 ,                             (9)
                                       t=0                  t=0


where     t=0 R
                -t T
                  yt  W0 is the tradables non-financial wealth of the economy. This condition,
together with (3)-(6), fully characterizes this model's equilibrium. Following Mendoza (2005),
we simplify the analysis by assuming that: a) R = 1; b) b0 < 0 (i.e., the economy starts with
                  T
some debt), c) y0    is lower than in the future, so that agents would want to set b1 < 0; and
                                                   T
d) there are wealth-neutral shocks that reduce y0    keeping W0 constant.13 These shocks induce
                                                               T                                T
agents to borrow more. For a shock large enough to make y0       fall below a threshold value y
                                                                                              ^0  ,
the collateral constraint binds, but for weaker shocks it does not.
        T
   For y0 y   T
             ^0 , the collateral constraint does not bind at t = 0, and since R = 1, we get the
standard result that tradables consumption is a constant fraction of total wealth:

                                           cT = (1 -  )(W0 + b0 ).                                         (10)

Moreover, since consumption of tradables and the non-tradables endowment (and consumption)
are constant, the equilibrium price of non-tradables is also constant.
         T      T
    For y0 <y  ^0 , the collateral constraint binds, and a Sudden Stop occurs. Condition (7) implies
that c0 falls, because access to debt is insufficient to sustain cT . Then, it follows from condition
      T

(3) that pN0 falls to clear the non-tradables market. This triggers the Fisherian amplification
mechanism: the endogenous price drop further tightens the collateral constraint because it re-
duces the value of collateral provided by the non-tradables endowment in condition (5). Formally,
the value of cT0 is now determined by condition (8).

       Figure 3 illustrates the determination of unique constrained and unconstrained equilibria in a
                                                                     1
  12                                   -                         - - 
     The CES aggregator is ct =  cT  t    + (1 -  ) cNt         ,  > -1,   (0, 1).
  13                                                                    T    T              T
     A wealth-neutral income shock at t=0 is defined by income levels (y0 , y1 ) such that y1  ¯T = R(¯
                                                                                                      y T - y0
                                                                                              -y             T
                                                                                                               )
      T    T                                                      T
and yt = y¯ for t  2. Hence, wealth remains constant at W0 = y   ¯ /(1 -  ).


                                                            15
manner analogous to Figure 2 in Mendoza (2005). The multiple-equilibria case is discussed later
in this Section. The PP curve is the pN (CtT ) function, which as noted above is increasing and
convex in C T . The BBSS and BBN B curves plot values of pN that correspond to values of cT such
that the collateral constraint holds with equality and the tradables resource constraint is satisfied
(i.e., equation (8) solved for pN                    T                           T 14
                                0 as a function of c0 ) for different values of y0 .  BBN B is for
 T      T
y0  =y ^0 so that the constraint is marginally binding: a wealth-neutral shock of this magnitude
sustains the exact amount of debt that agents would want to have.15 BBSS is for y0      T
                                                                                           <y  T
                                                                                              ^0 , so
that the binding constraint does alter allocations and prices.




               Figure 3: Sudden Stops under Perfect Foresight: Unique Equilibrium

     The competitive equilibrium when the constraint is not binding (binding) is determined at
point NB (SS), which is the intersection of the PP curve with the BBN B (BBSS ) curve. For any
  T     T
y0  y  ^0 , the constraint does not bind and the equilibrium remains at point NB with consumption
at c¯T and the non-tradables price at p  ¯N . Income shocks such that y0 T
                                                                           <y  T
                                                                              ^0 shift the BB curve
to the left, triggering the credit constraint and causing a Sudden Stop. The credit constraint
forces agents to reduce consumption to the value consistent with point A, which is lower than
¯T , but at that consumption level, clearing the market of non-tradables makes the price fall to
c
the one consistent with point B. But at this lower price, the credit constraint tightens and forces
consumption to fall to the value consistent with point C, and market-clearing then requires the
  14
    Mendoza (2005) showed that the BB curves are increasing, linear functions of cT 0 with a horizontal intercept
given by I SS  (1 + )y0   T
                            + b0 and a slope of mSS  1/(y N ).
          ¯T -b0 -p
                  ¯N y
                     ¯N
    ^0 = c
  15 T
    y          1+       , where c¯T and p¯N are the unconstrained equilibrium outcomes.

                                                       16
price to fall to point D. This Fisherian debt-deflation feedback loop continues until the Sudden
Stop equilibrium is reached at point SS. This point yields the consumption and price values that
solve equation (8). Hence, this Figure highlights how the Fisherian mechanism amplifies the
effects of income shocks, causing a sharp drop in consumption and the price of non-tradables
(i.e., the real exchange rate). Implicit in the consumption reversal is a sharp reversal of the
current account, implied by the sudden increase in the NFA position forced by the binding credit
constraint at the sharply lower pN .
    How do results change if we consider a credit constraint independent of market prices instead
of the Fisherian constraint? For example, debt could be set not to exceed a constant value or set
to keep a debt-to-income cap in which non-tradables are valued at a notional "book value." In
this case, the BB curves in Figure 3 become vertical lines at the level of tradables consumption
that the fixed credit constraint supports. The figure determines only the equilibrium price (where
the vertical BB curves would intersect with the PP curve), because consumption is exogenously
determined by the credit constraint. The constraint still forces consumption to fall relative to
the unconstrained outcome, but there is no Fisherian amplification mechanism, as the lower
equilibrium price does not cause an endogenous tightening of the credit limit.
     It is worth noting also that there is a second intersection of the BB and PP curves in Figure 3,
which would be visible if we extended its domain far enough. This second intersection, however, is
not an equilibrium, because cT  0 would be higher than c   ¯T . Moreover, given the specification of the
wealth-neutral shock, the intertemporal resource constraint would imply cT              T
                                                                                   1 < c0 , which would
imply a negative Lagrange multiplier (µ0 = u (cT                T
                                                     0 ) - u (c1 ) < 0). In addition, the unconstrained
equilibrium cannot co-exist with the unique Sudden Stops equilibrium, because as Figure 3 shows,
with the credit constraint binding, the value of pN  0 at which the non-tradables market would clear
                                T
if tradables consumption is c  ¯ is too low for the resource constraint to be satisfied.
    While the constrained and unconstrained equilibria illustrated in Figure 1 are unique, it is
possible to obtain multiple equilibria in both DTI and LTV Sudden Stops models, as Schmitt-
Groh´ e and Uribe (2017) and (2018) showed. This opens up the possibility of Sudden Stops due to
self-fulfilling expectations or "sunspots." In the specific DTI example we are analyzing, Mendoza
(2005) noted that a sufficient condition for uniqueness is that the BB curve be flatter than the
PP curve around the unconstrained equilibrium (point NB). Formally, the sufficiency condition
for uniqueness is:16
                                                      cT
                                            ^                  .                             (11)
                                                 (1 +  )pN y N
Note, however, that the condition involves not only the parameter  but also the preference
                          ¯T and p
parameters that determine c       ¯N , which include  ,  , and  . Given these parameters, if
  16
       This condition follows from noting that the slope of the BB curve is 1/(y N ), and since the PP curve is given
                                                  (1+ )pN                                                     (1+ )p¯N
by condition (3), its slope can be expressed as      cT
                                                        t
                                                            , which at the unconstrained equilibrium equals      ¯T
                                                                                                                 c
                                                                                                                         .
                                                      t




                                                            17
 satisfies this condition, the constrained and unconstrained equilibria are unique. Intuitively,
the condition states that the cap on debt relative to income cannot exceed the product of the
elasticity of substitution times the ratio of tradables-to-non-tradables expenditures.
    Failure of the above condition is necessary but not sufficient for multiplicity. Multiplicity
                    T
requires also that y0 be in a particular interval. To see this, Figure 4 shows the equilibrium
determination assuming that the sufficiency condition for uniqueness fails. For simplicity, we
assume also that the preference parameters are given, and hence the condition is violated because
                                           T      T
 is "too large." As the figure shows, at y0   =y ^0 we now have two equilibria. One is the same
unconstrained equilibrium as in Figure 1 (point NB), but now point A is also an equilibrium and
is one in which the constraint binds, resulting in sharply lower consumption and prices. Here,
Sudden Stops would be the result of self-fulfilling expectations.




              Figure 4: Sudden Stops under Perfect Foresight: Multiple Equilibria

                             T                 T    T
    But what happens as y0     changes? For y0   <y^0 , the BB curve would shift to the left, and there
is a unique Sudden Stop equilibrium. But if BB shifts slightly to the right, namely, if income rises
                 T
a little above y
               ^0  , there are now three equilibria: two Sudden Stop equilibria at the two points
where the BB curve intersects with the PP curve (points B and C), as well as the unconstrained
                                    T     T
equilibrium at NB (because with y0    >y ^0 , the unconstrained outcome is also an equilibrium). BB
keeps shifting rightward as income rises, and we keep finding three equilibria. But when we reach
                     T
the income level y  ~0 such that BB is tangent to SS, we have only two equilibria (the tangency
                                                            T     T
point D and the unconstrained equilibrium NB). For y0         >y ~0 , multiplicity disappears, and the
                                                                                         T      T    T
unconstrained equilibrium is the unique equilibrium. Hence, multiplicity requires y     ^0  y0    y ~0 .
  Schmitt-Groh´    e and Uribe (2018) derived a similar necessary condition on  required for
multiplicity, but focused on how multiplicity emerges if initial bond holdings fall within an interval

                                                  18
of relatively high values (i.e. multiplicity requires low initial debt), instead of focusing on income
shocks. The value of b0 must be high enough (i.e. debt low enough) so that at the unconstrained
equilibrium condition (11) holds, but not so high that the credit constraint does not bind (since
higher b0 also implies higher b1 at the unconstrained equilibrium). Intuitively, the consistency
of the two treatments follows from noticing that by capitalizing initial income differences into
                                                         T
changes in bond holdings, differences in b0 keeping y0     constant can be alternatively represented
                    T
as differences in y0  keeping b0 constant. Hence, an interval of relatively high b0 (i.e., low debt)
that sustains multiplicity is equivalent to an interval of relatively high initial income values.
    The quantitative relevance of multiplicity in Fisherian Sudden Stops models is an open ques-
tion. It is possible to construct reasonably calibrated models where condition (11) can hold or
fail (e.g., Hernandez and Mendoza, 2017 v. Schmitt-Groh´         e and Uribe, 2018). This depends on
assumptions about the relevant values of  and parameters like the intertemporal elasticity of
substitution in consumption, estimates of which are very noisy, as well as the size of debt ratios
and the data frequency at which they are being targeted. Moreover, violating condition (11) is
necessary but not sufficient for multiplicity. If it fails, the likelihood of multiplicity then depends
on the probability of observing income in the relevant interval of relatively high but not too-high
                 T              T
values (above y ^0 but below y~0  ). But this implies that Sudden Stops should be associated with
relatively high income, which is not in line with the stylized facts. Finally, both condition (11)
and the multiplicity income interval are model dependent. For instance, if banks intermediate
capital inflows in units of T goods to fund domestic loans in units of the domestic CPI, Mendoza
and Rojas (2019) show that multiplicity requires  to be higher than in condition (11), and the
multiplicity income interval narrows. The literature has found, however, that Fisherian ampli-
fication in models with a unique equilibrium is quantitatively large, and hence the Fisherian
framework can provide a plausible theory of Sudden Stops even without multiplicity and with
Sudden Stops co-existing with typical business cycles (Mendoza, 2010). Moreover, Sudden Stops
result from financial amplification of shocks of standard magnitudes included in the known set
of shock realizations, so this theory of Sudden Stops does not rely on large, unexpected shocks.


3.2    Normative Implications of Fisherian Models
We close this Section by examining the market-failure argument that justifies the use of macro-
prudential policy in Fisherian models. The competitive equilibrium in these models is generally
constrained-inefficient because of a pecuniary externality by which agents do not internalize the
effects of their borrowing decisions on collateral values. Pecuniary externalities generally do not
distort allocations, but in Fisherian models they do because market prices alter borrowing ca-
pacity. In particular, there is scope for implementing policies that reduce borrowing (e.g., debt
taxes or equivalent instruments) because agents do not internalize that higher borrowing at time


                                                  19
t contributes to reduce the price of collateral at t + 1and, in this way, tightens the collateral
constraint of all agents in the economy (see Bianchi, 2011). As a result, the private marginal
cost of borrowing ignores the response of collateral values at t +1 if the credit constraint becomes
binding. A social planner or financial regulator would factor this in, and hence private and social
marginal costs of borrowing differ.
    To formalize the above argument in a generic form that applies to both DTI and LTV models,
consider that the equilibrium relative prices determining the market value of collateral corre-
spond to marginal rates of substitution in consumption. Because these are general equilibrium
outcomes, individual borrowers do not internalize the effects of their own borrowing decisions on
the aggregate variables that pin down the value of collateral via these equilibrium conditions,
but a social planner does, because it internalizes that prices are determined jointly with alloca-
tions. Appendix A provides a full characterization of the constrained-efficient planner's problem
illustrating the nature of the pecuniary externality and showing how the planner's allocations
can be decentralized with debt taxes.
    In DTI models, the relevant marginal rate of substitution for the value of collateral is that
between cT and cN , and in the widely used case in which income from N goods is an exogenous
endowment, we saw before that we can express the price of non-tradables as a function pN          T
                                                                                             t (Ct )
of aggregate tradables consumption CtT . In the LTV models, the relevant marginal rate of substi-
tution is the entire set of future intertemporal marginal rates of substitution, so the equilibrium
value of collateral can be expressed as qt (Ct , Ct+1 ...). Notice a key difference between the two
cases: in the DTI model, the price depends only on date-t aggregate variables, whereas in the
LTV model, it depends on current and future variables. This difference has crucial implications
for time consistency of optimal macroprudential policy that we discuss later in this Section.
    A property common to all Fisherian models is that in a decentralized equilibrium without
policy intervention the households' Euler equation for bond holdings is

                                   u (t) = Rt Et [u (t + 1)] + µt .                              (12)

Here, u (t) denotes the marginal utility of consumption, with the caveat that for DTI models
like the one examined earlier it denotes the marginal utility of cT . The non-negative Lagrange
multiplier µt is again the multiplier on the collateral constraint. Intuitively, when the constraint
binds, the marginal cost of borrowing rises because it is as if the effective interest rate rose above
Rt by an amount that depends on the shadow value of the constraint.
   Studies of optimal macroprudential policy differ widely, depending on the particular struc-
ture of the model and the policy instruments that are available. A general result, however, is
the presence of overborrowing, characterized by a wedge in the intertemporal Euler equation of
debt that arises in the optimization problem of a constrained social planner who chooses bor-


                                                 20
rowing on behalf of the households. The planner is subject to the implementability constraints
associated with the private optimality conditions--except the one for debt, because it is chosen
by the planner--in addition to the financial and resource constraints (Appendix A provides a
full description of the constrained-efficient planner's problem). Focusing on a state of nature in
which the collateral constraint does not currently bind, the planner's Euler equation for bonds
typically takes this form:17

                                                     i
                      u (t) = Rt Et u (t) + µt+1 t+1 t+1 ,             i = DT I, LT V,                     (13)

                                                                        i
where µt+1 is the planner's multiplier on the borrowing constraint, and t+1 measures the change
in the market value of collateral at t + 1 as the bond holdings chosen by the planner at date t
(i.e., Bt+1 ) change. For the DTI and LTV models, this is given by these expressions:

                               DT I  N     N     T
                               t+1 =yt+1 (pt+1 /Ct+1 ),                                                    (14)
                               LT V
                               t+1 =Kt+1+j (qt+1 /Ct+1 ),              j = 0, 1.                           (15)

                      i
The term µt+1 t+1 t    +1 represents an externality because it captures the difference in the marginal
cost of borrowing faced by the social planner v. the one faced by private agents in the absence
of regulation. It is relevant only if the constraint is expected to bind in at least some states of
nature at t + 1. It is a pecuniary externality because it is caused by the price effects that are the
aggregate result of individual choices and, as such, are not internalized by private agents. The
                                                                        i           i
externality is said to induce overborrowing (underborrowing) if t        +1 > 0 (t+1 < 0), because
it implies that private agents undervalue (overvalue) the marginal cost of borrowing relative to
                                                     i
what is socially optimal. In turn, the sign of t      +1 is determined by the sign of the derivative
of the collateral price with respect to aggregate consumption: pN            T
                                                                      t+1 /Ct+1 and qt+1 /Ct+1 for
the DTI and LTV models, respectively. Notice that these derivatives are an equilibrium object,
so establishing their sign, rather than assuming it, is essential (see Appendix K of Bianchi and
Mendoza, 2018 for a discussion of this issue).
    In the simpler versions of DTI and LTV models, it is relatively straightforward to establish
that the price derivatives are indeed positive, because of the concavity of utility. The equilibrium
pricing function derivatives in these models are

                   pN
                    t+1   -pN
                            t+1 u (t + 1)                  qt+1   -qt+1 u (t + 1)
                     T
                        =                 > 0;                  =                 > 0.
                   Ct+1     u (t + 1)                      Ct+1     u (t + 1)

As noted earlier, the derivatives of u(.) for the DTI model are with respect to cT , with composite
consumption given by a CES aggregator. Those for the LTV model are with respect to the
  17
    Technically, we assume implicitly also that if the planner chooses under commitment, all previous collateral
constraints are also not binding (see Bianchi and Mendoza, 2018 for details).


                                                      21
standard aggregate consumption measure.
   Since the pricing derivatives are positive, the pecuniary externality is positive, and agents
overborrow at date t when the constraint does not bind, because they fail to internalize that
additional debt taken at t leads to a larger collapse in collateral values if the credit constraints
bind at t + 1. The allocations of the social planner can therefore be decentralized by taxing
debt at date t by the correct amount, rebating the revenue generated by this tax as a lump-sum
transfer. The optimal debt tax is the one that leads the private marginal cost of borrowing in a
decentralized equilibrium with regulation (i.e., with debt taxes) to equalize the social marginal
cost of borrowing. This requires an optimal macroprudential debt tax given b:

                                              i
                                Et µt+1 t+1 t  +1
                            t =                          i = DT I, LT V.                          (16)
                                  Et [u (t + 1)]

If the constraint is expected to bind at t + 1 in at least some states of nature, this tax is strictly
positive, because it inherits the sign of the pecuniary externality, which is given by the sign of
the pricing derivatives determined above. Moreover, everything else the same, the tax is higher
when (a) the constraint is more likely to bind at t + 1 (i.e., the larger is the set of states at t + 1
for which µt+1 > 0), (b) prices fall more in response to the collapse in demand at t + 1 (i.e., the
larger are the price derivatives), and (c) the larger the value of pledgeable collateral at t + 1.
    The above argument uses debt taxes to decentralize the optimal macroprudential policy be-
cause they are a natural way of doing so given that we are dealing with an externality. As
documented in Section 1, however, standard tax instruments are not a widely used macropru-
dential policy instrument, compared with rules for capital buffers with countercyclical elements,
or liquidity requirements such as the liquidity coverage ratio, and more recently limits on loan-
to-value and debt-to-income ratios on borrowers. Still, under some conditions, it is possible to
implement the optimal macroprudential policy with these instruments (Bianchi, 2011), echoing
standard results on the equivalence between price and quantity instruments. An alternative
macroprudential instrument that does not rely on financial regulation is the accumulation of
international reserves (Arce et al., 2019).
   In line with the properties of the optimal debt tax, the other MPP instruments would be
deployed whenever there is a positive one-step-ahead conditional probability of the constraint
becoming binding. These instruments, however, may have different comparative statics or cyclical
properties, as discussed in Bianchi (2011) and Stavrakeva (2020). Moreover, as we show in
Appendix B, in a model in which households pledge assets as collateral, debt taxes and regulatory
LTVS are not equivalent, because they have different effects on asset prices.
   There are three important additional considerations to the above discussion:

   1. Depending on model structure, the social planner may have incentives to intervene not just

                                                  22
       with macroprudential or ex-ante policy when µt = 0 and Et [µt+1 > 0] but also with ex-post
       policy when µt > 0. Benigno et al. (2013) study a DTI model in which tradables and non-
       tradables are produced with labor, and wage income enters in the credit constraint.18 The
       planner intervenes ex-post to increase the relative price of non-tradables by reallocating la-
       bor toward tradables or by subsidizing non-tradable goods. Similarly, Benigno et al. (2016)
       show how a subsidy on non-tradables can prop up the real exchange rate and relax the
       constraint. In Schmitt-Groh´ e and Uribe (2018), there are multiple equilibria, and a subsidy
       on borrowing when the constraint binds can rule out the bad equilibrium. Interestingly, in
       these cases, while the planner ends up borrowing more than in the unregulated equilibrium
       because of the ability to mitigate the Fisherian deflation ex-post, the tax on debt remains
       positive and given by the expression (16). Hernandez and Mendoza (2017) study a DTI
       model with sectoral production using imported inputs. There is overborrowing only, but
       again the planner reallocates inputs from non-tradables to tradables production ex-post to
       prop up the value of collateral and weaken the constraint. In Bianchi (2016), firms face
       collateral and dividend constraints, and when the dividend constraint binds, a pecuniary
       externality operates via wages to reduce profits and investment. The planner uses bailouts
       to stabilize firms' net-worth ex-post and taxes debt to hamper overborrowing ex-ante.

   2. When collateral values at date t are determined jointly by date-t and date-t+1 equilibrium
      outcomes, the planner's optimal plans become time-inconsistent under commitment. Time-
      inconsistency is important because it undermines the credibility of macroprudential policy
      and raises the well-known problems of rules v. discretion, which are examined in the
      broader literature on optimal policy. In the MPP context, this issue was raised first by
      Bianchi and Mendoza (2018) in their analysis of a planner's optimal policy problem in
      an LTV model with and without commitment. They showed that the time-inconsistency
      of the optimal policy under commitment emerges because the planner internalizes the
      Euler equation driving asset prices, which makes qt increasing in ct and decreasing in
      ct+1 . Hence, the planner realizes that rising ct weakens the credit constraint at t but
      tightens it at t - 1. Intuitively, when the LTV constraint binds at t, the planner acting
      under commitment promises lower future consumption so as to prop up asset prices and
      borrowing capacity at t, but ex post when t +1 arrives, it is suboptimal to keep this promise.
      Bianchi and Mendoza show also that debt taxes can be used to decentralize the optimal
      policy of the planner with or without commitment. The debt tax can be separated into two
      components. One is macroprudential and again tackles the pecuniary externality, and the
      other captures the effects of the incentives to intervene when the credit constraint binds.
  18
    This formulation has nontrivial limitations in terms of matching the stylized facts of Sudden Stops. Since
agents can borrow more by working harder, the model underestimates the magnitude of Sudden Stops and predicts
that tradables output rises during Sudden Stops.



                                                     23
       The macroprudential component is not, however, characterized by the same expressions
       with and without commitment. They are the same only the first time the constraint binds
       along a given equilibrium path (i.e., if the collateral constraint has never been binding up
       to some date t and is expected to bind with some probability at t + 1). Otherwise, in future
       dates t + j in which the constraint does not bind but can bind at t + j + 1, the expressions
       determining optimal macroprudential debt taxes differ with and without commitment.

    3. Quantitatively, optimal macroprudential policy is very effective at reducing the magni-
       tude and frequency of financial crises, but it requires complex, non-linear, state-contingent
       schedules for the management of policy instruments. Moreover, simpler policy rules are
       less effective and can be welfare reducing.19 Using the DTI model, Bianchi (2011) found
       that the "best" (i.e., welfare-maximizing) constant debt tax reduces the probability of Sud-
       den Stops from 5.5. to about 2.2 percent (v. 0.4 percent with the optimal debt taxes).
       Moreover, the optimal fixed tax is 3.6 percent, which is about 70 percent of the average of
       the state-contingent tax and achieves 62 percent of the welfare gains from implementing
       the constrained-efficient allocations. Hernandez and Mendoza (2017) found that the best
       constant debt and production taxes reduce the probability of Sudden Stops from 3 to 1.1
       percent v. 0 with the optimal taxes, and the welfare gain is about half of that under the
       optimal taxes. In addition, a constant debt tax set to the average of the optimal debt tax
       is welfare reducing. In an LTV model, Bianchi and Mendoza (2018) found that several sim-
       ple rules, including constant taxes and constant-elasticity rules akin to a Taylor rule that
       adjust debt taxes to target credit or asset prices, are significantly inferior to the optimal
       policy and can easily lead to welfare losses. The difference relative to the results with DTI
       models is that when asset prices determine the value of collateral, by altering marginal
       utilities and asset prices, a tax that is optimal in some states can have negative welfare
       effects on other states. In this situation, the lack of a state-contingent policy makes the
       application of macroprudential policies more challenging.



4      Macroprudential Policy Tradeoffs
The existing quantitative assessments of simple MPP rules documented in the previous Section
abstract from potentially important limitations of those rules, because they were obtained using
models in which the main tradeoff of sub-optimal credit regulation is hampering consumption
smoothing and distorting precautionary savings. In practice, however, in both the long and
  19
    This is in sharp contrast with findings for monetary and fiscal policies. The Taylor rule is generally sub-
optimal in the New Keynesian DSGE models used in central banking, but quantitatively it is very effective at
smoothing fluctuations and targeting inflation, and it is welfare-improving. Re-arrangements of the tax structure,
even of simple constant tax rates, can produce large efficiency and welfare gains.


                                                       24
short-run, regulation is likely to also affect capital accumulation and the level of output . In this
section, we shed light on these issues by studying a setup with endogenous capital accumulation
that combines elements of both LTV and DTI Fisherian models.


4.1    A Two-Sector Model with Investment
We propose a two-sector model in which tradables and non-tradables are used both for consump-
tion and as inputs for production of investment goods. Final output in each sector is produced
with capital, and capital is homogeneous across sectors. Households face an LTV collateral con-
straint. The model is designed so that the relative goods price of non-tradables determines also
the price of capital as collateral.


Investment goods production. A representative firm produces investment goods it using as
input a composite good xt = x(xT       N
                                  t , xt ) formed by a constant elasticity-of-substitution (CES)
aggregator of inputs from the tradables and nontradable sectors xT         N
                                                                  t and xt :

                                                           1
                                 -                        -
                                                      N -
                     xt =     xT
                               t     + (1 -  )       xt        ,  > -1,   (0, 1),               (17)

where 1/(1 + ) is the elasticity of substitution between xT      N
                                                          t and xt .

   This firm's optimization problem is solved using standard two-stage budgeting and duality
results. In the first stage, the producer minimizes the cost of inputs required to obtain a target
amount of x denoted x   ¯:

                                   C (pN  ¯) = min xT
                                       t ,x
                                                          N N
                                                    t + p t xt                                  (18)
                                                    xT   N
                                                     t ,xt

                                             s.t.
                                  x( xT    N
                                      t , xt ) = x
                                                 ¯.                                             (19)

As in the DTI models reviewed earlier, tradable goods are the numeraire and pN
                                                                             t denotes the
relative price of non-tradables in units of tradables.
   The first-order conditions of this problem imply that:

                                  xxN (xT    N         T    N      N
                                        t , xt )/xxT (xt , xt ) = pt                            (20)

Using the linear homogeneity of x(xT       N                                            N
                                      t , xt ), we obtain an homogenous price index P (pt ) in units
of tradables such that the cost function of the producer is Ct = P (pN                         N
                                                                           t )xt . Hence, P (pt ) is
the minimum expenditure needed to produce one unit of investment goods for a given pN         t (i.e,
C (pN            N      T    N N
    t , 1) = P (pt ) = xt + pt xt ). Given the CES structure of xt , the price index of investment



                                                      25
goods is:
                                                                             1+
                                          1                      1            
                            Pt (pN
                                 t ) = 
                                        1+ + (1 -  ) 1+ pN
                                                         t
                                                                        1+
                                                                                  .                (21)

    In the second stage, the firm chooses the optimal xt so as to maximize profits of selling
investment goods at a relative price qt subject to the investment goods-production technology
denoted f (x). In order to obtain an equilibrium in which the price of investment goods qt is
determined by the cost price index Pt in "static" fashion (since Pt is determined by the relative
                                                                               x             x
price of nontradable goods), we assume a simple linear technology f (xt ) = zt   xt , where zt is a
shock to the productivity of producing investment goods. The profit maximization problem is

                                          max [qt it - Pt xt ]                                     (22)
                                          it ,xt

                                                   s.t.
                                                    x
                                              it = zt xt .

                                                 x
The first-order condition implies that qt = Pt /zt . Hence, at equilibrium, profits are zero, and the
price of investment goods is equal to the productivity-adjusted price index of the inputs used to
produce them (which is a function of pN  t ).



Final goods production. Households own the firms that produce final goods, and these firms
operate a production technology with decreasing returns that uses capital k as the only input.
                                                                      
Capital depreciates at a rate (1 -  ). The production function is zt kt , where zt is a productivity
shock to final goods production, and 0 <  < 1. Each period, this technology produces a flow of
                                                                             
tradable goods equal to a fraction a of zt kt and a fraction ((1 - a) of zt kt of non-tradables.

                                          T        
                                         yt = azt kt                                               (23)
                                          N              
                                         yt = (1 - a)zt kt .                                       (24)


Households. A representative household makes optimal consumption, saving and investment
decisions so as to maximize expected lifetime utility:

                                                   
                                         E0                t u(ct ) ,                              (25)
                                                   t=0


where ct is a CES aggregator of tradables and non-tradables consumption ct (cT    N
                                                                             t , ct ), which takes
the same form as in Section 2. The household faces the following budget and credit constraints:

                                                           bt+1
              qt [kt+1 - kt (1 -  )] + pN  N    T
                                        t ct + ct +             = bt + p N                     
                                                                         t (1 - a)zt kt + azt kt   (26)
                                                            R


                                                         26
                                          bt+1 ¯
                                               bt - qt kt+1                                      (27)
                                           R
The collateral constraint is of the LTV type but with the variation that it includes the term
¯
bt < 0 aimed at capturing fluctuations in credit regimes. There are two regimes, ¯    bt = ¯bL , ¯
                                                                                                 bH ,
where ¯bL (¯
           bH ) is the tight (loose) regime with one-step transition probability PLL (PHH ). Hence,
the mean durations of the L and H regimes are determined by 1/PLH and 1/PHL respectively.
     In the left-hand side of the budget constraint, we used the law of motion of the capital
stock to substitute for investment (i.e.,, purchases of investment goods are given by qt it =
qt [kt+1 - kt (1 -  )]). As in the case of the producer of investment goods, the household's total
consumption expenditures can be expressed as PtC c(cT        N      T    N N            C
                                                        t , ct ) = ct + pt ct , where Pt is the CES
price index for consumption expenditures (which is again a linear homogeneous function of pN     t ):

                                                                      1+
                                             1            1       
                                                                       
                                  Ptc =  1+ + (1 -  ) 1+ pN
                                                          t
                                                                 1+
                                                                           .                     (28)

Notice that since qt is both the market price of new capital at which collateral is valued and the
market price of investment goods, and the latter is a function of pN   t at equilibrium, the model
features financial amplification and externality effects similar to those resulting from having the
price of non-tradables in the credit constraint of the standard DTI models. In addition, since
the collateral constraint is of the LTV form, the Fisherian mechanism affecting excess returns
and capital accumulation is also at work.
    Let µ denote the Lagrange multiplier on the collateral constraint. The first-order conditions
of the household's problem imply the following optimality conditions:

   ccN (cT    N         T    N      N
         t , ct )/ccT (ct , ct ) = pt                                                            (29)

                 ucT (t) - µt = REt {ucT (t + 1)}                                                (30)
                                                                     -1           N
            qt [ucT (t) - µt ] =  Et ucT (t + 1) (1 -  )qt+1 + zt+1 kt+1 ((1 - a)pt+1 + a)   .   (31)

The Euler equations for bonds and capital imply that the excess return on capital simplifies to
                                                               q
                              q           -cov (ucT (t + 1), Rt +1 ) + (1 - )µt
                         Et (Rt+1 )   -R=                                       ,                (32)
                                                    Et [ucT (t + 1)]
        q                           -1          N
where Rt +1  [qt+1 - qt+1 + zt+1 kt+1 ((1 - a)pt+1 + a)]/qt is the rate of return of capital. Hence,
in the absence of uncertainty and if the credit constraint does not bind, the model yields the
standard property of small open economy models equating the return on domestic capital to
the world real interest rate. Uncertainty introduces an equity-risk-premium term, and the credit
constraint adds an additional premium given by the fraction 1 -  of the shadow value of the
constraint. This premium is earned because of the fraction of new capital that cannot be pledged

                                                     27
as collateral.


Market-clearing and unregulated equilibrium. The market-clearing conditions in the
markets for nontradable goods and investment goods are:

                                                     xN    N     N
                                                      t + ct = y t                                               (33)

                                                               x
                                          kt+1 - kt (1 -  ) = zt x(xT    N
                                                                    t , xt ).                                    (34)
                                                   x         x
Using the above conditions together with qt = Pt /zt , it = zt xt and Pt xt = pN  N    T
                                                                               t xt + xt , we obtain
the following resource constraint for tradables:20

                                                                        bt+1
                                                xT     T     T
                                                 t + c t = y t + bt -        .                                   (35)
                                                                         R
                                                                                                                
The unregulated competitive equilibrium is defined by sequences of prices {pN                      t , qt , Pt }t=0 and
                                             N                                            
allocations {cT     N                   T                            T   N
               t , ct , bt+1 , kt+1 , xt , xt }t=0 such that: (i) {ct , ct , bt+1 , kt+1 }t=0 solve the household's
                                                    
optimization problem; (ii) {xT              N
                                       t , xt , it }t=0 solve the optimization problem of investment goods
producers; (iii) the market-clearing conditions for non-tradable goods and investment goods hold
(i.e.,, equations (33) and (34) hold). The equilibrium of a variant of the model without credit
frictions is defined in the same way but without µ terms in the household's optimality conditions.


Equilibrium with regulation. The government implements simple macroprudential policy
rules, which take the form of a tax on debt t or a regulatory LTV ratio t such that 0  t  1
(to reflect the assumption that regulation reduces borrowing capacity below what private markets
  20
       This constraint is derived as follows:
                                               bt+1
          qt [kt+1 - kt (1 -  )] + pN  N    T
                                    t ct + c +      = bt + pN         
                                                            t (1 - a)kt + akt
                                                                             
                                                R
                                                                         bt+1
                                            Pt xt + pN   N     N     T
                                                     t (yt - xt ) + c +          =   bt + pN               
                                                                                           t (1 - a)kt + akt
                                                                           R
                                                                         bt+1
                                    (pN  N    T      N N       N     T
                                      t xt + xt ) + pt (yt - xt ) + c +          =   bt + pN               
                                                                                           t (1 - a)kt + akt .
                                                                           R
In the last expression, the terms with pN  N
                                        t xt cancel out, and we arrive at the result in the text.




                                                            28
can provide). The equilibrium conditions are the same as before except for these key changes:21

                               ucT (t) = R(1 + t )Et {ucT (t + 1)} + µt (1 + t )                            (38)

  qt [ucT (t) - µt (1 - t )]
                                                                         - 1          N
                                   =  Et ucT (t + 1) (1 -  )qt+1 + zt+1 kt+1 ((1 - a)pt+1 + a)              (39)

                                                                                 q
                       q                    (1 - (1 - t ))µt - cov ucT (t + 1), Rt+1
                   Et Rt+1    = R(1 + t ) +                                                                 (40)
                                                          Et [ucT (t + 1)]
Consider first the role of the debt tax. Condition (38) implies that the debt tax increases the
effective cost of borrowing and thus reduces incentives to borrow. Hence, the debt tax aims to
hamper incentives to borrow in non-crisis times. The debt tax, however, distorts investment
decisions by requiring a higher marginal return on capital as eq. (40) shows. Consequently, this
reduces investment. In fact, the debt tax has an effect analogous to that of a capital income
tax. This is clearer assuming perfect-foresight and no credit frictions: The debt tax rises the
opportunity cost of accumulating capital and is equivalent to taxing capital returns at a rate
equal to t /(1 + t ). This is the standard efficiency distortion of capital income taxation.22 Under
uncertainty, the debt tax has an additional effect operating in the opposite direction, because to
the extent that it improves consumption smoothing, it reduces risk premia. Overall, this imply
that the debt tax has potentially costly tradeoffs in terms of investment and output.
    These debt-investment tradeoffs interact with the dynamics of debt and borrowing capacity.
On one hand, the debt tax makes it less likely that the constraint binds and induces lower debt
levels, so that when it binds its shadow value is smaller, which in turn contributes to reduce
capital returns when the constraint binds. On the other hand, the debt tax imposed when
the constraint was not binding can also result in the economy attaining higher leverage ratios
because of lower capital values. Thus, the debt tax distorts equilibrium outcomes both when the
constraint is not binding and when it binds.
   Regulatory LTVs targeted to borrowers have similar implications. When the regulatory LTV
binds, the shadow value of the binding credit constraint takes the place of the debt tax, increasing
the effective marginal cost of borrowing in the right-hand-side of condition (38). In addition,
  21
       The household's budget and borrowing constraints are modified as follows:
                                            bt+1
                 qt kt+1 + pN  N    T
                            t ct + ct +             = bt + p N                     
                                                             t (1 - a)zt kt + azt kt + qt kt (1 -  ) + Tt   (36)
                                          R(1 + t )

                                               bt+1 ¯
                                                    bt - (1 - t )qt kt+1 .                                  (37)
                                                R
                                                                      bt+1
The tax on debt is rebated as a lump-sum transfer, so that Tt = -t R(1+  t ) at equilibrium.
  22
     For the same reason, it follows that an additional policy instrument, in the form of a subsidy on capital
returns, could be used to mitigate the adverse effect of MPP instruments on the effective opportunity cost of
investing in physical capital.


                                                            29
the LTV regulation increases the marginal cost of accumulating capital in the left-hand-side of
condition (39), which leads to higher marginal returns on capital and reduced investment in
condition (40). There are, however, two important differences between the debt tax and the
regulatory LTV. First, while the direct effects of the debt tax on the marginal cost of borrowing
and capital returns are exogenous (since R(1+ t ) is a product of exogenous variables), the effects
of the LTV are partly endogenous, since they depend on the value of µt . Hence, regulators have
full control of the policy instrument direct effect on equity returns with the debt tax but not with
the LTV regulation. Second, the regulatory LTV distorts the optimality conditions only when it
binds, while a debt tax governed by a simple rule may remain active even when debt is too low
for taxing debt to be optimal for macroprudential reasons (i.e., when the credit constraint is not
binding at t and has zero probability of being binding at t +1). If in some of these low-debt states
the regulatory LTV does not bind, the debt tax still has adverse distortionary effects on capital
accumulation but the LTV does not, and it does not because of a self-adjusting mechanism that
turns off the policy instrument when the LTV regulation is not binding. Moreover, in general
it is not true that an equilibrium supported by a given debt-tax policy t can be supported
by some LTV regulation t . As shown in Appendix B, LTV regulation aimed at matching the
allocations of the debt-tax regime at a given date t implies a higher price of capital than under
debt taxes and, because of the forward-looking nature of asset prices, different allocations in
previous periods. Hence, qualitatively a debt tax and a regulatory LTV have similar effects in
terms of distorting optimality conditions, but they are not equivalent instruments.



5    Quantitative Analysis
This section of the paper examines the model's quantitative implications. We calibrate the model
to emerging-markets data and study its implications for the properties of Sudden Stop events.
Then, we use the model to examine the effects of constant debt taxes and the tradeoffs of these
taxes in terms of capital accumulation and output.
    Quantitative solutions of optimal macroprudential policy in Fisherian models are generally
based on first-order condition methods that apply fixed-point iteration or endogenous-grids al-
gorithms to the models' optimality conditions. These methods are standard, and since they are
described in several published articles (with replication codes available online), we do not provide
a detailed description here. For DTI models, see for example, the appendices to Bianchi (2011)
and Bianchi et al. (2016). For LTV models, see for example, Sections B and E of the appendix to
Bianchi and Mendoza (2018). For a fast fixed-point iteration method that is easy to implement in
Sudden Stop models, see Mendoza and Villalvazo (2020). The solution method used to generate
the solutions discussed in this section is described in the replication files provided on line, which
include also the computer codes.

                                                 30
5.1    Calibration
The calibrated parameter values are reported in Table 1. A period in the model represents a year,
so the calibration uses annual data. The calibration strategy splits the parameters into three
sets: (1) parameters set "directly" based on commonly used values (R, , ,  ), (2) parameters
calibrated to data estimates or to match data targets in the deterministic steady state of the
model (, , , , , PLL , PHH ), and (3) parameters determined so that the model's stochastic
equilibrium matches statistics observed in the data ( , , ¯
                                                          bL , ¯
                                                               bH , ).

                                      Table 1: Calibration

                                           Value             Source/Target
  Interest rate                            R - 1 = 0.02      Standard value
  Depreciation rate                         = 0.1            Standard value
  Share of capital                          = 0.35           Standard value
  Elasticity of substitution consumption    = 0.205          Bianchi (2011)
  Elasticity of substitution production     = 0.205          Same as 
  Preference weight cT                      = 0.314          y T /pN y N = 0.5
  Production weight xT                      = 0.314          Lombardo and Ravenna (2012)
  Productivity parameter                   z
                                           ¯=1               Normalization
  Risk aversion                            =4                Standard value
  Discount factor                           = 0.962          qk/(y T + pN y N ) = 2.5
  Duration tight financial regime          PLL = 0.77        Borio (2014)
  Duration loose financial regime          PHH = 0.93        Borio (2014)

  Parameters set by simulation             Value             Target
  Std. of TFP                               = 0.025          STD of Output = 0.029
  Autoc. of TFP                             = 0.3            Autocorrelation of Output = 0.54%
  Tight financial regime                   ¯
                                           bL = -0.27        Probability of sudden stop = 3%
  Loose financial regime                   ¯
                                           bH = -0.31        Std of CAY = 1.1%
  Collateral parameter                      = 0.09           Mean NFA



    The values of the parameters set to commonly used values are R = 1.02,  = 0.1,  = 0.35, and
 = 4. The real interest rate, depreciation rate, and capital share are standard for a calibration
at annual frequency. The value of  is consistent with empirical evidence in emerging markets
(see Reinhart and Vegh (1995)) suggesting that the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is in
the 0.2­0.5 range.

                                               31
    The second set of parameters are calibrated as follows. We assume, for simplicity, the same
elasticity parameters in the two CES aggregators ( =  ), and set them to the same value
used by Bianchi (2011), which is based on a range of cross-country estimates for Latin American
economies. The values of PLL , PHH are set based on the estimated durations of the loose and tight
phases of financial cycles reported by Borio (2014). In particular, we set PLL = 0.77, PHH = 0.93,
which imply durations of 4.5 and 16 years of the loose and tight financial regime.
    The values of the weights of tradables in the CES investment and consumption aggregators (
and  ) and the discount factor ( ) are determined jointly with the model's deterministic steady
state-equilibrium conditions, for a given steady state of NFA denoted ~  b. We assume  =  , based
on the evidence from Lombardo and Ravenna (2012) showing that for several emerging economies
(e.g., Mexico, Turkey and Poland) the share of tradable goods in consumption demand equals that
in investment inputs. The values of  and  are then determined jointly with the deterministic
steady-state values of xT , xN , k, pN , q by solving the following system of deterministic steady-
state conditions targeting a sectoral consumption ratio of cT /pN cN = 0.5, a capital output ratio
of qk/y = 2.5, and an NFA position of -0.40 as a share of GDP (based on the data from Lane
and Milesi-Ferreti, 2007) or -1.2 as a share of y T (using a ratio of tradables GDP in total GDP
of one-third), which implies ~
                             b = -1.2ak:23

                      (1 - a)k  - xN
                                           = 0 .5
          1-       ak  - xT + ~
                              b(1 - R-1 )
                                  qk
                                 N
                                           = 2 .5
                         ak + p (1 - a)k
                                                                                            +1
                                                 N     1-      ak  - xT + ~
                                                                          b(1 - R-1 )
                                             p       =
                                                                  (1 - a)k  - xN
                                                                                      1+
                                                          1              1        
                                                                                       
                                                    1+ + (1 -  ) 1+ pN 1+
                                                 q =
                                                              
                                              1 =  [(1 -  ) + k -1 ((1 - a)pN + a)]
                                                              q
                                                            k
                                             xN =
                                                  [ (xT )- + 1 -  ]-1/
                                                                1/(1+)
                                             xT = xN        pN         .
                                                     1-

Solving the above system yields  =  = 0.34 and  = 0.962.
    The third set of parameter values is determined by solving the stochastic model given the
rest of the parameter values so as to match data targets as follows: for the stochastic process
of TFP, we assume that TFP follows a first-order autoregressive process ln zt =  ln z + t . The
  23
   With unitary elasticity and balanced trade, and since expenditure shares are constant, it follows that
p y /y T = [(1 -  )/ ]y N /y T .
 N N




                                                     32
values of the autocorrelation coefficient  and the standard deviation of the TFP innovations 
are set so as to match the standard deviation and autocorrelation of the cyclical component of
annual HP-filtered GDP for Mexico for the 1950­2016 period. The values of ¯   bL and ¯
                                                                                     bH are set
so as to match the long-run frequency of Sudden Stops (3 percent) and the standard deviation
of the current account for the 1993-2016 period (1.1 percent), respectively. A Sudden Stop in
the model is defined as an increase in excess of 4 percent in the current-account-GDP ratio, in
line with the 3.7 percent magnitude of the median Sudden Stop event identified in the empirical
analysis of Section 2.24 The value of  was set so as to match a mean NFA position of -0.4 of
GDP, which required  = 0.09.


5.2       Results
5.2.1      Financial Crisis Events

We first examine the characteristics of financial crises in the unregulated competitive equilibrium
(DE). Column (1) of Table 2 shows key statistical moments. The top panel shows the long-run
averages of the NFA-GDP and capital-GDP ratios, the probability of Sudden Stops and the
probability of a binding credit constraint. The bottom panel shows the average changes in
macro variables displayed in Sudden Stop events, identified using a long time-series simulation
of the model of 100,000 periods. As mentioned earlier, a Sudden Stop in the model occurs when
the current-account-GDP ratio rises by more than 4 percent (with 4 percent corresponding to 2.3
times the standard deviation of the current account). Figure 5 shows seven-year even windows of
all the main macroeconomic aggregates centered on the date Sudden Stops hit. For each period,
we report the mean of each variable across all the events.
    The probability of Sudden Stops is 3.15 percent, close to the 3 percent calibration target
of based on the actual frequency of Sudden Stops in emerging economies reported in Section
2. The event windows show that the model qualitatively matches several of the documented
features of Sudden Stops, indicating strong financial amplification effects via Fisherian deflation
during Sudden Stop events. Quantitatively, the model predicts that when a Sudden Stop hits
(at t=0) the reversal in the current account and the drops in investment, asset prices and the
real exchange rate are large and in line with the data, but the drops in aggregate consumption
and output are small (see column [1] of Table 2 and Figure 5).
       Output falls little because on the date a Sudden Stop hits it can respond only to TFP shocks
  24
     4 percent is about 2.3 times the standard deviation of the current account in the calibrated model, so this
criterion also fits within the 95 percentile criterion used in Section 2 to define Sudden Stops. Conditioning on
a binding borrowing constraint in addition to the current-account reversal does not change the probability of a
sudden stop in the model.




                                                      33
                    Table 2: Long-Run and Sudden Stop Moments

                                                                    Unregulated        Constant
                                                                    Equilibrium          Tax
           Long-run Moments                                               (1)             (2)
    Average B/Y %                                                        -39.5           -39.0
    Average K/Y                                                           2.53           2.51
    Welfare Gain1%                                                        n/a           0.0179
    Prob. of Sudden Stops2%                                               3.15           1.06
    Prob(µt > 0) %                                                        18.1             8.7
    Debt Tax Rate  B %                                                    n/a             1.31
           Average change in Sudden Stops (% )
    c                                                                     -0.5            -0.2
    I                                                                    -22.1           -16.0
    pN                                                                   -17.1           -11.6
    q K , pC                                                             -12.1            -8.2
    CA/Y                                                                  5.2              3.4
1
  Welfare gains are computed as compensating variations in the argument of period utility
constant across dates and states that equate welfare in the economy with regulation with that
in the unregulated decentralized equilibrium. The welfare gain W at state (b, k, s) is given by
(1 + W (b, k, s))1- V DE (b, k, s) = V i (b, k, s). The unconditional (long-run) average is computed
using the ergodic distribution of the unregulated economy.




                                                34
and the capital stock, which is predetermined, is on average above the mean.25 TFP shocks are
only about -1 percent on average, roughly 0.38 of the standard deviation of TFP. Hence, the
large fluctuations observed in the model's Sudden Stops are driven largely by the effects of the
credit constraint, which operate because of the fluctuations in ¯
                                                                bt and the Fisherian amplification
affecting qt and kt+1 .
    The small fall in aggregate consumption masks the fact that sectoral consumption allocations
do move significantly, albeit in opposite directions: cT falls more than 10 percent while cN rises
5 percent. The sharp decline in cT is standard in Sudden Stops models. It reflects the sudden
loss of access to credit markets that forces a sharp reversal of both the current account and
net exports. In the standard model, however, non-tradables consumption is often modeled as
an exogenous endowment. In contrast, in this model, households cut investment expenditures
seeking to reallocate their resources towards tradables consumption, and the fall in demand for
investment goods lowers their price, leading producers to demand less of both xT and xN (see
Figure 5). The supply of non-tradables (y N = (1 - a)zk) slightly falls because of the TFP
shock, but the fall in xN is larger, and therefore market clearing requires cN to rise. Since we
are abstracting from productivity shocks in the production of investment goods, q = P . Hence,
the fall in q implies a fall in P and also in pN , since P is a monotonic function of pN . But since
pN is the same price for households buying consumer goods or firms buying inputs, and since
the calibration features  =  and  = , the ratios xT /xN and cT /cN are always equal to each
other. When the Sudden Stop occurs, xT falls by more than xN and cT falls more than cN rises
so that the two sectoral ratios are equal and yield the same pN .
    Output remains low and, in fact, drops slightly at t + 1. This occurs because the sharp
investment drop at t reduces capital used in production at t + 1, and the recovery of TFP is
gradual. Investment demand and tradables consumption rise sharply, as the credit constraint is
relaxed. This sets in motion the opposite dynamics from those observed at t. Now, the price
of investment goods rises with investment demand, which causes xT , xN , P and pN to increase.
Non-tradables consumption falls, because the supply of non-tradables is still low but demand of
xN surged, so market clearing requires lower consumption of non-tradables.




  25
    Producing large drops in output requires mechanisms that link Fisherian amplification with the supply side
of the model--for instance if working-capital financing is needed to pay for variable inputs and is subject to the
credit constraint (e.g., Mendoza, 2010, Bianchi and Mendoza, 2018


                                                       35
                         (a) CA/Y                                             (b) GDP T                                                     (c) C
          6                                                   0.5                                                     2
                                        Unregulated                                           Unregulated                                               Unregulated
                                        Tax                                                   Tax                                                       Tax
          5                                                                                                         1.5


          4                                                                                                           1

                                                                0
          3                                                                                                         0.5
      %




                                                          %




                                                                                                                %
          2                                                                                                           0


          1                                                                                                         -0.5
                                                              -0.5

          0                                                                                                          -1


          -1                                                                                                        -1.5


          -2                                                   -1                                                    -2
            -3      -2    -1    0   1   2             3          -3      -2    -1    0    1   2             3          -3      -2      -1      0    1   2             3




                           (d) cT                                               (e) cN                                              (f) Investment
          4                                                     5                                                     5
                                        Unregulated                                           Unregulated                                               Unregulated
                                        Tax                                                   Tax                                                       Tax
          2                                                     4
                                                                                                                      0

          0                                                     3

                                                                                                                     -5
          -2                                                    2
     %




                                                          %




                                                                                                                %
          -4                                                    1                                                   -10


          -6                                                    0
                                                                                                                    -15

          -8                                                   -1

                                                                                                                    -20
         -10                                                   -2


         -12                                                   -3                                                   -25
               -3   -2    -1    0   1   2             3          -3      -2    -1    0    1   2             3             -3   -2      -1      0    1   2             3




                           (g) xT                                              (h) xN                                          (i) q K = P C = P
          10                                                    5                                                     6
                                        Unregulated                                           Unregulated                                               Unregulated
                                        Tax                                                   Tax                     4                                 Tax
          5
                                                                0                                                     2
          0
                                                                                                                      0
          -5
                                                               -5                                                    -2
     %




                                                          %




                                                                                                                %




         -10                                                                                                         -4

                                                              -10                                                    -6
         -15
                                                                                                                     -8
         -20
                                                              -15                                                   -10
         -25
                                                                                                                    -12

         -30                                                  -20                                                   -14
               -3   -2    -1    0   1   2             3             -3   -2    -1    0    1   2             3             -3   -2      -1      0    1   2             3




                                                                                (j) pN
                                                               10
                                                                                              Unregulated
                                                                                              Tax
                                                                5



                                                                0
                                                          %




                                                               -5



                                                              -10



                                                              -15



                                                              -20
                                                                    -3   -2    -1    0    1   2             3




Note: All variables except the current account are plotted as percent deviations of long-run averages of the
unregulated equilibrium.

                               Figure 5: Sudden Stop Events with and without Debt Taxes




                                                                                    36
5.3     Investment Tradeoffs of Macroprudential Policy
Next we conduct a quantitative analysis of the tradeoffs of MPP induced by the reduction in
output and the capital stock. The results show that there is a potentially significant tradeoff
between losses in output and investment, on one hand, and financial stability on the other. We
examine features of this tradeoff in both the long-run (using averages from stochastic steady
states) as well as in the short run (conditional on temporary policies implemented in the initial
period).


Long-run frontier. We first study a long-run crisis probability­output frontier, defined as
the locus formed by the values of the probability of Sudden Stops and the long-run average of
GDP that the solution of the model yields for different values of the time-invariant debt tax.
Hence, this frontier shows the sacrifice in terms of long-run output that must be made in order
to achieve higher levels of financial stability using constant debt taxes as a simple MPP rule.
Figure 6 shows this frontier for debt taxes ( ) that vary from zero to 1.8 percent. This tax is
constant across all states in which the collateral constraint does not bind and zero otherwise. The
vertical axis shows the unconditional (long-run) probability of Sudden Stops, and the horizontal
axis shows the associated long-run output loss in percent of the long-run average of output in the
unregulated economy.26 The probability of a crisis corresponds to the probability of observing
a reversal in the current account-GDP ratio of at least 4 percentage points, which is the same
threshold used to define Sudden Stops in the economy without regulation.
    The figure shows that there is an important long-run tradeoff between output and financial
stability. To reduce the probability of crisis down to roughly half of what it is without regulation
(1.5 v. 3.2 percent), the economy gives up roughly 0.4 percent of the long-run average of output.
This outcome is attained with a debt tax of just 1.3 percent. Reducing the crisis probability
to zero requires a sacrifice of 0.45 of a percent of long-run output. These declines are due to
the distortionary effect of the debt tax on the no-arbitrage condition between capital and bonds
discussed earlier, which implies that the debt tax is akin to a capital tax.




  26
     To make real output comparable across economies with different taxes, we evaluate GDP at constant prices.
Measuring GDP using the prices in each economy gives a similar picture, but with somewhat lower GDP losses.
This is because the economy with higher taxes, features a higher NFA position, which implies a more appreciated
real exchange rate.


                                                      37
                                 3.5


                                   3


                                 2.5


                                   2


                                 1.5


                                   1


                                 0.5


                                   0
                                       0   0.05   0.1   0.15   0.2   0.25   0.3   0.35   0.4   0.45   0.5




                        Figure 6: Long-Run Financial Stability-Growth Frontier

Short-run tradeoffs of temporary debt taxes. The above analysis considers the long-run
effects of permanent taxes. It is also useful to examine the immediate effects of a temporary tax
on debt, because these effects also shed light on the incentives that a financial regulator has for
adjusting MPP in the model.
    Consider a policy scenario in which a debt tax is set at date zero, 0 > 0, and from the
following period onward, there are no MPP instruments in place (t = 0 for t  1). The goal
is to show how 0 affects current allocations--in particular, investment--and how this affects
continuation values through the two endogenous state variables, capital and bonds. Starting at
t = 1, the economy becomes the unregulated equilibrium, but the debt tax present at t = 0
critically affects how the economy reacts to adverse shocks at t = 1.27 This experiment is also
equivalent to calculating the effects of an unanticipated debt tax introduced for only one period.
   Figure 7 shows the effects of varying 0 on allocations and prices (in the vertical axes) for
values of 0 ranging from 0 to 7 percent (in the horizontal axes). We assume that at date 0, the
economy starts with b0 , k0 around their long-run averages in the unregulated equilibrium, and
there are positive shocks to TFP and ¯   b.28 For these initial states, the collateral constraint is
not binding in the first period. Absent regulation, the constraint binds in the next period if a
negative shock to ¯
                  b is realized. By construction, the allocations and prices for 0 = 0 (illustrated
with solid dots) coincide with the unregulated equilibrium.



  27
     Given the debt levels and capital accumulation policies, it is possible to compute an LTV policy  that would
deliver the same level of debt by solving for  such that bt+1 = -qt kt+1 (1 - t ) + ¯    b. As we argue in Appendix
B, however, asset prices would differ under both policies.
  28
     Results are qualitatively similar for other initial conditions in which the collateral constraint is not binding.


                                                                     38
  (a) Next-period Capital (k1 )                                             (b) Next-period Debt (-b1 )                                                                                  (c) Current Welfare
  1.63                                                                     0.75                                                                                        -111.962

                                                                          0.745
 1.628
                                                                                                                                                                       -111.964
                                                                           0.74
 1.626
                                                                          0.735                                                                                        -111.966

 1.624                                                                     0.73
                                                                                                                                                                       -111.968
 1.622                                                                    0.725

                                                                           0.72                                                                                         -111.97
  1.62
                                                                          0.715
                                                                                                                                                                       -111.972
 1.618
                                                                           0.71

 1.616                                                                    0.705                                                                                        -111.974
         0   0.01   0.02   0.03   0.04   0.05   0.06   0.07                       0     0.01     0.02     0.03      0.04     0.05     0.06   0.07                                 0          0.01          0.02          0.03          0.04          0.05   0.06   0.07




(d) Inv. next period (i1 (¯
                          bL , z H ))                             (e) Consumption (cT    N
                                                                                    0 , c0 )                                                                    (f) Inputs (xT    N
                                                                                                                                                                             0 , x0 )
 0.168                                                         0.45                                                                                  0.17


 0.166                                                        0.445
                                                                                                                                                    0.165
 0.164
                                                               0.44

 0.162
                                                                                                                                                     0.16
                                                              0.435
  0.16
                                                               0.43
                                                                                                                                                    0.155
 0.158

                                                              0.425
 0.156
                                                                                                                                                     0.15
 0.154                                                         0.42


 0.152                                                        0.415                                                                                 0.145
         0   0.01   0.02   0.03   0.04   0.05   0.06   0.07           0    0.01       0.02     0.03     0.04     0.05      0.06     0.07                    0   0.01     0.02         0.03          0.04          0.05          0.06          0.07




                                                Figure 7: Short-Run effects of a temporary debt tax
Note: Next-period investment corresponds to the investment in the next period when ¯
                                                                                   b=¯
                                                                                     bL , z = z H


   As Figure 7 shows, a higher 0 leads to a reduction in debt accumulation but at the expense of
reducing capital accumulation (i.e, -b1 falls but k1 also falls, see panels [a] and [b]). Moreover,
panel (f) shows that both tradable and nontradable inputs fall, while panel (e) shows that
tradable consumption falls but nontradable consumption rises. This implies that pN       0 falls and
hence q0 falls and the real exchange rate depreciates. This occurs because of the same mechanism
described earlier to explain the Sudden Stop effects: the tax on debt makes tradable goods more
expensive, reducing both investment and consumption. As investment drops, so do the prices of
capital and investment goods and the relative price of non-tradables. Producers of investment
goods reduce xT       N                                                          N
                 0 , x0 , but on the households' side, market clearing requires c0 to rise, because
the supply of non-tradables is the same for all tax rates (since k0 and the initial TFP shock are
the same) and demand for non-tradables by producers fell.
    The dynamic benefits of the debt tax can be seen in panel (d), which shows investment chosen
a t = 1 for a low ¯b realization and a positive TFP shock that period. A higher 0 induces higher
investment at t = 1, partly because of a direct effect of lower investment at t = 0, but it is also
important to note that the lower accumulation of debt leaves more resources to invest in the
future, especially when the constraint binds and higher investment contributes to relax it. This
accounts for the kink observed in panel (d). Investment at t = 1 increases more with 0 in the
region in which the constraint becomes binding. For high enough 0 , the reduction in debt at
t = 0 is sufficiently large so that the constraint does not bind at t = 1, and in that region, i1 is

                                                                                                               39
less responsive to tax hikes. Moreover, there is also an amplification effect: lower aggregate debt
level implies that demand for consumption and investment is relatively higher tomorrow, which
in turn leads to a higher market price for assets tomorrow and mitigates the Fisherian deflation
that arises when a negative shock triggers a binding collateral constraint.
    Panel (c) plots lifetime utility evaluated as of t = 0. This graph shows an important result:
the welfare-maximizing debt tax is strictly positive (date-0 welfare peaks with 0 around 3.1
percent). By taxing debt, the government induces less borrowing, which in turn mitigates the
general equilibrium effects that tighten the credit constraint via the pecuniary externality. The
tax on debt weakens this externality and prevents over-consumption and overborrowing (Bianchi,
2011, Bianchi and Mendoza, 2018). In addition, the debt tax induces less investment at t = 0
but more investment at t = 1. Note that the kinks in the welfare plot are related to the kinks
in the plot for i1 in panel (d). The first kink in both plots occurs at the same tax rate slightly
above 2 percent, and the second, less noticeable one in panel (d) occurs with a tax a notch above
3 percent. This second kink occurs precisely at the tax rate at which the credit constraint ceases
to bind at t = 1. For taxes higher than that value, welfare sharply falls as the tax rises. The
economy is better off increasing the debt tax if there is no debt tax, but after a debt tax of
slightly more than 3 percent, welfare declines with the tax, as the efficiency losses of the higher
0 captured in the fall in k1 dominate the financial-stability benefits.
    It is also worth noting that the short-run effects on capital and output at t=1 can be poten-
tially larger than the long-run effects on steady state capital and output with a permanent tax.
This is because the NFA position increases in the long run with the latter, since the permanent
tax incentivizes additional precautionary savings and reduces equity risk premia. Therefore, for
a given cost of borrowing given by the risk free rate plus the tax, once the economy adjusts to a
higher NFA, it invests more in capital.
    The previous experiment shows how a temporary debt tax reduces investment, borrowing, and
consumption in the short run, relative the unregulated economy, and can also improve welfare.
To evaluate the efficiency of investment decisions, we consider now a related scenario in which
a social planner compares different levels of debt and investment at date 0, taking as given a
level of cT
          0 and, from date 1 forward, a given continuation unregulated competitive equilibrium.
The difference in this experiment is that we keep constant the initial level of consumption and
consider alternative (k , b ) that would deliver this level of consumption.
    Start from an initial state (b, k, z, ¯
                                          b) at date 0 and recall the resource constraint for tradables

                                      cT + xT + qb = ak  + b.                                     (41)

We want to examine how different combinations of (b , k ) chosen at date 0 translate at date 1
into different investment choices, and levels of welfare and crisis exposure. To this end, we solve


                                                  40
for all possible combinations of b , k at date 0 that are consistent with the above resource con-
straint, a given level of tradables consumption--in particular the optimal one in the unregulated
equilibrium cT (b, k, z, ¯
                         b)--, optimal sectoral allocations of consumption and inputs, and market
clearing in the non-tradables market. The solutions are determined as follows: given values of
cT and b , the resource constraint yields a value of xT . Then, xN is determined as follows, using
the households' and firms' first-order conditions for sectoral-demand allocations together with
non-tradables market clearing:
                                                               +1                   +1
                           1-       ak  + b - xT - qb                   1-    xT
                                                                    =                    .
                                     (1 - a)k  - xN                           xN

Given the solutions for xT and xN , the value of k follows from the CES aggregator of investment
goods and the definition of investment, k = x(xT , xN ) + k (1 -  ), and cN follows from the
non-tradables market-clearing condition, cN = (1 - a)zk  - xN .
    Figure 8 presents the results of this experiment. We set b0 and k0 close to their long-run
averages, z0 equal to a plus-one standard-deviation TFP shock, and ¯      b at the level of the loose
borrowing limit. In all panels, we show the debt choice of date t (i.e., -b1 ) in the horizontal axis.
In the vertical axis of each plot, we report the outcomes for k1 (panel (a)), welfare or lifetime
utility (panel [b]) evaluated as of date 0, and the choice of investment in the following period i1
(panel [c]) following adverse shocks to TFP and the borrowing limit in that period. The solid
dots identify the unregulated competitive equilibrium.
    A key point that follows from panel (b) of this Figure, which echoes the one made in Figure 7,
is that the amount of debt that maximizes current welfare, keeping cT 0 constant, is lower than the
unregulated equilibrium amount (i.e., there is overborrowing). Recall that because the amount
of tradable consumption is kept constant, this implies that the capital stock chosen at date 0 (k1 )
is lower than in the unregulated equilibrium, as shown in panel (a). On the other hand, panel
(c) shows that reducing the debt and investment chosen at date 0 leads to a higher investment
at date 1.29 At low debt levels chosen for date 0, welfare rises fast with debt and investment at
date 1 falls slowly. At debt levels around 0.70, investment at date 1 begins to decline sharply
with more debt, indicating that choosing debt in that range exposes the economy to a Sudden
Stop at date 1. After a debt level of about 0.74, welfare becomes decreasing in debt and the
unregulated equilibrium ends up with too much debt.
       Throughout these experiments, allocations with lower borrowing and investment at date 0
  29
    It is possible to solve for a debt tax (0 ) and a tax/subsidy on capital returns (sk
                                                                                       0 ) that implement this level
of debt and capital as

                      uT (0)                                            q0 ucT (0)
           1 + 0 =              ,    1 + sk
                                          0 =                                      -1                   .
                     REt uT (1)                  Et   ucT (1) (1 -  )qt+1 + zt+1 k1   ((1 - a)pN
                                                                                               1 + a)




                                                         41
deliver higher welfare. While this result suggests that there is not only overborrowing but also
overinvestment, determining the socially optimal amount of investment is more subtle and a
thorough analysis of this issue is left for future research. A social planner able to decide invest-
ment on behalf of firms would internalize how higher investment today provides more tradable
resources tomorrow, which would raise asset prices and help relax the collateral constraint when
it binds. At the same time, higher investment implies more non-tradable resources which would
have the opposite effects. On the other hand, a government that only has a tax on debt available
to tackle the pecuniary externality can affect investment only indirectly. In particular, as we
discussed above, a tax on debt depresses investment, and therefore, a large tax on debt may go
too far in terms of reducing investment and output. 30

         (a) Next-period Capital (k1 )                                 (b) Current Utility                         (c) Inv. next period (i1 (¯
                                                                                                                                             bL , z L ))
          1.67                                            -111.96                                                     0.17

          1.66
                                                          -111.98                                                     0.16
          1.65
                                                            -112
          1.64                                                                                                        0.15

                                                          -112.02
          1.63
                                                                                                                      0.14
          1.62                                            -112.04
                                                                                                                      0.13
          1.61
                                                          -112.06
           1.6                                                                                                        0.12
                                                          -112.08
          1.59
                                                           -112.1                                                     0.11
          1.58

          1.57                                            -112.12                                                      0.1
                   0.7          0.75                0.8         0.68    0.7   0.72   0.74   0.76   0.78    0.8               0.7           0.75    0.8

                         Debt                                                        Debt                                           Debt




                 Figure 8: Effects of choosing debt in the first period keeping c0 T constant




5.4     Optimal Time-Invariant Debt Tax
We now study the welfare implications of the constant debt-tax rule we examined in the context of
the long-run frontier. For every initial state (b, k, z, ¯b), we compute the compensating variation
in aggregate consumption that would make households indifferent between remaining in the
unregulated economy v. switching to the economy with the debt tax. Let  (b, k, z, ¯   b) denote the
                                               ¯
welfare gain for an initial value of (b, k, z, b) at t = 0.
                                                                                                          
                                                t
                                                    u(cT
                                                       t (1     +       ), cN
                                                                            t (1      +  )) =                         cT
                                                                                                                  t u(~   ~N
                                                                                                                       t ,c t )
                                       t=0                                                                t=0

  30
     In terms of the analysis contained in Figure 7, we found that for low debt taxes on debt, incorporating a
tax on investment is desirable. However, as we consider higher taxes on debt, including the welfare-maximizing
one in Figure 7, subsidizing investment becomes desirable. Overall, choosing jointly a welfare-maximizing pair
of taxes on debt and investment yields a small negative tax on investment. The subsidy is -0.2 percent for the
same initial states considered in Figure 7 and the 3.1 percent welfare-maximizing debt tax. The effective wedge
on the capital arbitrage condition is therefore 1.031/1.002 = 1.029, which implies an effective tax of 2.9 percent.




                                                                                     42
where "tilde" variables denote the economy with the constant tax and all consumption alloca-
tions are evaluated at the corresponding equilibrium values. Using the value functions and the
homotheticity of the utility function, the welfare gain can be expressed as

                                                                           1/(1- )
                                               ~ (b, k, z, ¯
                                               V           b)
                                (b, k, z, ¯
                                          b) =                                       - 1,                      (42)
                                               V (b, k, z, ¯
                                                           b)

where
                                                                                       
                V (b, k, z, ¯
                            b) =            t
                                                u(cT    N
                                                   t , ct ),
                                                                    ~ (b, k, z, ¯
                                                                    V           b) =              cT
                                                                                              t u(~   ~N
                                                                                                   t ,c t ).
                                   t=0                                                 t=0


Note that each  (b, k, z, ¯
                          b) includes long-run effects as well as the effects of the transitional
dynamics of consumption across the unregulated and regulated economies. We average the
welfare gains using the ergodic distribution of the unregulated equilibrium, denoted (b, k, z, ¯
                                                                                               b).
By averaging the gains in this way, we take into account the probability of introducing the
regulation at each possible (b, k, z, ¯
                                      b) in the unregulated economy. The average welfare gain is
therefore given by
                                   =  (b, k, z, ¯  b)d(b, k, z, ¯
                                                                b).                          (43)

Panel (a) of Figure 9 shows the welfare effects of varying  between 0 and 2 percent. This figure
shows that unconditional welfare  is maximized with a debt tax of about 1.3 percent (denoted
the "best fixed tax") . The welfare gains are less than 0.02 percentage points of consumption
and fall sharply and turn into markedly bigger losses for taxes higher than 1.6 percent.
    Panel (b) of Figure 9 shows how the welfare gains and costs vary with debt for three different
values of k and positive shocks to TFP and the borrowing limit, keeping the debt tax at its "best
fixed" rate. The three values of capital are the mean and plus or minus 10 percent around it.
For all k values, there is a narrow interval of relatively high debt at which the best fixed tax
yields welfare gains. Conversely, for debt below 0.6, the tax on debt always yields welfare losses
and these are much larger when k is high. These results follow from the fact that the debt tax
is beneficial when it can tackle overborrowing, and this is the area with debt high enough so
that the constraint does not bind at t but the economy is vulnerable to Sudden Stops at t + 1.
As debt falls, the set of current debt and capital states for which this is possible shrinks, and it
shrinks faster for larger capital stocks. When the set is small enough, the distorting effects on
investment dominate and result in efficiency losses that reduce welfare. There are also distortions
on consumption smoothing, since debt is being taxed in states in which households could have to
borrow more to smooth. On the other hand, the welfare losses that result when debt is very high
are accounted for by the fact that future taxes depress current asset prices and further tighten
the collateral constraint when it is binding (see Bianchi and Mendoza, 2018).

                                                               43
      (a) Welfare effects for constant debt taxes                                        (b) Welfare effects of "best" fixed Tax
      0.05




         0                                                                               0




      -0.05




                                                                                  %
                                                                                      -0.05
       -0.1




      -0.15
                                                                                                                       Low Capital
                                                                                       -0.1
                                                                                                                       Average Capital
                                                                                                                       High Capital
       -0.2
              0   0.002 0.004 0.006 0.008   0.01   0.012 0.014 0.016 0.018                          0.2        0.4          0.6

                                                                                                           Debt




                                            Figure 9: Welfare Effects of Constant Debt taxes

   We close this Section with an analysis of the macroeconomic implications of implementing
the best fixed debt tax. Column 2 of Table 2 shows the key statistics for the economy regulated
with this simple tax rule, which implies a debt tax of roughly 1.3 percent. This policy reduces
the probability of Sudden Stops to 1.1 percent and yields a small welfare gain of 0.02 percent.
The average reversals in investment, the price of non-tradables, and the price of capital when
Sudden Stops occur are roughly 30 percent smaller than they are in the absence of regulation.
   To show how the best fixed debt tax affects the dynamics of Sudden Stops, we use the
counterfactual event analysis methodology proposed in Bianchi and Mendoza (2018). Based on
the Sudden Stop events identified in the unregulated equilibrium (i.e., the periods in which the
current account exceeds 4 percent), we feed the same shocks and initial conditions to the policy
functions of the regulated economy. For each one of the sudden stops in the simulated sample,
we consider the initial conditions 3 years before the sudden stops for the unregulated economy,
and simulate the model using the policy functions for the best-fixed tax economy and the same
shocks that hit the unregulated economy. The resulting simulations are shown in Figure 5. The
plots indicate that, by reducing investment and external borrowing before Sudden Stops, the
debt tax mitigates the current-account reversal by about 2 percentage points and also dampens
the fluctuations in the other macroeconomic aggregates.
    We should emphasize that our analysis of optimal macroprudential taxes on debt is restricted
to the search of a simple time-invariant tax. Allowing for optimal state contingent macropru-
dential policy leads to much larger gains, as studied in Bianchi (2011) and Bianchi and Mendoza
(2018). However, a more complete study of macroprudential policy in the context of a model of
capital accumulation, like the one presented here, remains an avenue for future research.




                                                                             44
6    Conclusions
This paper reviews the positive and normative contributions of the research program on Fisherian
models of Sudden Stops to the analysis of financial crises. From a positive perspective, the
literature has shown that Fisherian deflation is a powerful financial amplification mechanism
capable of producing model-generated Sudden Stops with realistic features, particularly their low
long-run frequency and their large current-account reversals and collapses of real exchange rates,
asset prices, output, consumption and investment. From a normative perspective, the literature
has found that the large corrections in collateral prices induce large pecuniary externalities
that distort borrowing choices and reduce social welfare. Optimal macroprudential policy is
very effective at reducing the magnitude and frequency of financial crises, but requires complex
state-contingent policies. Simpler policy rules closer to the ones used in practice (e.g., the
countercyclical capital buffer and regulatory LTV and DTI ratios with limited flexibility) are
less effective and need to be carefully evaluated because they can easily produce welfare-reducing
outcomes. To date, finding an effective but simple MPP rule remains elusive.
    The paper also adds to the literature by conducting a new analysis of MPP tradeoffs using
a model that combines features of the DTI and LTV classes of Fisherian models and allows for
capital accumulation and sectoral allocation of inputs. Macroprudential debt taxes and regula-
tory LTVs reduce overborrowing but also distort capital accumulation with effects analogous to
those of capital income taxes. Starting from the unregulated economy, using debt taxes or LTVs
is beneficial because they reduce overborrowing, but simple policy rules focusing purely on debt
may result in output and welfare losses.
    Despite the fact that both debt taxes and regulatory LTVs distort investment in the same
direction in the model, lender-based MPP akin to debt taxes and borrower-based LTV regulation
are not equivalent. If used to replicate the consumption and debt allocations obtained with debt
taxes, regulatory LTVs would yield higher asset prices. Since asset prices are forward-looking,
this would also imply different allocations before that date.
    Quantitative analysis of the new model we proposed shows that, in the absence of policy
intervention, the model generates Sudden Stop dynamics in line with previous findings. The
mechanism for production of investment goods using non-tradables and tradables generates sec-
toral reallocations that imply that when a Sudden Stop occurs consumption of tradables falls
but that of non-tradables rises. Simple MPP rules in the form of constant debt taxes (but with
the flexibility to be turned off when credit is constrained) have significant tradeoffs because of
their distortionary effects on investment. These tradeoffs are illustrated by a long-run crisis
probability­output loss frontier: higher debt taxes reduce the frequency of crises but also shave
off up to 0.45 percent of GDP at the stochastic steady state. The welfare-maximizing constant
debt tax of about 1.3 percent is somewhat effective at reducing the frequency and magnitude of


                                               45
crises and yields a modest welfare gain, but slightly higher tax rates above 1.5 percent produce
increasingly large welfare losses.
    Normative and positive quantitative analysis of financial crises based on Fisherian models is
a fertile area for further research. Based on the material covered in this paper and our review
of the recent literature, the following topics are particularly worth considering: i) enriching
financial intermediation by introducing securitization and intermediaries with frictions (e.g.,
liquidity risk) and portfolio considerations (e.g., liquidity and maturity choices), ii) studying
the interaction of monetary and macroprudential policies, iii) introducing nominal rigidities and
interactions with aggregate demand externalities, iv) examining the interaction between ex-
ante macroprudential policies and ex-post policies like FX intervention or bailouts, v) studying
Fisherian amplification in environments with agent heterogeneity, vi) exploring the normative
implications for the design of international financial regulation, vii) contrasting policies under
commitment and under discretion and quantifying the value of commitment, and viii) studying
the design of effective simple MPP rules.




                                               46
References
Acharya, Viral V, Katharina Bergant, Matteo Crosignani, Tim Eisert, and Fergal
 McCann, "The anatomy of the transmission of macroprudential policies: Evidence from
 Ireland," 2017. Mimeo, NYU.

Ahnert, Toni and Ali Kakhbod, "Information choice and amplification of financial crises,"
 The Review of Financial Studies, 2017, 30 (6), 2130­2178.

Aiyagari, S Rao and Mark Gertler, "Overreaction of asset prices in general equilibrium,"
 Review of Economic Dynamics, 1999, 2 (1), 3­35.

Arce, Fernando, Julien Bengui, and Javier Bianchi, "A Macroprudential Theory of For-
 eign Reserve Accumulation," 2019. NBER Working Paper No. 26236.

Beirne, John and Christian Friedrich, "Capital flows and macroprudential policies-A mul-
 tilateral assessment of effectiveness and externalities," 2014.

Bengui, Julien and Javier Bianchi, "Macroprudential Policy with Leakages," Technical
 Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.

Benigno, Gianluca, Huigang Chen, Christopher Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci, and
 Eric R Young, "Financial crises and macro-prudential policies," Journal of International
 Economics, 2013, 89 (2), 453­470.

  , , , , and , "Optimal capital controls and real exchange rate policies: A pecuniary
  externality perspective," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2016, 84, 147­165.

Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler, "Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctualtions,"
 American Economic Review, 1989, 79, 1­15.

Bianchi, Javier, "Overborrowing and systemic externalities in the business cycle," American
  Economic Review, 2011, 101 (7), 3400­3426.

  , "Efficient bailouts?," American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (12), 3607­59.

   and Enrique G Mendoza, "Optimal time-consistent macroprudential policy," Journal of
  Political Economy, 2018, 126 (2), 588­634.

  , Chenxin Liu, and Enrique G Mendoza, "Fundamentals news, global liquidity and
  macroprudential policy," Journal of International Economics, 2016, 99, S2­S15.

Borio, Claudio, "Towards a macroprudential framework for financial supervision and regula-
 tion?," CESifo Economic Studies, 2003, 49 (2), 181­215.

                                             47
  , "The financial cycle and macroeconomics: What have we learnt?," Journal of Banking &
  Finance, 2014, 45, 182­198.

Boz, Emine and Enrique G Mendoza, "Financial innovation, the discovery of risk, and the
 US credit crisis," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2014, 62, 1­22.

Brunnermeier, Markus K and Yuliy Sannikov, "A macroeconomic model with a financial
 sector," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (2), 379­421.

Buch, Claudia M., Edgar Vogel, and Benjamin Weigert, "Evaluating Macroprudential
 Policies," Working Paper Series, Minneapolis Fed, 2018, (76).

Calvo, Guillermo A, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Ernesto Talvi, "Sudden stops and phoenix
 miracles in emerging markets," American Economic Review, 2006, 96 (2), 405­410.

  , , and Luis-Fernando Mejia, "On the empirics of sudden stops: the relevance of balance-
  sheet effects," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2004.

Calvo, Guillermo, Fabrizio Coricelli, and Pablo Ottonello, "Jobless recoveries during
 financial crises: is inflation the way out?," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic
 Research 2013.

Cerutti, Eugenio, Stijn Claessens, and Mr Luc Laeven, The use and effectiveness of
 macroprudential policies: new evidence number 15-61, International Monetary Fund, 2015.

Claessens, Stijn and Mr M Ayhan Kose, Financial crises explanations, types, and impli-
  cations number 13-28, International Monetary Fund, 2013.

Cordella, Tito, Pablo Federico, Carlos Vegh, and Guillermo Vuletin, Reserve require-
 ments in the brave new macroprudential world, The World Bank, 2014.

Coulibaly, Louphou, "Monetary policy in sudden stop-prone economies," 2018. Mimeo, Pitts-
 burgh.

Dell'Ariccia, Giovanni, Deniz Igan, and Luc UC Laeven, "Credit booms and lending
 standards: Evidence from the subprime mortgage market," Journal of Money, Credit and
 Banking, 2012, 44 (2-3), 367­384.

Durdu, Ceyhun Bora and Enrique G Mendoza, "Are asset price guarantees useful for
 preventing Sudden Stops?: A quantitative investigation of the globalization hazard­moral
 hazard tradeoff," Journal of International Economics, 2006, 69 (1), 84­119.




                                            48
  , , and Marco E Terrones, "Precautionary demand for foreign assets in Sudden Stop
  economies: An assessment of the New Mercantilism," Journal of development Economics,
  2009, 89 (2), 194­209.

Edwards, Sebastian, "Financial openness, sudden stops, and current-account reversals," Amer-
 ican Economic Review, 2004, 94 (2), 59­64.

Eichengreen, Barry, Poonam Gupta, and Oliver Masetti, "Are Capital Flows Fickle?,"
  World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, 2017, 7972.

Farhi, Emmanuel and Iv´     an Werning, "A theory of macroprudential policies in the presence
  of nominal rigidities," Econometrica, 2016, 84 (5), 1645­1704.

Ferretti, Gian Maria Milesi and Assaf Razin, "Current account reversals and currency
  crises: empirical regularities," in "Currency crises," University of Chicago Press, 2000, pp. 285­
  323.

Fisher, Irving, "The debt-deflation theory of great depressions," Econometrica: Journal of the
  Econometric Society, 1933, pp. 337­357.

Flemming, Jean, Jean-Paul L'Huillier, and Facundo Piguillem, "Macro-Prudential tax-
  ation in good times," Journal of International Economics, 2019, 121, 103251.

Forbes, Kristin J and Francis E Warnock, "Capital flow waves: Surges, stops, flight, and
  retrenchment," Journal of International Economics, 2012, 88 (2), 235­251.

Fornaro, Luca, "International Debt Deleveraging," Journal of the European Economic Associ-
  ation, 2018.

Galati, Gabriele and Richhild Moessner, "What do we know about the effects of macro-
 prudential policy?," Economica, 2018, 85 (340), 735­770.

Gertler, Mark and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, "Financial intermediation and credit policy in busi-
 ness cycle analysis," in "Handbook of monetary economics," Vol. 3, Elsevier, 2010, pp. 547­599.

Hernandez, Juan M and Enrique G Mendoza, "Optimal v. simple financial policy rules in
 a production economy with liability dollarization," Ensayos sobre Pol´
                                                                      itica Econ´
                                                                                omica, 2017,
 35 (82), 25­39.

Jeanne, Olivier and Anton Korinek, "Managing credit booms and busts: A Pigouvian
  taxation approach," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2018.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore, "Credit cycles," Journal of political economy, 1997,
 105 (2), 211­248.

                                                49
Korinek, Anton and Enrique G Mendoza, "From sudden stops to fisherian deflation: Quan-
 titative theory and policy," Annu. Rev. Econ., 2014, 6 (1), 299­332.

Kuttner, Kenneth N and Ilhyock Shim, "Can non-interest rate policies stabilize housing
 markets? Evidence from a panel of 57 economies," Journal of Financial Stability, 2016, 26,
 31­44.

Lane, Phillip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferreti, "The External Wealth of Nations Mark
  II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004," Journal of
  International Economics, 2007, 73, 223­250.

Lombardo, Giovanni and Federico Ravenna, "The size of the tradable and non-tradable
  sectors: Evidence from input­output tables for 25 countries," Economics letters, 2012, 116
  (3), 558­561.

Lorenzoni, Guido, "Inefficient credit booms," The Review of Economic Studies, 2008, 75 (3),
  809­833.

Mendoza, Enrique G, "Credit, prices, and crashes: Business cycles with a sudden stop," in
 "Preventing currency crises in Emerging markets," University of Chicago Press, 2002, pp. 335­
 392.

  , "Real exchange rate volatility and the price of nontradables in sudden-stop-prone economies,"
  Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2005.

Mendoza, Enrique G., "Sudden Stops, Financial Crises, and Leverage," American Economic
 Review, 2010, 100(5), 1941­1966.

Mendoza, Enrique G and Eugenio Rojas, "Positive and Normative Implications of Liability
 Dollarization for Sudden Stops Models of Macroprudential Policy," IMF Economic Review,
 2019, pp. 1­41.

   and Katherine A Smith, "Quantitative implications of a debt-deflation theory of sudden
  stops and asset prices," Journal of International Economics, 2006, 70 (1), 82­114.

   and    , "Financial globalization, financial crises, and the external portfolio structure of
  emerging markets," The Scandinavian journal of economics, 2014, 116 (1), 20­57.

   and Marco E Terrones, "An anatomy of credit booms: evidence from macro aggregates
  and micro data," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2008.

   and , "An anatomy of credit booms and their demise," Technical Report, National Bureau
  of Economic Research 2012.

                                               50
   and Sergio Villalvazo, "FiPIt: A Simple, Fast Global Method for Solving Models with Two
  Endogenous States and Occasionally Binding Constraints," Review of Economic Dynamics,
  2020, forthcoming.

   and Vincenzo Quadrini, "Financial globalization, financial crises and contagion," Journal
  of monetary economics, 2010, 57 (1), 24­39.

Meza, Felipe, "Financial crisis, fiscal policy, and the 1995 GDP contraction in Mexico," Journal
 of Money, Credit and Banking, 2008, 40 (6), 1239­1261.

Minsky, Hyman P, "The financial instability hypothesis," The Jerome Levy Economics Insti-
 tute Working Paper, 1992, (74).

Ostry, Jonathan D, Atish R Ghosh, Marcos Chamon, and Mahvash S Qureshi, "Tools
 for managing financial-stability risks from capital inflows," Journal of International Economics,
 2012, 88 (2), 407­421.

Ottonello, Pablo, "Optimal exchange rate policy under collateral constraints and wage rigid-
 ity," manuscript, Columbia University, 2015.

Reinhart, Carmen and Carlos A. Vegh, "Nominal Interest Rates, Consumption Booms,
 and Lack of Credibility: A Quantitative Examination," Journal of Development Economics,
 1995, 46 (2), 357­378.

Reinhart, Carmen M and Kenneth S Rogoff, This time is different: Eight centuries of
 financial folly, princeton university press, 2009.

Reyes-Heroles, Ricardo and Gabriel Tenorio, "Macroprudential Policy in the Presence of
 External Risks." Mimeo, Federal Reserve Board.

Rothenberg, AD and FE Warnock, "Sudden Flight and Sudden Stops," Institute for Inter-
 national Integration Studies, University of Dublin. Working Paper, 2006, 187.

Schmitt-Groh´   e, Stephanie and Mart´     in Uribe, "Adjustment to small, large, & sunspot
  shocks in open economies with stock collateral constraints," Ensayos sobre Pol´
                                                                                itica Econ´
                                                                                          omica,
  2017, 35 (82), 2­9.

   and , "Multiple equilibria in open economy models with collateral constraints: Overbor-
  rowing revisited," 2018. Forthcoming, Review of EConomic Studies.

Schularick, Moritz and Alan M Taylor, Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Lever-
  age cycles and Financial Crisis, 1870-2008, CEPR, 2009.



                                               51
Seoane, Hern´  an D and Emircan Yurdagul, "Trend shocks and sudden stops," Journal of
  International Economics, 2019, 121, 103252.

Stavrakeva, Vania, "Optimal bank regulation and fiscal capacity," The Review of Economic
  Studies, 2020, 87 (2), 1034­1089.

Stein, Jeremy C, "Monetary policy as financial stability regulation," The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 2012, 127 (1), 57­95.

Uribe, Martin and Stephanie Schmitt-Groh´
                                        e, Open economy macroeconomics, Princeton
 University Press, 2017.

Werning, I, "Discussion of michael kleins capital controls: Gates and walls," Technical Report,
 Technical report, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2012.

Yeyati, Eduardo Levy, "Are capital controls effective?," VoxEU. org, 2011, 20.




                                              52
                                                     Appendix


A         Optimal macroprudential policy
We describe below a constrained-efficient social planner's problem that is standard in the lit-
erature in models of optimal macroprudential policy. We base the analysis on the workhorse
DTI model of Bianchi (2011).31 The planner chooses directly the holdings of non-state contin-
gent bonds denominated in units of tradables subject to the collateral constraint, transfers the
net proceeds from borrowing to the households and lets the goods market clear competitively.
Households choose optimally the split between tradable and non-tradables, implying that the
price of nontradables must equal the corresponding marginal rate of substitution in sectoral con-
sumption. As a result, the planner internalizes how choosing debt affects consumption, which in
turn affects the equilibrium price of collateral and thus borrowing capacity.
       The planner's optimal plans solve the following dynamic programming problem:
                                                                                     1
                                                             -                   - - 
           V (b, y T , y N ) =      max          u      cT        + (1 -  ) cN           +  EV (b , z )   (1)
                                 pN ,cT ,cN ,b
                                 subject to                                                               (2)

                                                     cT + qb = b + y T                                    (3)

                                                         cN = y N                                         (4)

                                                  qb  -(y T + pN y N )                                    (5)
                                                                          +1
                                                 N      1-          cT
                                                 p =                                                      (6)
                                                                    cN
The endogenous state variable is the current bond position, b, and the exogenous states are the
endowment realizations (y T , y N ). The planner chooses (pN , cT , cN , b ) subject to four constraints:
the resource constraint for tradables (3), the market-clearing condition for nontradables (4), the
credit constraint (5), and the implementability constraint requiring that the price of nontradables
be consistent with a competitive equilibrium (6). Note that the price can be removed from the
problem by substituting (6) into (5), to make it clear that what the planner is picking are the
optimal allocations (i.e. optimal plans for bonds and consumption) but being mindful that these
must be implementable as a competitive equilibrium.
  31
     The macroprudential policy in this economy does not have any time inconsistency issues. We will return to
this below.




                                                             53
       The first-order conditions of the planner's problem in sequential form are:

                                                                 1-        cT
                                       
                         t = uT (t) + µt t ,           t            (1 +  ) N ,                              (7)
                                                                           y
                                           
                         t = REt [t+1 ] + µt .                                                               (8)

where            
        t and µt denote the planner's Lagrange multipliers on the resource constraint and credit
constraint, respectively. As explained in Section 3, the term t captures the effect of an additional
unit of tradables consumption on borrowing capacity via equilibrium effects on the price of
collateral (i.e. the price of nontradables).32 Hence, µ  t t reflects the fact that, when the credit
constraint binds, the social marginal benefit from cT includes the gains resulting from how
changes in cT can help relax the credit constraint, in addition to the marginal utility of tradables
consumption.
       The above two conditions yield the following Euler equation:

                         uT (t) = REt uT (t + 1) + µ           
                                                    t+1 t+1 + µt (1 - t ).                                   (9)

    Consider a state of nature in which the constraint is not binding (µ    t = 0).    Comparing
this condition with the household's Euler equation for bonds (eq. (4)) shows that there is a
wedge between the private and social marginal cost of borrowing, given by the term µ       t+1 t+1 .
In particular, when the credit constraint is expected to bind, the planner faces a strictly higher
marginal cost of borrowing than the representative agent. This is a pecuniary externality, because
it results from the fact that the planner makes borrowing choices at t taking into account that
the credit constraint could bind at t + 1, and if it does the Fisherian debt-deflation mechanism
will cause a collapse of the relative price of nontradables that will shrink borrowing capacity.
The representative agent takes prices as given, and thus does not internalize these effects.
    The literature has shown that the planner's allocations can be decentralized as a regulated
competitive equilibrium using various policy instruments, including taxes on debt, loan-to-value
ratios, capital requirements or reserve requirements (see Bianchi, 2011). Most studies focus on a
debt tax that taxes the cost of borrowing at a rate t with the revenue of the tax rebated to the
household as a lump-sum transfer. With this policy in place in the regulated economy, the cost
of purchasing bonds in the budget constraint becomes [1/R(1 + t )]bt+1 and the Euler equation
becomes uT (t) = R(1 + t )Et [uT (t + 1)] + µt .33
       The optimal macroprudential debt tax is then defined as the value of t that equates the
                               T
  32
     The product 1-              c
                       (1 +  ) y N   measures how total income in units of tradables changes with the choice of
bt+1 , because this choice alters consumption of tradables and hence the relative price of nontradables.
  33
     There are also results in the literature showing cases in which the problem of a Ramsey planner choosing
debt tax rates yields the same allocations and taxes as the constrained efficient planner (see Section A.3 of the
Appendix to Bianchi and Mendoza (2018) for a proof in the case of an LTV model).



                                                       54
Euler equations of bonds of the social planner and the regulated economy with the tax (note
that this tax varies across time and states of nature). Hence, the tax induces private agents to
face the social marginal cost of borrowing when it differs from the private cost. Solving for t
yields:
                                            Et µ t+1 t+1
                                       t =                                                  (10)
                                            Et [uT (t + 1)]
The tax rate equals the expected value of the pecuniary externality, which captures also the
possibility of a financial crisis at t + 1, normalized by the (higher) marginal utility of tradables
consumption if a crisis does occur.
    For states in which µt > 0, there is a range of taxes that implements the constrained efficient
allocations, each of which is associated with a different Lagrange multiplier on the borrowing
constraint for households, while delivering the same allocations. The logic is that if a given tax
implements the constrained-efficient allocation when the constraint binds, a slightly lower tax
increases the shadow value of relaxing the constraint, but it does not modify the feasible level
of debt. A standard case is such that when evaluated at the constrained-efficient allocation, we
have uT (ct ) > REuT (ct+1 ), in which case a zero tax would implement the constrained-efficient
allocation. When two or more allocations are consistent with conditions (3)-(6) and (5) holding
with equality (i.e. when the multiplicity conditions examined in Section 3.1 of the paper are
satisfied), a subsidy may be necessary to induce a higher aggregate level of borrowing that can
support a higher price of collateral, so that the allocations that the planner finds optimal can be
implemented.
    A final remark worth highlighting is that there are no credibility problems associated with
the above optimal macroprudential policy, as implied by the fact that the planner's problem can
be expressed as a standard Bellman equation. A feature of the planner's problem that is key for
this result is that the price of collateral depends only on allocations determined at date t. When
the price is forward looking, optimal macroprudential policy becomes time-inconsistent under
commitment, as Bianchi and Mendoza (2018) showed for the case of a Fisherian model with the
LTV constraint. In this case, the planner's implementability constraint is the Euler equation for
capital: qt u (t) = Et [u (t + 1)(dt+1 + qt+1 )], where dt+1 represents dividends. Intuitively, the
planner internalizes that it can affect qt by altering ct+1 . When the constraint binds at t, it would
like to pledge lower ct+1 to prop-up qt and thus improve borrowing capacity at t, but delivering
on that pledge at t + 1 is suboptimal.
    The literature has followed two approaches to deal with the time-inconsistency problem:
First, Bianchi and Mendoza (2018) solved for time-consistent policy by modeling the regulator
of date t as taking as given the decision rules of future regulators, and then solving for a Markov
stationary equilibrium in which these decision rules and the ones that are optimal for the current
regulator are consistent. Second, an earlier version of Bianchi and Mendoza (2018) and studies


                                                 55
like Mendoza and Rojas (2019) impose a treatment of the pricing function of collateral in the
planner's problem akin to the notion of conditional efficiency: The planner takes as given the
recursive equilibrium pricing function of the unregulated competitive equilibrium. It still inter-
nalizes how collateral prices respond to debt decisions and hence the pecuniary externality is
still present, but it does not aim to alter the set of feasible borrowing positions allowed by the
pricing function of the unregulated equilibrium. When the planner is free to alter the pricing
function, it will respond to the incentive to prop up qt in the time-inconsistent problem under
commitment or to the incentive to influence the actions of future regulators in the time-consistent,
Markov-stationary problem.


B      Debt taxes & LTV regulation are not equivalent
This part of the Appendix shows that debt taxes and LTV regulation are not equivalent, even
tough both reduce credit and distort investment. Consider for simplicity a one-sector variant of
the model with an asset in fixed supply of one unit. The budget and collateral constraints with
debt taxes and LTV regulation are:
                          bt+1
                                  + zt F (kt )  ct - bt + qt (kt - kt+1 ) + Tt
                        R(1 + t )
                                        bt+1
                                                -(1 - t )qt kt+1
                                          R
and the first-order conditions of the household's problem (evaluated at kt+1 = 1) are:

                                           u (ct ) = R(1 + t )Eu (ct+1 ) + µt
                       [u (ct ) - µt (1 - t )] qt = Eu (ct+1 )[qt+1 + zt+1 ]

where we simplified by assuming F (1) = 1 without loss of generality.


Proposition Suppose there is a set of equilibrium allocations {b                                  
                                                                          t+1 , ct } and prices {qt } asso-
ciated with a debt-tax policy {t }. Then, {b            
                                            t+1 , ct , qt } cannot be implemented with a regulatory
LTV ratio {t }, and in particular implementing {b             
                                                       t+1 , ct } yields higher asset prices under LTV
                  
regulation (qt > qt ).
   Proof: We show that implementing {b                
                                               t+1 , ct } with regulatory LTVs given by {t } yields
                                            
higher equilibrium asset prices (i.e. qt > qt ), and hence the two regimes yield different equilibria.
Consider first the equilibrium in which only taxes are used (i.e. t = 0) and a state of nature in
which the constraint is not binding at date t (which is when a positive debt tax would be used).




                                                    56
The Euler equations of bonds and capital are:

                                 u ( c                    
                                      t ) = R(1 + t )Eu (ct+1 )

                              u (c     
                                  t ) qt = Eu (c       
                                                t+1 )[qt+1 + zt+1 ]                           (11)

   To implement the same level of debt with LTV regulation requires that the credit constraint
binds (µt > 0) at the amount of debt of the debt-tax regime:

                                                     - bt+1
                                        (1 - t ) =        
                                                                                              (12)
                                                     Rqt

In order to sustain also the same equilibrium asset prices, the Euler equations of the LTV regime
must hold with the same allocations and prices using regulatory LTVs instead of taxes (i.e.
t = 0). Combining the two Euler equations under the LTV regime yields the following:

                                                          
           u (c                                
               t ) - (1 - t ) u (ct ) - R Eu (ct+1 )     qt = Eu (c       
                                                                   t+1 )(qt+1 + zt+1 )

                                                                        
    u (c                                                   
        t ) -  u (ct ) - R Eu (ct+1 ) + t u (ct ) - R Eu (ct+1 )       qt
                                                                  = Eu (c       
                                                                         t+1 )(qt+1 + zt+1 ) (13)


    Subtracting (13) from (11)and simplifying we obtain:

                                                                
                                u (c      
                                    t ) (qt - qt ) = -(1 - t )µt qt                           (14)

Since in order to tighten credit without taxes the regulatory LTV must bind (µ     t > 0) and since
the LTV regulation requires 0 < t < 1, the right-hand-side of this expression is negative and
                                               
hence satisfying this condition requires qt > qt , which implies that asset prices would be higher
under the LTV regime than with the debt tax. This also implies that allocations would be
different in previous periods, because of the forward looking nature of asset prices. Moreover,
this result suggests that it may be the case that LTVs dominate other macroprudential policy
instruments, particularly debt-tax-like instruments (e.g. lender targeted instruments like capital
controls and capital requirements), because of their ability to boost asset prices.


C      Sudden Stops Event Analysis
We constructed the Sudden Stops event analysis using the same methodology as in Korinek and
Mendoza (2014), extending the dataset to cover the 1979-2016 period. The full details of their
methodology are described in the data appendix of their paper (which is available for down-
load at https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/suppl/10.1146/annurev-economics-080213-041005).
Their methodology is in turn based on the one developed by Calvo et al. (2006), including Sud-


                                                57
den Stops with both large and mild output collapses. Sudden Stops are identified by applying
two filters: the capital flow reversal filter and the systemic filter. The capital flow filter flags
years with a large fall in capital flows, measured as an increase in the current account-GDP
ratio larger than two standard deviations. The systemic filter identifies years in which there
were either aggregate EMBI spread spikes for emerging economies or aggregate VIX spikes for
advanced economies.
     A Sudden Stop event is identified for a particular country in a particular year when the two
filter conditions are satisfied. Then we construct five-year event windows using macro data based
on medians across all Sudden Stop events for emerging and advanced economies. For Sudden
Stop events before 2004, we use the list of events identified by Calvo et al. (2006), except for
the events they identified for Morocco in 1981 and 1995, which were too close to Sudden Stops
they also identified for 1983 and 1997. We consider the 1981 and 1983 (1995 and 1997) events
as part of a single event dated in 1983 (1997), which is the year with the largest current account
reversal.
   We used for the most part the same data sources as in Korinek and Mendoza (2014), but using
additional data for the real exchange rate and real equity prices. For countries and/or periods
where the Korinek-Mendoza data sources do not show data, we construct bilateral real exchange
rates using domestic CPI, US CPI, and the nominal exchange rate of the domestic currency v.
the US dollar for December of each year. For stock prices, missing country series were completed
(when possible) using stock price index data from Bloomberg (December averages). Lastly, when
possible, the stock price data were extended by extrapolating using the annual percentage change
from S&P Global Equity Indices, obtained from the World Development Indicators.




                                                58
