                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE GENDER GAP IN HOUSING RETURNS

                                    Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham
                                          Kelly Shue

                                       Working Paper 26914
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26914


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2020




We thank James Choi, Tim Landvoigt (discussant), Gonzalo Maturana (discussant), Barry
Nalebuff, Chris Palmer (discussant), Paola Sapienza (discussant), Matt Spiegel, and seminar
audiences at Berkeley, Colorado Finance Summit, Five Star Conference, Florida International
University, FMA, Georgia State University, Johns Hopkins University, NBER Behavioral
Economics, Stanford, University of Michigan, University of Delaware, University of Pittsburgh,
University of Toronto, Yale, and Yale-RFS Conference on Real and Private-Value Assets for
helpful comments. We thank Gen Li, Huijun Sun, and Kaushik Vasudevan for excellent research
assistance. This research was funded in part by the International Center for Finance at Yale SOM.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham and Kelly Shue. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Gender Gap in Housing Returns
Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham and Kelly Shue
NBER Working Paper No. 26914
March 2020
JEL No. D14,D31,G4,G51,J16,R2

                                          ABSTRACT

Housing wealth represents the dominant form of savings for American households. Using
detailed data on housing transactions across the United States since 1991, we find that single men
earn 1.5 percentage points higher unlevered returns per year on housing relative to single women.
The gender gap grows significantly larger after accounting for mortgage borrowing: men earn 7.9
percentage points higher levered returns per year relative to women. Approximately 45% of the
gap in housing returns can be explained by gender differences in the location and timing of
transactions. The remaining gap arises primarily from gender differences in execution prices: data
on repeat sales reveal that women buy the same property for approximately 2% more and sell for
2% less. Women experience worse execution prices because of differences in the choice of initial
list price and negotiated discount relative to the list price. Gender differences in upgrade and
maintenance rates, and preferences for housing characteristics and listing agents appear to be less
important factors. Overall, the gender gap in housing returns is economically large and can
explain 30% of the gender gap in wealth accumulation at retirement.


Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Avenue
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
paulgp@gmail.com

Kelly Shue
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Avenue
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
kelly.shue@yale.edu
                                                   I. Introduction

Housing accounts for the majority of most American households' wealth, with Americans investing

more in the housing market than in the stock market.1 Housing also differs from other common

forms of household savings, such as bank deposits, bonds, and stocks, in that it is an illiquid and

heterogeneous asset with prices determined through bilateral negotiation. Motivated by the existing

research showing gender differences in negotiation, financial investment strategies, and preferences

for risk and competition (e.g., Sunden and Surette, 1998; Ayres, 1990; Babcock and Laschever, 2009;

Sapienza et al., 2009; Bertrand, 2011; Reuben et al., 2015; Niederle and Vesterlund, 2007; Gneezy et al.,

2003), we investigate how men and women differ in their financial returns on housing investment.

     We use detailed data from CoreLogic covering over 50 million housing transactions and matched

property listings across the US from 1991 to 2017. For approximately 9 million transactions for which

we can identify homeowner gender, and the initial purchase and eventual sale prices, we compute the

homeowner's annualized realized return.

     We find that single men earn 1.5 percentage points higher unlevered annualized returns relative

to single women. Approximately 45% of this gender gap in raw housing returns can explained by

market timing, i.e., the choice of where and when to buy, and when to sell. Women earn lower returns

on housing partly because they tend to buy in locations when aggregate house prices are high and

sell when they are low. However, a large gender gap persists even after accounting for market timing.

Among men and women who buy and sell in the same zip code and year-month, women still earn 0.8

percentage points lower unlevered annualized returns.

     We also find that couples underperform single women on a raw unadjusted basis, but the low

returns for couples are primarily due to market timing. After adjusting for the location and timing of

purchases and sales, couples significantly outperform single women and underperform single men.

Couples also display unique dynamics, in that they underperform single men at purchase, but out-

perform single men at sale.

     Most U.S. home buyers purchase housing using mortgage debt with loan-to-value ratios of 80 per-

cent or higher, and have not paid down a large fraction of the principal at the time of sale. Therefore,

the real return earned is typically a levered return. We find that men outperform women by almost 8

percentage points per year after adjusting for leverage. The growth in the gender gap arises because
  1 We plot the share of net worth invested in housing and the stock market for each percentile in the wealth distribution in

Appendix Figure A1 using data from the Survey of Consumer Finances.



                                                             1
leverage amplifies raw return differences.

     The gender gap in housing returns varies with the business cycle, but exists in all years within our

sample and has not declined significantly in recent years (similar to the persistence of the unexplained

gender wage gap in the most recent two decades (Goldin, 2014; Blau and Kahn, 2017)). Zip codes

with lower average education and income, greater average age, and higher fraction single female are

associated with larger gender gaps. However, the gender gap remains large in regions with high

average education, income, and house price levels. The gender gap is largest in the right tail of the

return distribution, although it also present at the median, and does not significantly reverse in the

left tail.

     In more detailed analysis, we explore the sources of the gender gap in housing returns. Con-

trolling for market timing, we show that the remaining gender gap arises primarily because of a gap

in execution prices at the points of purchase and sale. What happens between purchase and sale,

e.g., potential mechanisms in which men invest more in upgrades and maintenance or buying riskier

properties that naturally earn higher returns, appear to be less important drivers of the gender gap.

     We begin by examining data on repeat sales of the same property. We further compare men and

women who transact in the same zip code and year-month. This allows us to examine the remaining

gender gap after adjusting for differences in market timing. Holding the property fixed, and compar-

ing men and women to transact in the same zip-year-month, women buy the same property for 1-2%

more than men and sell for 2-3% less. This gender gap in transaction prices arises from differences in

the choice of list price and negotiated discount relative to the list price. Again using repeat sales data

that allow us to hold the property fixed, we find that female buyers purchase properties that are listed

at higher relative prices. Despite buying at higher prices, female sellers also choose to list for lower

prices when selling. In addition, women negotiate worse discounts relative to the list price.

     This gender gap in prices varies with the match between the gender of the buyer and seller in

each transaction. Again exploiting repeat sales, we find that the highest transaction prices are associ-

ated with male sellers and female buyers, and the lowest transaction prices are associated with female

sellers and male buyers. Female sellers and male buyers are associated with the largest negotiated dis-

counts relative to the list price, while male sellers and female buyers are associated with the smallest

discounts.

     These findings relating to list prices and negotiated discounts imply that women experience worse

execution prices on real estate transactions at the points of purchase and sale. Differences in execution


                                                    2
prices should matter much more for the annualized returns of short-term investors than for the returns

of long-term buy-and-hold investors. Consistent with this insight, we find that the magnitude of the

gender gap in annualized returns decays toward zero with holding length. Homeowners with shorter

tenure in their properties "trade" assets more often, so variation in execution prices matter more for

their annualized returns.

    We also explore several other potential mechanisms which may drive the gender gap in housing

returns. First, men may select properties with characteristics naturally associated with higher returns.

In particular, men may purchase riskier properties, such that their higher return represents compen-

sation for the additional risk. Second, men may invest more in housing maintenance and upgrades,

such that their real investment return is lower than implied by analysis using only the purchase and

sale prices. Third, women may be older, have more children, or have lower education and income,

and these demographic factors may contribute to the gender gap in housing returns. Fourth, men

may employ better real estate agents when engaging in housing transactions.

    We find that differences in preferences for types of homes do not substantially affect the gender

gap in housing returns. Men and women indeed differ in their choice of home type (e.g., new con-

struction and number of bedrooms), but controlling for these features does not significantly affect the

gender gap in housing returns. Then, using detailed demographics data from the American Housing

Survey, we replicate our main results showing a gender gap in housing returns. We find that home-

owner age, education, income, and number of children significantly predict returns. However, the

unexplained gender gap remains large after controlling for these variables. We also find no gender

differences in reported home maintenance investment in the American Housing Survey data. In ad-

dition to routine maintenance, men may invest more in non-routine upgrades or renovations. Using

CoreLogic listings data, we find that men are more likely to list homes that have been upgraded or

renovated, but the difference in upgrade rates is small. The gender gap in housing returns remains

large in a restricted sample for which the house listing does not mention any upgrades or renovations.

Further, we find that the gender gap in returns persists after controlling for listing agent fixed effects,

implying that women do not hire systematically worse real estate agents on average.

    We also use the empirical relation between annualized returns and holding length to assess the

importance of the property risk or maintenance explanations. Gender differences in routine mainte-

nance or property risk imply that the the gender gap in annualized housing returns should remain

positive as holding length increases. For example, if men purchase riskier properties that warrant


                                                    3
an extra 1% return each year, the gender gap in annualized returns should asymptote toward 1% as

holding period increases. Instead, we observe a gender gap in annualized housing returns that decays

toward zero with holding length. This pattern is more consistent with a gap in returns that arises from

gender differences in execution prices.

    Finally, we examine how the gender gap varies with market tightness. In tight markets, sale vol-

ume is high relative to the number of outstanding house listings. As markets tighten, the gender gap

in returns, transaction prices, and negotiated discounts all shrink toward zero. This pattern suggests

that bilateral negotiation may be an important driver of the average gender gap in housing returns. As

markets tighten, bilateral negotiations are typically replaced with quasi-auctions, in which multiple

interested buyers bid for homes. The reduction in the gender gap with market tightness is also incon-

sistent with an explanation in which men buy riskier properties or invest more in home maintenance

and upgrades, because risk and home improvements should, if anything, be more efficiently priced

in liquid markets. Similarly, the reduction in the gender gap with market tightness is inconsistent

with women earning lower housing returns because they derive greater utility from housing and are

therefore willing to pay more for the same house. If so, women should also submit higher bids for

homes, leading to lower returns in tight housing markets.

    Our analysis is related to existing research examining gender differences in stock market partici-

pation, portfolio allocation between stocks and bonds, and investment performance (e.g. Sunden and

Surette, 1998; Bajtelsmit and VanDerhei, 1997; Hinz et al., 1997; Barber and Odean, 2001). We believe

it is equally or more important to study gender differences in housing investment, given that hous-

ing represents a much larger proportion of the typical household's savings portfolio. Housing also

differs from other common forms of household savings because prices are often determined through

bilateral negotiation. In contrast, we would expect men and women to earn the same return on an in-

vestment in a S&P500 index fund (holding timing constant), even if one group were more financially

sophisticated or derived greater personal utility from owning the asset.

    Our findings that women negotiate worse discounts relative to the list price suggests that gen-

der differences in negotiation contribute to the gap in housings returns. The fact that women choose

to list homes at lower prices also suggests that gender differences in "first offers" within a negoti-

ation framework may play an important role. These patterns are consistent with a large literature

documenting gender differences in the ability, style, and willingness to negotiate. This literature has

shown that women have more negative outcomes when negotiating in laboratory settings, as well as


                                                  4
in labor market and automobile market settings (e.g., Ayres, 1990; Ayres and Siegelman, 1995; Castillo

et al., 2013; Leibbrandt and List, 2014; List, 2004; Morton et al., 2003; Reuben et al., 2015).

    Housing negotiations differ from standard labor market or automobile negotiations in that buyers

and sellers are often advised by real estate agents, who may vary in skill and may not perfectly share

the interests of their clients.2 We find that the gender gap remains similar after controlling for listing

agent fixed effects, implying that the gender gap is not driven by women systematically choosing

worse agents. However, it remains possible that the same agent gives different advice to men and

women, or that men and women differ in whether they follow the (good or bad) advice of their agents.

Our observational data unfortunately does not allow us to examine the details of discussions between

clients and agents, so we leave further study of the role of agents to future work.

    The format of housing negotiations resembles that of semi-anonymous experimental ultimatum

games. In housing negotiations, buyers and sellers typically submit written bids through agents rather

than negotiating face to face, although buyers and sellers are usually aware of basic facts regarding

each other's identities, such as gender. Solnick (2001) studies a related ultimatum game between two

players in which Player 1 chooses how to split $10 between him or herself and Player 2. Player 2 sees

the offer and can choose to accept the offer or reject, in which case both players receive zero. The play-

ers are randomly matched and are aware of each other's genders, but remain otherwise anonymous

and do not interact face to face. Solnick (2001) finds that gender significantly affects game payoffs.

Player 1s, especially female Player 1s, on average offer more money to Player 2 if Player 2 is known to

be male. Male Player 2s choose higher minimum acceptable offers, especially if Player 1 is known to

be female. These experimental results are consistent with an important idea that may apply to hous-

ing negotiations: both men and women expect women to be more willing to share the surplus from

negotiations, and are more willing to walk away from aggressive offers if those offers are proposed by

women.

    We caution that our results do not necessarily imply that women make mistakes in housing ne-

gotiations or have lower negotiation ability. Exley et al. (2016) show that women can experience more

negative outcomes by "leaning-in" and negotiating aggressively, and Ayres and Siegelman (1995) find

that female buyers receive worse counteroffers during automobile negotiations even when they fol-

low identical scripts used by male buyers. Moreover, women may equal men in negotiation ability,
   2 Some  labor market negotiations with documented gender pay gaps also involve agents, such as those in which talent
agents represent professional actors or athletes. Our housing setting is also unique because personal interactions usually
end after housing transactions are completed, so the gender gap is unlikely to be explained by women placing greater value
on continued relationships, a factor that might impact labor market negotiations (Babcock and Laschever, 2009).


                                                            5
but conduct the housing search differently because they derive greater utility from a fast, low-risk,

or non-confrontational negotiation process. It is not the goal of this paper to disentangle negotiation

ability from other preferences that could affect negotiated outcomes.

     Regardless of the exact channel, our analysis shows that gender differences in housing returns

are economically large. A simple calculation implies that the housing-related gender gap in dollars is

approximately $1,600 per year for the median single female homeowner. This is approximately half as

large as the unexplained gender pay gap, which has been the subject of numerous academic studies

and policy debates (see e.g., Blau and Kahn (2017); Card et al. (2015)). Because housing wealth is the

dominant form of savings for most households, our findings also offer insight into variation in wealth

accumulation (e.g., Ruel and Hauser (2013)). We estimate that the gender gap in housing returns can

explain approximately 30% of the overall gender gap in wealth accumulation at retirement.

     Finally, our research question is related to contemporaneous work by Andersen et al. (2018)

(AMNV), which examines gender differences in negotiations for real estate transactions in Denmark.

Our analysis differs from and complements AMNV in several ways. First, AMNV (along with re-

lated earlier research by Harding et al. (2003)) is focused on demographic variation in negotiation and

bargaining power,3 while we are interested in the total gender gap in housing returns from the per-

spective of wealth accumulation. We are interested in factors contributing to this gender gap beyond

negotiation; for instance, we show that market timing can explain 45% of the gender gap in realized

returns.4 Second, we differ from AMNV in our usage of data on both list prices and final transaction

prices, which allows us to examine negotiated discounts, as well as the matching between the genders

of buyers and sellers. Third, we find large gender differences in transaction prices using repeat sales

data in the US, while AMNV find smaller and insignificant differences using repeat sales data in Den-

mark. These results complement each other, and suggest that the gender gap may vary by country

and culture.


                                           II. Data and Measurement

In this section, we describe the data sources for our analysis, the construction of key measures, includ-

ing identification of gender, and summarize the overall data set.
   3 Harding et al. (2003) uses data from the American Housing Survey and structural modeling methods to estimate how

bargaining power varies with demographics.
   4 Our evidence of inequality in housing markets is related to earlier findings by Bayer et al. (2017), who use panel data

covering four U.S. cities to show that Black and Hispanic buyers pay a 3% premium when purchasing homes. We unfortu-
nately cannot examine racial gaps in our main data sample because we do not observe detailed demographic information
for buyers and sellers, and instead infer gender from names.


                                                             6
                                       A. CoreLogic Deeds and Listings Data

Our main housing transaction data comes county deeds records gathered by CoreLogic. We restrict

our analysis to arms-length transactions (sales between two unaffiliated parties) and exclude non-

transaction deed events such as mortgage refinancings. Each observation reflects a housing transac-

tion, containing information on the date of the transaction, the sale price, the exact address of the

property, and the names of both sides of the transaction. This last set of data fields allows us to par-

tially identify the gender of the participant, as well as the number of participants on each side of the

transaction (discussed further below).

    To supplement the transactions data with time-varying measures of the properties' characteristics,

we link the deeds dataset by property location to a dataset of property listings also constructed by

CoreLogic.5 These data come from Multiple Listing Service (MLS) systems operated by regional real

estate boards. Each listing includes a large number of fields describing the property and the status

of the listing. These include when the property is listed, the list price, listing agent identification

number, and the listed property features such as the number of bedrooms and bathrooms and age of

the structure. If the listing sells, we observe the close date and sale price.

    When linking the deeds and listings data, we match properties based on unique geographic lo-

cation identifiers, which are the parcel identifier and county. This provides a many-to-many match

between deed transactions and listings. We then match a deed transaction to a listing by: 1) matching

the closest pair where the deed transaction date is within a year after the listing sale date, and 2) re-

stricting that the difference in the log sale price in the deeds data and the log sale price in the listings

data is less than one.


                                 B. Measurement of Gender and Family Structure

We identify the gender and family structure (single or couple) of the buyers and seller on each trans-

action using reported names on the deed. For each deed record reflecting an arms-length transaction,

CoreLogic reports the full name of the first and second buyers on a deed and the full names of the first

and second sellers. We identify two pieces of information from these name fields: first, we parse the

fields to identify how many parties exist on each side of the transaction, since in some cases, couples

are transcribed as "John and Mary Smith" in one field, rather than being split across fields as "John

Smith" and "Mary Smith." Second, we use the first names to probabilistically assign a gender to each
  5 Properties   are uniquely identified via parcel number (assigned by county deeds offices) and county code.



                                                              7
party in the transaction. We follow Chari and Goldsmith-Pinkham (2017) and use data from Tang et

al. (2011) to measure the probability that a given name is male or female (based on self-reported data

to Facebook). Then, for all names with associated gender probabilities greater than 95%, we assign

either male or female gender. For those who do not match, or whose probabilities are less than 95%,

we treat as unknown genders.

    Identification of the number of parties, and their respective genders, allows us to group each

side of the transaction into four "gender groups": single male, single female, couples (2 individuals

with both genders identified), and other, where other is the residual category and will include single

individuals without gender identified, couples where only one gender is identified, couples where

neither gender is identified, and institutions. For each transaction, this grouping is done for both the

buyer and seller side.

    In a small set of counties during the early years of our sample period, we observe an unusually

high percentage of single male buyers and sellers, and an unusually low percentage of couple buyers

and sellers. Since housing records are maintained at the county level, we believe these county-years

represent cases in which only one name, usually the male name, was recorded for transactions actually

conducted by couples. To address this measurement issue, we impose that, in a given county-year,

we are able to identify the gender and family structure (single or couple) for at least five percent

of deeds, and that within identified deeds, at least 20% are identified as couples, and at least five

percent as single women. Otherwise, all observations in the county year are reclassified as the "other"

category due to inability to credibly identify gender and family structure. The procedure reclassifies

approximately four hundred thousand observations. In Appendix Table A1, we show that our main

results remain similar if we do not apply this screen.


                                        C. Measurement Error

Our measures of gender and family structure may be subject to three types of measurement error.

First, we fail to identify gender for some individuals, and they will be relegated into the "Other"

category. This is more likely with non-Anglo-Saxon names where the gender is less predictable based

on name. Second, we may miscategorize some single women as single men and vice versa. Given

our cutoff for gender categorization is 95% or greater certainty based on names, we are less concerned

about this type of error, but it remains possible. Finally, some single men and women identified in our

data may actually correspond to couples who choose (or follow local convention) in recording only a



                                                   8
single name in a real estate transaction. As noted in the previous section, we filter out county-years

which appear to follow a convention in which transactions involving couples only list one person's

name (usually the husband's name). These cases usually occur in the early years of our data sample.

However, it remains possible that our filter does not identify all such cases.

    We address measurement error in three ways. First, we examine supplementary data from the

American Housing Survey (AHS), a representative panel dataset of US homes. Homeowner gender

and marital status in the AHS are self reported and much less likely to suffer from measurement

error. We are able to replicate our baseline finding of a larger than 1 percentage point gender gap in

unlevered housing returns. These supplementary results show that our main conclusions are unlikely

to be driven by errors in our gender and family structure identification algorithm.

    Second, we show via a simple extension of Aigner (1973) that, under reasonable assumptions,

measurement error in our gender and family structure measure would cause us to underestimate

the extent to which single women earn lower returns on housing relative to single men. Full details

concerning assumptions and derivations are presented in Appendix B.

    Third, we report the gender gap in realized returns for each year within our sample period in

Figure 5. In recent years, there is likely to be less measurement error in which true couples are mis-

classified as single men or women because only one name is reported on deed records (see Appendix

Figure A3 which shows that the ratio of identified single male buyers to identified couple buyers falls

in the 1990s and then stabilizes in the post-2000 period). We continue to find economically large and

statistically significant gender gaps in housing returns in recent sample years.

    Finally, we note that, while a strength of our data is the large sample coverage, we face the limi-

tation that we can only analyze differences in housing returns among the women, men, and couples

who appear in our data. In particular, we measure a gender gap among men and women who choose

to own housing. Our estimates are not meant to represent potential housing returns for the universe

of men and women. Despite these limitations, we believe our estimates are informative of the sources

of the gender gap among the large set of Americans who choose to be homeowners. Our data limita-

tions are similar to the limitations faced by the large literature examining the gender pay gap, which

likewise can only be measured among the set of men and women who choose to work.




                                                    9
                                 D. Measuring Unlevered Returns and Levered Returns

In our full dataset of transactions, we are able to identify consecutive arms-length market transactions

for each property. We focus on realized returns, earned in the period from purchase to sale. Using

these consecutive transactions, we can identify the unlevered annualized return for property i in sale
                           1
                   Pis   (s-b)
year s: ris =      Pib           - 1, where Pib is the purchase price, i.e., the previous market transaction price
on the property in year b. Because we observe exact dates for transactions, we allow years b and s

to be non-integers to better measure the exact holding length of each property. We require a mini-

mum holding length of three months to be included in the returns sample, and also present results

separately by holding length buckets. To ensure that we correctly measure ris for single male, single

female, and couples, we focus on the subsample of returns that has three additional restrictions: (1)

we have identified the gender and family structure in both periods b and s, (2) the gender and family

structure of the buyer in period b corresponds to the gender and family structure in period s, and (3)

the names of the buyers in period b is sufficiently close to the names of the sellers period s by string

matching distance.6 This final sample is used for our analysis of housing returns. These filters sub-

stantially restrict our analysis sample, since we need to observe multiple transactions and correctly

identify gender and family structure, but ensures that we are not incorrectly measuring returns. Our

final returns sample contains 8.9 million observations.

    Restriction (2) also ensures that we can focus on the housing returns of men and women who

were identified as single at both purchase and sale. Observations in which a house is purchased by a

couple and sold by a single person (which can occur after death or divorce), or purchased by a single

person and sold by a couple (which can occur after marriage), are not used when comparing returns

across single men, women, and couples.

    In reality, the majority of homeowners in the United States buy their homes using debt, with lever-

age of five-to-one or higher. Moreover, this leverage tends to persist over a long period of time, due to

long duration mortgages whose fixed amortization schedules pay mainly interest upfront. Therefore,

the real return earned is typically a levered return. Ideally, given the mortgage type, term, interest rate

and downpayment, we could identify the exact levered return earned by each homeowner. However,

many of these fields are missing from the data. Therefore, we compute hypothetical levered returns if

the homeowner used the most common type of mortgage in the data: a 30-year fixed rate loan with an

initial loan-to-value (LTV) ratio of 80% with the market interest rate in the year-quarter of the initial
  6 We   use a tolerance of 0.7 for the string matching function matchit in Stata.


                                                               10
purchase. We also present summary statistics for the average level of leverage used by single men,

women, and couples over time, as well as the rates of missing data within each group. Finally, in

supplementary results, we calculate levered returns using actual LTV ratios for a more recent sample

period which has fewer missing data issues.

    We measure the initial LTV as the ratio of the initial mortgage amount divided by the purchase

price. In many cases, the mortgage amount is missing. In recent years, we believe missing mortgage

amounts represent homes purchased with cash. In 2017, for example, 28.8% of all housing transactions

in our data have missing mortgage amounts, which approximately matches external estimates of the

fraction of all cash purchases in the 2000s.7 However, in the 1990s, the share of missing mortgage

amounts in our data is substantially higher, and suggests that there may also be missing data issues.

    To address these data issues, we provide a simple benchmark in which we convert unlevered

housing returns into levered returns assuming all purchases were done with an 80% LTV mortgage.

This holds fixed any potential leverage differences across transactions, and instead converts the unlev-

ered returns into a measure that captures the modal degree of leverage that homeowners face. Based

on the purchase value and assuming 80% LTV, we calculate the initial downpayment Dib and initial

mortgage amount Mortgageib used to buy the home. We then calculate the average interest rate in

the year-quarter of initial purchase by taking the 30-year fixed rate mortgage rate from Freddie Mac.

Using this interest rate ib , we calculate the relative principal pay down at every monthly duration

horizon, and use this to identify the share of remaining mortgage principal outstanding when the

house is sold in period s (Mortgageis ). This allows us to calculate the total cash out payment for the

home at the time of sale: Equityis = max { Pis - Mortgageis , 0}.8 We then approximate the time b net

present value of equity as the sum of the downpayment plus the discounted value of principal pay-

down payments: Equityib  Dib + s
                                =b Wi  / (1 + ib )
                                                    -b . As a result, our levered annualized return
                         1
    lev =   Equityis   (s-b)                                                        lev = r .
is ris      Equityib           - 1. Note that in the case of a full cash purchase, rit     it

    In additional robustness results reported in the Appendix, we use the exact initial mortgage

amount in the data to calculate the LTV ratio at the time of purchase, and use this to calculate levered

returns. Due to missing data issues in the early years of our sample, we limit this analysis to purchases

in 2000 and after. We continue to make the same interest rate and maturity structure assumptions as

described above, as many of these fields are missing in the data even in recent years.
  7 The  Wall Street Journal, available https://www.wsj.com/articles/want-that-house-youd-better-pay-
in-cash-1512469800, estimates 20-30% of home purchases in the 2000s were all cash transactions.
   8 By using the max operator, we are implicitly assuming that homeowners cannot lose more than 100% of their original

equity. Removing the max operator yields similar results.


                                                            11
    It is important to note that these calculations estimate realized levered and unlevered returns con-

ditional on sale. These returns do not represent returns in a counterfactual world in which all home-

owners are forced to sell at a fixed horizon. Instead, they measure realized returns for those home-

owners who choose to sell.


                                         E. Description of Data

In Panels A and C of Table 1, we report the average sale transaction price broken across buyer and

seller gender groups (single male, single female, couple, and other) and pooled into overall averages.

We are able to credibly identify the buyer gender and family structure according to the criteria de-

scribed in Section B for approximately 62% of the sample, or around 32 million transactions. We are

able to credibly identify the seller gender and family structure according for approximately 40% of the

sample, or around 21 million transactions. Among identified gender groups, couples have the largest

share of transactions, followed by single men and then single women. We refrain from interpreting

gender differences in raw sale prices in the summary statistics table, because men and women may

purchase properties with different average quality. Our subsequent analysis will focus on housing

returns or exploit repeat sales, which hold the property constant.

    In Panels B and D, we report the averages for our sample of sales transactions that are linked to

listings data, which has more limited coverage for the early years of our sample period. The linked

sample is substantially smaller and covers roughly 20 million transactions. Approximately 68% and

50% of this sample's buyer and seller gender groups can be credibly identified, respectively. Unsur-

prisingly, this sample has higher prices, since the listings data covers a later sample period.

    We measure discounts off the list price as (list price - transaction price)/list price × 100. A larger

discount benefits buyers and hurts sellers in terms of returns on housing investment. Among the iden-

tified gender groups, single male buyers receive the largest purchase discounts, followed by couple

buyers, and then single female buyers. Single female sellers give the largest sale discounts, followed

by single male sellers, followed by couple sellers. The three groups have similar average days on mar-

ket, equal to the number of days between the earliest available listing associated with a transaction

and the sale date.

    Finally, in Panel E, we report the averages for our sample where we observe both the purchase and

the sale of a property, and we are able to confirm that the seller is the same as the buyer in the previous

transaction. This restricted sample is smaller at roughly 8.9 million transactions. In this sample, we



                                                    12
exclude the other group. We find that, on average, single men have the highest annualized unlevered

return, at 8.40 percent, followed by single women at 6.85 percent, and couples at 6.46 percent. Single

men hold their properties for 0.4 years less time than single women, and 0.6 years less than couples.


                                       III. Empirical Results

This section describes our regression methodology and summarizes our main results measuring the

difference in returns between single men, single women, and couples. We then assess the various

channels that can explain this difference in returns.

                                       A. Estimation Approach

Our main analysis takes two forms. Both approaches use a simple linear regression framework to

account for potential differences across gender groups. The first is an analysis of the unlevered and

levered annualized returns:



                           ris = Single Femaleis  1 + Coupleis  2 + Xis  +   is ,                      (1)

where Single Femaleis is an indicator for a single female seller in period s and Coupleis is an indicator

for a couple seller in period s. We estimate this regression using the returns sample, which only in-

cludes single male, single female, and couple sellers. As a result,  1 and  2 capture the relative effect

when compared to Single Maleis , the omitted category. Xis represents control variables. Without any

control variables, the coefficients on Single Femaleis and Coupleis measure the average raw return dif-

ference for each group relative to Single Maleis . We also present specifications in which Xis represents

control variables for location and time. For instance, if Xis includes five-digit zip code interacted with

sale-year-month fixed effects, then the main coefficients measure the average difference in returns

among people who sold in the same zip code and time period.

    Our second set of analyses, focusing on the channels affecting housing return, is similar but uses

alternative outcome measures, such as the log(Sale Priceit ):


                    Yit = Single Femaleit  1 + Coupleit  2 + Otherit  3 + Xit  +    it .               (2)


Since these outcomes are not measured using within-home changes in price, we additionally include a

property fixed effect in Xit to capture unobserved quality in the property that may be correlated with

gender or family structure. To better estimate this property fixed effect, we include transactions that

                                                   13
are not included in our returns data sample, and additionally control for the Otherit indicator.


                                           B. Baseline Results

We begin by showing how housing returns differ by the gender group of the homeowner. We use

observations at the sale transaction level. The sample is restricted to observations for which the gender

of all sellers can be identified, and for which we can match the identity of the seller at the time of sale

to the identity of the buyer at the time of initial purchase. The results are shown graphically in Figure

1 with detailed regression results reported in Table 2.

    In column 1 of Table 2 Panel A, we find that single women earn 1.5 percentage points lower

unlevered annualized returns than single men (the omitted category). We then explore how much

of this overall gender gap can be explained by market timing, i.e., gender differences in the choice

of when and where to buy, and when to sell. As we move from column 1 to column 5, we introduce

more detailed control variables for market timing, including zip-year-month fixed effects for the initial

purchase transaction and zip-year-month fixed effects for the sale transaction. We also control for the

interaction between year-month of purchase and year-month of sale fixed effects, which subsume the

control variable for holding length. We find that 45% the raw gender gap in returns in column 1 can

be explained by more detailed control variables for market timing. In other words, women earn lower

returns partly because they are more likely to buy in locations when aggregate house prices are high

and sell when they are low. However, a large gender gap persists even after introducing detailed

controls for market timing. Among men and women who buy and sell in the same zip code and

year-months, women still earn 0.8 percentage points lower unlevered annualized returns on housing.

    We also find that couples underperform single women in terms of raw returns but outperform

single women and underperform single men after adjusting for market timing. Column 1 shows that

the raw return gap in annualized unlevered returns between couples and single men is 1.9 percentage

points. However, the relative returns for couples are very sensitive to the inclusion of controls for

market timing. Moving from column 1 to column 5, we find that 79% of the return gap between

couples and single men can be attributed to market timing. Among households that buy and sell in

the same location and time period, couples outperform single women by 0.4 percentage points and

underperform single men by 0.4 percentage points. These results indicate that couples earn lower

returns primarily due to poor market timing, but outperform single women holding the location and

transaction period fixed. These findings are consistent with the idea that couples (and possibly single



                                                    14
women) face more binding constraints in the timing of real estate transactions due to child care and

the school calendar system. In later analysis, we examine the behavior of each group separately at

purchase and sale, and find that couples underperform when purchasing, but outperform even single

men when selling.

    Because most home buyers purchase housing using loan-to-value ratios of 80 percent or higher,

and have not paid down a large fraction of the principal at the time of sale, the real return earned is

typically a levered return. Appendix Figure A4 plots the average loan-to-value (LTV) at the time of

initial purchase for each gender group over time. In Panel A, we report the LTV for the sample with

mortgage amount data, while in Panel B we report the share of transactions with missing mortgage

data information. Single men and women have higher average LTV than couples across all years con-

ditional on non-missing mortgage data, but also have higher rates of missing mortgage data. Because

missing mortgage data can represent cash purchases or true missing data, we do not draw strong

conclusions about differences in leverage across groups.

    In Panel B of Table 2, we assess variation in housing returns after accounting for mortgage debt. In

general, adjusting for leverage leads to a much larger gender gap in housing returns because leverage

amplifies raw returns, and therefore amplifies differences in raw returns between groups. For each

return observation, we compute the annualized levered return assuming the homeowner used a 30-

year fixed rate mortgage with an initial 80% LTV, following the procedure described in Section II.D.

Regression coefficients measure the the expected gender gap for households with the modal LTV

of 80% in the data. We find the women underperform men by 7.9 percentage points per year after

adjusting for leverage. Approximately half of the gap in levered returns can be attributed to market

timing. However, women continue to underperform men by 3.7 percentage points per year after

controlling flexibly for the location and timing of purchases and sales. We again find that couples

underperform in terms of raw levered returns, but earn levered returns in the intermediate range

after controlling for market timing: among households that buy and sell in the same zip code and

year-months, couples outperform women by 2.2 percentage points and underperform men by 1.5

percentage points.

    In addition to examining the gender gap in mean returns, we also compare the distribution of

returns across groups. Panels A and B of Figure 2 show unlevered and levered annualized returns at

various percentiles of the return distribution for each gender group. These figures report raw returns

(without any adjustments for market timing). This set of figures reveal that the gender gap exists in


                                                  15
all parts of the return distribution except for the left tail where women and men fare equally poorly.

However, the gender gap is larger at the 90th percentile of the returns distribution than at the median.

Couples underperform at most points of the raw return distribution, but as shown in Figure 1, couples

earn returns between that of single men and women after adjustments for market timing.

    In Panel A of Figure 3, we plot the density of unlevered annualized returns. The figure again

shows that men weakly outperform women at all parts of the return distribution, with the largest

differences in the right tail. In Panel B, we zoom in to the return near zero, where all groups have

distributions with missing mass just to the left of zero. This dip in the distribution is consistent with

loss aversion and the disposition effect (see e.g., Genesove and Mayer, 2001; Shefrin and Statman,

1985), in which people are reluctant to sell at less than their initial purchase price. Finally, Figures 2

and 3 show that men do not have worse left tail outcomes than women in terms of realized returns.

Therefore, compensation for greater downside risk in realized returns is unlikely to explain the higher

average returns for men in our sample. However, we caution that we don't observe other adverse

outcomes such as personal bankruptcy costs that may differ by gender.

    In supplementary analysis reported in Appendix Table A2, we repeat the estimation procedure in

Table 2, but focus on purchases in the year 2000 and afterwards, where there is less missing mortgage

data. To calculate levered returns, we use the initial mortgage amount reported in the data (instead of

assuming an initial LTV of 80%) and assume a cash purchase when the mortgage amount is missing.

In Panel A, we see that restricting the sample to a more recent time period yields similar estimates for

for the relative performance of single women, single men, and couples in terms of unlevered returns.

In Panel B, we see very similar results in levered returns for single women relative to single men, but

greater underperformance for couples. This is due to the fact that couples choose mortgages with

lower initial LTVs (as seen in Appendix Figure A4). However, the lower return for couples comes

with a benefit, as they are exposed to less risk due to their lower leverage. The same is not true for

single women, who have similar average LTV compared to single men.


                                           C. Heterogeneity

In Table 3, we explore how the average gender gap in housing returns within a zip code varies with

zip-level demographics from the 2010 American Community Survey. We measure the gender gap in

each zip code as the average difference between male and female returns and present the average

gender gap across quartiles of various zip-level demographic characteristics. We find that the magni-



                                                   16
tude of the gender gap decreases with education, and increases with age, fraction black, and fraction

single female. We also find that the gender gap remains large even in zip codes in the top quartile of

education, income, and house prices (measured relative to the state-year-month average).

    Figure 4 shows the magnitude of the average difference in unlevered returns between single men

and women across each state in our sample.9 The gender gap is positive in almost all states within

our sample with good data coverage. We believe that variation in the gender gap across states could

be partly caused by differences in data quality and estimation error across states. As noted earlier in

Section II.B, some single men and women identified in our data may actually correspond to couples

who choose (or follow local convention) to record only a single name in a real estate transaction. If the

degree of estimation error also varies across states, that could contribute to variation in the estimated

gender gap across states (see Appendix B).

    Figure 5 and Appendix Figure A5 show how the average and median realized returns varied

over time and across gender groups. Realized returns on housing are positive in all years of our

sample, but display significant business cycle variation, with the highest returns in the run-up to the

housing market crash in 2006. This is consistent with recent findings in Sakong (2019) showing a

relation between cyclical housing transactions and wealth inequality. The magnitude of the gender

gap in returns appears to increase with average returns, although the gender gap remains large in

magnitude in recent years and does not exhibit a strong secular decline over time.

    Appendix Figure A3 shows the composition of transactions by gender group over time. Changing

composition, combined with business cycle variation in average returns, implies that gender differ-

ences in market timing can play a role in the overall gender gap, but the overall shift in composition

is relatively small.

                                      D. The Gender Gap in Execution Prices

So far, we have shown that the gender gap in housing returns can be partly explained by gender

differences in market timing. In this section, we explore gender variation in transaction prices, list

prices, and transaction discounts, among buyers and sellers who transact in the same zip code and

time period. We also discuss why the impact of a gender gap in execution prices on annualized returns

depends on the holding length.

    The unlevered annualized return on housing depends mechanically on the ratio of the sale price to

the initial purchase price, annualized to account for holding length. To assess gender variation in each
  9 We   exclude states where the number of observations is less than 500.


                                                             17
transaction price, we exploit repeat sales data and control for zip-year-month fixed effects to account

for time trends within a zip code. Each observation in this analysis is a transaction. To better estimate

property fixed effects, we do not restrict the sample to buyers or sellers with identified genders and

matched names across sales and initial purchase. All observations corresponding to non-identified

parties are included and coded as the "other" category. Thus, our sample size expands to over 50

million observations.

    The results in Table 4 show that women purchase homes at approximately 1-2% higher prices than

men, holding the property fixed and adjusting for local time trends in prices. Women also sell the

same property for 2-3% less than men. Couples underperform single women in terms of purchasing

at higher prices, but also outperform even single men in terms of selling at higher prices.

    We can also examine how transaction prices vary with the match between categories of sellers

and buyers. In Figure 6, we plot the coefficients from a regression of log transaction price on the

interaction of seller gender and buyer gender, controlling for property fixed effects and zipcode by

sale-year-month fixed effects. The base category is male buyers and male sellers, and each estimate

should be interpreted as the relative price compared to that group. Among the four possible matches

between male and female sellers and buyers, the highest transaction prices occur when there is a male

seller and female buyer, and the lowest transaction prices occur when there is a female seller and male

buyer.

    While these results suggest that there may be strategic reasons to match with female buyers and

sellers, we do not find strong evidence of unusual matching patterns. In Appendix Table A3, we ex-

amine how sellers and buyers of different genders and family structure match. We find that sellers

and buyers of the same "type" (single male, single female, and couple) tend to match with them-

selves slightly more than would be expected under random matching, but otherwise do not find large

deviations from what would be expected under random matching.

    The final sale price for each transaction depends on the price at which the property is listed and the

negotiated discount relative to the list price. To examine gender variation in list prices and negotiated

discounts, we restrict the sample from Table 4 to observations that can be matched to MLS data on

home listings, leading to approximately 20 million observations, 10 million of which correspond to

repeat sales. Using repeat sales, and holding the property fixed and adjusting for local time trends in

listed prices, we find in Table 5 that women choose to purchase the same property when it is listed for

approximately 2% higher than when it is purchased by men. Even though women purchase homes


                                                   18
at relatively higher prices, female sellers also choose to list the same property for 2% less than when

it is listed by men. Couples again show differential behavior at purchase and sale. Couples purchase

homes that are listed for 1-2% higher than when they are purchased by single men. However, couples

choose list prices at sale that are only 0.4% lower than single men, after adjusting for zip-year-month

fixed effects.

     Next, we examine how negotiated discounts vary by gender in Table 6. We measure purchase and

sale discounts as the percentage discount relative to the list price, (list price - transaction price)/list

price × 100, so a larger purchase discount contributes to a higher return on housing investment and

a larger sale discount contributes to a lower return on housing investment.10 We find that female

buyers purchase homes at a 0.26 percentage point lower discount relative to men. Thus, female buyers

receive lower discounts on home purchases even though they also choose to purchase properties with

relatively high list prices. Further, female sellers agree to 0.09 percentage points greater discounts at

sale. Thus, female sellers agree to larger discounts off the list price even though they already choose

to list at lower prices than male sellers.

     The discounts negotiated by couple buyers and sellers also display interesting patterns. Couple

buyers lie between single men and women in terms of purchase discounts. However, couples negoti-

ate more advantageous discounts than even single men when selling properties. In combination with

the earlier results on list prices, we find that couple sellers list the same property at approximately

equal prices set by single men, but are less willing to agree to discounts off the chosen list price.

     In Appendix Figure A8, we plot the full purchase and sale discount distributions. There is a large

mass of discounts at exactly zero, with female buyers bunching the most at zero discount. When we

condition on positive discounts, we see that for purchase discounts, female buyers have more mass

on the left than male buyers (so female buyers receive lower discounts). This behavior flips for sale

discounts (so female sellers agree to larger discounts).

     We can also examine how transaction discounts vary with the match between categories of sellers

and buyers. In Figure 7, we plot the results from a regression of discounts on the interaction of seller

gender and buyer gender, including zipcode by year-month fixed effects. The base category is male

buyers and male sellers, and each estimate should be interpreted as the relative discount compared to

that group. Among the four possible matches between male and female sellers and buyers, the largest
  10 To adjust for outliers, we censor discounts that are outside of the [-10,25%] range, implying a sale price that is less than

25% of the list price, or 10% higher than the list price. The endpoints of the range are chosen to approximately match the
top and bottom 1% of the data.



                                                               19
discount occurs when there is a female seller and male buyer, and the smallest discount occurs when

there is a male seller and female buyer.

      Given the gender differences in list prices and discounts, one may wonder whether female sellers

benefit from less aggressive pricing with faster transaction times. For approximately 10 million obser-

vations, we observe the number of days on market between initial listing and sale resolution. Because

some houses are listed multiple times if they fail to sell, we use the earliest available listing date and

list price for each transaction. In Table 7, we find that women sell homes with 2.7% shorter transaction

periods relative to men (the difference falls to 1% if we control for property fixed effects). This differ-

ence, while statistically significant, is economically small: the average transaction period is 42 days,

and single women transact one day faster. Column 3 shows that the gender gap in sale prices remains

large after controlling for the days on market. In Appendix Figure A9, we plot the full distribution of

days on market for each gender group, and do not see substantial differences in the right tail of the

distribution, implying that male sellers are not more likely to experience unusually long transaction

times.


D.1    Variation by Holding Length

The gender gap in list prices and transaction discounts together imply that single women experience

worse execution prices on real estate transactions at the points of purchase and sale. Differences in

execution prices should matter much more for the annualized returns of short term investors than for

the returns of long term buy-and-hold investors. In a simple model in which women buy properties

for  fraction more and sell  fraction less then men and hold for t years, we expect that women will

earn 100 × 2/t percentage points lower annualized unlevered returns than men.11 In other words, the

impact of a gender gap in execution prices on the gender gap in annualized returns should asymptote

toward zero with holding length.

      Panel A of Figure 8 shows that the gender gap in annualized returns converges toward zero as

holding length increases. Homeowners with longer tenure in their properties "trade" assets less often,

so any advantage or disadvantage in execution prices will matter less for their annualized returns.12
   11 Let P represent the market price of the property at the time of purchase. Suppose that the market value of the property
            0
grows by a fraction r each year. Suppose men buy and sell at the market price, so their annualized return equals r regardless
of the holding period. Suppose that women buy properties for a fraction  more and sell for  less than the market price
and hold for a period of t years. We can solve for the annualized return for women r F such that [(1 + r F )t = (1 - )  P0 
(1 + r )t ]/[(1 + )  P0 ]. Solving for r F after applying the approximation that log(1 + x )  x for x close to zero implies that
r F = r - 2 / t.
   12 The level of annualized returns also declines with holding length for all groups, as shown in Appendix Figure A6.




                                                              20
     In Panels B and C of Figure 8, we examine how the gender gap in execution prices vary with

holding length. While there is some variation, the gender gap in execution prices does not asymptote

toward zero as holding length increases. Women have significantly worse execution prices at purchase

and sale for all holding length buckets in our sample. However, worse execution prices at the points

of purchase and sale matter less for annualized returns on investment as holding period increases.

     These empirical patterns also help to reject a potential mechanism involving "house flipping."

House flippers have a strategy of buying, rehabbing, and quickly reselling properties for a profit. Sin-

gle men may be more likely to pursue flipping strategies than single women, and that may contribute

to their higher returns (Appendix Figure A7 shows that single men are slightly more likely than sin-

gle women and couples to have short holding length). However, we continue to find a large female

disadvantage in transaction prices for homes held for eight or more years, which are less likely to be

flipped properties.

     In our baseline analysis, we equally weighted each completed housing transaction when estimat-

ing the gender gap in housing returns. We can instead weight each transaction by holding length, so

that each year in which a property is held receives equal weight. This alternative weighting scheme

would place, e.g., six times the weight on a observation for a home held for six years relative to an

observation for a home held for one year. We present results using this alternative weighting scheme

for unlevered and levered returns in Panels A and B of Appendix Table A4, respectively. We find

that the gender gap shrinks significantly: single women earn 0.4 percentage points lower unlevered

returns and 1.4 percentage points lower levered returns relative to single men. The smaller estimated

gender gap is consistent with the fact that gender differences in execution prices should matter less

for annualized returns for investments with longer holding periods, and this alternative specification

increases the weights on observations with longer holding periods.

                                          E. Other Potential Mechanisms

In this section, we explore several other potential mechanisms which may help explain the gender

gap in housing returns. First, men may select properties with characteristics associated with higher

returns. In particular, men may buy riskier homes, such that their higher return represents compen-

sation for the additional risk. Second, men may invest more in housing maintenance and upgrades,

such that their real investment return is lower than implied by analysis using only the sale price and
This pattern may occur due to selection, in which homeowners sell early only if they expect a high sale price that can cover
transaction costs. However, the level of returns asymptotes toward 5% per year rather than zero, and cannot directly explain
why the gender gap in returns asymptotes toward zero.


                                                            21
purchase price. Third, women may be older, have more children, or have lower education and in-

come, and these demographic factors may drive the gender gap in housing returns. Fourth, men may

earn higher returns because they choose better or more effective real estate agents.


E.1    Property characteristics, risk, maintenance, and upgrades

In Appendix Table A5, we find that gender is predictive of the types of properties held, i.e., age of

house, square footage, and whether it was new construction at the time of purchase. Table 8 shows

that, while some of these characteristics are predictive of housing returns, controlling for detailed

home characteristics does not have a large impact on the estimated magnitude of the gender gap in

returns (as evidenced by the small difference in coefficients on single female between columns 2 and

3). This analysis shows that women do not, on average, sort toward a set of housing characteristics

that are associated with lower returns.

      Next, we explore whether men earn higher returns because they invest more in housing mainte-

nance and upgrades. In particular, men may be more likely to purchase fixer uppers, which would

explain why men buy at low prices and sell at high prices, holding the property fixed. Given that

maintenance and upgrades are costly (Harding et al., 2007), men's real investment return may be

lower than implied by analysis using only the sale price and purchase price. In Appendix Table A6,

we find that men are more likely to list homes that have been upgraded or renovated, but the differ-

ence in upgrade rates across genders is small. Table 8 shows that the gender gap remains large after

controlling for whether the house has been upgraded or renovated, and Appendix Table A6 shows

that the gender gap in housing returns remains large in a restricted sample for which the house listing

does not mention any synonyms for upgrades, renovations, new features, expansions, etc.

      Aside from upgrades and renovations that are noted in property listings, men may also invest

more in routine maintenance. In column 1 of Table 9, we use data on self-reported annual home

maintenance costs (scaled by the price of the home) from the American Housing Survey and find

insignificant and close-to-zero gender differences in maintenance investment.

      So far, we have shown that the gender gap remains large for homes that have not experienced

major upgrades/renovations, and men and women invest similar dollar amounts into home mainte-

nance. However, it remains possible that men invest more personal time and effort into home mainte-

nance. To further assess the importance of gender differences in home maintenance, we return to the

empirical relation between holding length and the gender gap in returns. Examining this relation will


                                                  22
also help to rule out a risk-based story in which men purchase riskier properties.

      If men invest more in maintenance each year or purchase riskier properties, then the gender gap in

annualized housing returns should not decay toward zero as holding period increases. For example,

if men purchase riskier properties that warrant an extra 1% return each year as compensation for risk,

then the gender gap in annualized returns should asymptote toward 1% as holding period increases.

We instead observe a gender gap in housing returns in Figure 8 that decays toward zero with holding

length. This pattern is more consistent with a gap in returns that arises from gender differences in

execution prices at the points of purchase and sale (as discussed previously, differences in execution

prices of  and a holding length of t predicts that the gender gap equals 2/t, which approximately

matches the shape of the decay in the data).


E.2    Demographic Variation using the American Housing Survey

We use detailed demographic data from the American Housing Survey to explore whether demo-

graphic factors correlated with gender may help explain the gender gap in housing returns. Women

outlive men on average, and older individuals may earn worse returns on housing.13 Women may also

have more children, lower education, and lower income, factors that may impact housing returns.

      Table 9 presents regression analysis using the American Housing Survey (AHS) over the 2001-2013

sample period. In column 3, we are able to replicate our baseline results of a gender gap in housing

returns using this alternate data source. This shows that our baseline results are unlikely to be due

to measurement error in the identification of gender groups, since these fields are self-reported rather

than imputed in the AHS. Interestingly, the gender gap in realized returns in column 3 exceeds the

gender gap in self-reported estimated returns in column 2, which uses self-reported estimates of the

current market value of the property relative to the purchase price to calculate returns.14 This compar-

ison suggests that women underestimate their investment return disadvantage in housing markets.15
  13 Afterthe death of a spouse, widows or widowers may sell homes at a discount for a variety of reasons. Such cases are
excluded from our returns analysis because we require that the homeowner be single at the time of home purchase as well
as the time of home sale in order to be classified as single male or single female. We also restrict our sample to arms-length
transactions, which excludes transfers to family members.
  14 The estimated unlevered return and the real unlevered return are calculated in slightly different samples. For the real

unlevered return, we follow Harding et al. (2007) and require that a transaction happens between two adjacent surveys, and
that both the purchase and sale of the property are arms-length transactions. Since not all houses transact in this way and
we have a shorter sample period, we are left with a much smaller sample. For the estimated return, we observe this value
in almost all cases, and thus have a much larger sample to draw on.
  15 Bordalo et al. (2019) show that women exhibit lower performance when they face negative setting-specific stereotypes.

For example, women may perform poorly in automobile negotiations because the automobiles setting is stereotypically
dominated by men. It is less obvious that housing is a male-dominated setting, given that women invest a significantly
greater percentage of their wealth into housing than men. The results in column 2 of Table 9 also suggest that women may



                                                             23
      In column 4, we show that number of children, ethnicity, and income all significantly predict real-

ized unlevered housing returns. A greater number of other adults in the home (which may represent

care given to elderly relatives) and lower education also predict lower returns, although the coeffi-

cients are not statistically significant. However, the gender gap remains large at 1 percentage point

per year after controlling for all of these demographic variables.

      In column 5, we explore how having children may impact single men, women, and couples dif-

ferently. The omitted category in this regression is single male without any children. For all groups,

we find that having children is associated with lower returns on housing (having at least one child

lowers the annualized return for single men and women by approximately 1 percentage point, and

the returns of couples by 0.5 percentage points).16 However, single women without any children still

earn 1 percentage points lower returns relative to single men without children, after controlling for

education, income, and ethnicity.


E.3    Real Estate Agents

The gender gap in housing returns could also arise because men employ better or more effective real

estate agents. Housing transactions are typically intermediated by agents who advise their clients on

the choice of listing prices, offers, and counter offers in real estate negotiations. Using merged MLS

data, we observe unique codes for each listing agent representing the seller. In Table 10, we re-estimate

the gender gap in returns, discounts, list prices, and transaction prices, after controlling for listing

agent fixed effects. The fixed effects control for the fixed impact of each agent on prices, discounts,

etc. across all transactions in our data. In other words, we can control for the time-invariant impact of

agent gender, talent, effort, etc., on housing transactions. We continue to find similarly sized gender

gaps in returns, discounts, list prices, and transaction prices after controlling for agent fixed effects.

Thus, the gender gap cannot be explained by the possibility that single women match with worse

seller agents.

      An important caveat to this analysis is that we can only rule out the influence of agent effects

that are fixed across clients. The impact of agents may depend on the interaction between agents and

the gender of their clients. For example, the same real estate agent may give different advice to male

and female clients. Men and women may also differ in whether they follow the (good or bad) advice
be unaware of the full extent to which they underperform relative to men when engaging in housing transactions.
  16 This result is in contrast to research showing that women's earnings and labor market outcomes are disproportionately

affected by childbirth (e.g., Kleven et al. (2019)).



                                                           24
of their agents. Our observational data unfortunately does not allow us to examine the details of

discussions between clients and agents, so we leave further study of the role of agents to future work.


E.4    Variation by Market Tightness

Finally, we explore how the gender gap in housing markets varies with market tightness in Table 11.

To measure market tightness, we use our listings data to construct a county-by-month measure of the

number of sales in a given month scaled by the total number of listings. As markets tighten, it becomes

easier to sell a given property and the housing market becomes more liquid. We replicate our analyses

from Tables 2, 4 and 6, interacting the gender group indicators with market tightness. We find that

the gender gaps in returns, prices, and discounts all shrink substantially with market tightness. The

gender gap in returns would approximately approach zero when market tightness is around 1. There

are similar offsetting interaction coefficients for transaction prices and discounts.

      This pattern suggests that bilateral negotiation may be an important driver of the average gender

gap in housing returns. As markets tighten, bilateral negotiation is often replaced with quasi-auctions,

in which multiple interested buyers simultaneously bid for homes. The reduction in the gender gap

with market tightness is also inconsistent with an explanation in which men buy riskier properties

or invest more in home maintenance and upgrades. Differences in maintenance or risk should lead

to real differences in home value appreciation that would, if anything, be more efficiently priced in

liquid markets. Similarly, variation by market tightness is inconsistent with the idea that women earn

lower housing returns because they derive greater utility from housing and are therefore willing to

pay more for the same house. If so, women should also submit higher bids for homes, leading to

lower returns in tight housing markets.


                                 IV. Discussion and Implications

Overall, we believe the gender gap in housing returns arises because of (1) differences in market

timing and (2) differences in negotiated execution prices, conditional on transacting in the same zip

code and time period. What happens in between purchase and sale, e.g., potential mechanisms in

which men invest more in upgrades and maintenance or buying riskier properties with naturally

higher returns, appear to be less important explanations.

      We also believe that the root causes of gender differences in market timing and negotiated out-

comes may be complex and are deserving of further research. For example, women may engage in



                                                    25
less advantageous market timing because they face timing constraints, rather than misunderstanding

market conditions. Women may have worse negotiated outcomes for a variety of reasons, including

expectations regarding how women should behave (e.g., Egan et al. (2017)), preferences and beliefs

regarding negotiation strategy which may be context dependent (e.g., Bordalo et al. (2019)), or will-

ingness and ability to search. Unobserved demographic differences across gender may also matter,

although we do find that the gender gap remains after controlling for income, education, and other

observed demographic characteristics.

    Regardless of the exact channel, our analysis shows that gender differences in housing returns

are economically large. In our main analysis, we presented percentage point gender gaps in housing

returns, transaction prices, and negotiated discounts. We can also think about the gender gap in terms

of dollars lost per year for the median single female homeowner. We assume that a woman holds

a home worth $200,000 (the median home value from the 2013-2017 American Community Survey

five-year estimates) for the median holding period of five years, and experiences a 2% execution price

disadvantage at the points of purchase and sale. These assumptions imply that women lose $1,600

each year as a homeowner relative to single men. We can compare this magnitude to the dollar loss

from the gender pay gap. Blau and Kahn (2017) estimate a gender pay gap of 8% among similar men

and women in terms of education, occupation, and other observables. Based on the median wage for

single men of $35,000 per year, the gender pay gap implies that women with similar observables earn

$2,800 less per year. Thus, the gender gap in housing markets is approximately half as large as the

gender pay gap, which has been the subject of numerous academic studies and policy debates.

    Because housing wealth is the dominant form of savings for most households, our findings also

offer insight into variation in wealth accumulation (e.g., Ruel and Hauser (2013)). Appendix Figures

A1 and A2 report equity in housing as a percentage of total net worth and the gender gap in wealth

accumulation at retirement, respectively. We estimate the impact of gender differences in the hous-

ing market on wealth accumulation under various assumptions. The details of this calculation are

reported in the Appendix. We estimate that the gender gap in housing returns can explain approxi-

mately 30% of the overall gender gap in wealth accumulation at retirement.

    Moreover, these calculations may represent conservative estimates of the gender gap in dollars.

The calculations use average differences in execution prices, which are measured among men and

women who transact in the same zip code and year-month. The calculations do not take into account

the significant gender differences in market timing. The gender gap in dollars would be larger if we


                                                 26
allow women to be more likely to buy when aggregate prices are high and sell when they are low.

    Finally, we emphasize that women may derive greater utility from home ownership despite earn-

ing lower financial returns. Therefore, we do not draw conclusions regarding gender gaps in welfare.

However, we also believe that a simple explanation in which women value housing more than men

is unable to fully match the empirical patterns documented in this paper. In particular, it does not

explain why women buy homes for more, but also sell for less. It does not explain why women nego-

tiate worse discounts when facing male counterparties. It also does not explain why the gender gap

approaches zero in tight housing markets. If women attach higher valuations to homes, they should

submit higher bids when multiple potential buyers submit competing bids, leading to lower returns

for women in tight housing markets.


                                            V. Conclusion

We uncover a large gender gap in the returns to housing investment in recent decades in the US.

This gender gap is an important contributor to gender differences in wealth accumulation, given that

housing wealth represents the dominant form of savings for most US households. Using detailed

data on housing transactions across the US, we find that single men earn 1.5 percentage points higher

unlevered returns per year on housing investment relative to single women. However, the real return

earned by most households is a levered return. The gender gap in raw returns grows significantly

larger after adjusting for mortgage borrowing. Assuming the modal 30-year fixed rate mortgage with

a 20% downpayment, men earn approximately 7.9 percentage points higher levered returns per year

relative to women. Using data on repeat sales, we show that women buy the same property for

approximately 2% more and sell for 2% less, after controlling for market timing. The gender gap in

housing returns arises because of gender differences in the location and timing of transactions, choice

of initial list price, and negotiated discount relative to the list price. While the gender gap varies with

demographic characteristics, it remains substantial in regions with high average education, income,

and house price levels. It also has not displayed a secular decline over time.

    In addition to the gender gap resulting from market timing, we find that women experience sig-

nificantly more negative negotiation-related outcomes in housing markets. Women negotiate smaller

discounts relative to the list price when buying and offer larger discounts when selling. Holding

the property fixed, the highest transaction prices occur in cases with a male seller and female buyer,

and the lowest transaction prices occur in cases with a female seller and male buyer. However, these



                                                    27
results do not necessarily imply that women make mistakes in housing negotiations. In particular,

recent research by Exley et al. (2016) suggests that women can sometimes experience even more neg-

ative outcomes by "leaning-in" and negotiating more aggressively. Given the importance of housing

investment for household savings, we believe that further exploration of factors that determine the

gender gap in housing is an important direction for future research.




                                                 28
                                           References
Aigner, Dennis J, "Regression with a binary independent variable subject to errors of observation,"
  Journal of Econometrics, 1973, 1 (1), 49­59.

Andersen, Steffen, Julie Marx, Kasper Meisner Nielsen, and Lise Vesterlund, "Gender differences
 in negotiation: Evidence from real estate transactions," Working Paper, 2018.

Ayres, Ian, "Fair driving: Gender and race discrimination in retail car negotiations," Harvard Law
  Review, 1990, 104, 817.

   and Peter Siegelman, "Race and gender discrimination in bargaining for a new car," American
  Economic Review, 1995, pp. 304­321.

Babcock, Linda and Sara Laschever, Women don't ask: Negotiation and the gender divide, Princeton
  University Press, 2009.

Bajtelsmit, Vickie L and Jack L VanDerhei, "Risk aversion and pension investment choices," Posi-
  tioning Pensions for the Twenty-First Century, 1997, 45, 66.

Barber, Brad M and Terrance Odean, "Boys will be boys: Gender, overconfidence, and common stock
  investment," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (1), 261­292.

Bayer, Patrick, Marcus D Casey, Fernando Ferreira, and Robert McMillan, "Estimating racial price
  differentials in the housing market," Journal of Urban Economics, 2017.

Bertrand, Marianne, "New perspectives on gender," in "Handbook of Labor Economics," Vol. 4, El-
  sevier, 2011, pp. 1543­1590.

Blau, Francine D and Lawrence M Kahn, "The gender wage gap: Extent, trends, and explanations,"
  Journal of Economic Literature, 2017, 55 (3), 789­865.

Bordalo, Pedro, Katherine Coffman, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer, "Beliefs about gender,"
  American Economic Review, 2019, 109 (3), 739­73.

Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, and Patrick Kline, "Bargaining, sorting, and the gender wage gap:
  Quantifying the impact of firms on the relative pay of women," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2015, 131 (2), 633­686.

Castillo, Marco, Ragan Petrie, Maximo Torero, and Lise Vesterlund, "Gender differences in bargain-
  ing outcomes: A field experiment on discrimination," Journal of Public Economics, 2013, 99, 35­48.

Chari, Anusha and Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, "Gender representation in economics across topics
 and time: Evidence from the NBER summer institute," Technical Report, National Bureau of Eco-
 nomic Research 2017.

Egan, Mark L, Gregor Matvos, and Amit Seru, "When Harry fired Sally: The double standard in
  punishing misconduct," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.

Exley, Christine Linman, Muriel Niederle, and Lise Vesterlund, "Knowing when to ask: The cost of
  leaning-in," Working Paper, 2016.

Genesove, David and Christopher Mayer, "Loss aversion and seller behavior: Evidence from the
 housing market," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (4), 1233­1260.

Gneezy, Uri, Muriel Niederle, and Aldo Rustichini, "Performance in competitive environments:
 Gender differences," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (3), 1049­1074.

                                                29
Goldin, Claudia, "A grand gender convergence: Its last chapter," American Economic Review, 2014, 104
 (4), 1091­1119.

Harding, John P, Stuart S Rosenthal, and CF Sirmans, "Depreciation of housing capital, maintenance,
 and house price inflation: Estimates from a repeat sales model," Journal of Urban Economics, 2007, 61
 (2), 193­217.

  , , and Clemon F Sirmans, "Estimating bargaining power in the market for existing homes,"
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 2003, 85 (1), 178­188.

Hinz, Richard P, David D McCarthy, and John A Turner, "Are women conservative investors? Gen-
 der differences in participant-directed pension investments," Positioning Pensions for the Twenty-First
 Century, 1997, 91, 103.

Kleven, Henrik, Camille Landais, and Jakob Egholt Søgaard, "Children and gender inequality: Evi-
  dence from Denmark," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2019, 11 (4), 181­209.

Leibbrandt, Andreas and John A List, "Do women avoid salary negotiations? Evidence from a large-
  scale natural field experiment," Management Science, 2014, 61 (9), 2016­2024.

List, John A, "The nature and extent of discrimination in the marketplace: Evidence from the field,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119 (1), 49­89.

Morton, Fiona Scott, Florian Zettelmeyer, and Jorge Silva-Risso, "Consumer information and dis-
 crimination: Does the internet affect the pricing of new cars to women and minorities?," Quantitative
 Marketing and Economics, 2003, 1 (1), 65­92.

Niederle, Muriel and Lise Vesterlund, "Do women shy away from competition? Do men compete
 too much?," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (3), 1067­1101.

Reuben, Ernesto, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, "Taste for competition and the gender gap
  among young business professionals," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research
  2015.

Ruel, Erin and Robert M Hauser, "Explaining the gender wealth gap," Demography, 2013, 50 (4),
 1155­1176.

Sakong, Jung, "Cyclical Housing Transactions and Wealth Inequality," Working Paper, 2019.

Sapienza, Paola, Luigi Zingales, and Dario Maestripieri, "Gender differences in financial risk aver-
  sion and career choices are affected by testosterone," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
  2009, 106 (36), 15268­15273.

Shefrin, Hersh and Meir Statman, "The disposition to sell winners too early and ride losers too long:
  Theory and evidence," Journal of Finance, 1985, 40 (3), 777­790.

Solnick, Sara J, "Gender differences in the ultimatum game," Economic Inquiry, 2001, 39 (2), 189­200.

Sunden, Annika E and Brian J Surette, "Gender differences in the allocation of assets in retirement
  savings plans," American Economic Review, 1998, 88 (2), 207­211.

Tang, Cong, Keith Ross, Nitesh Saxena, and Ruichuan Chen, "What's in a name: A study of names,
  gender inference, and gender behavior in facebook," in "International Conference on Database Sys-
  tems for Advanced Applications" Springer 2011, pp. 344­356.



                                                   30
       Figure 1: Annualized returns by gender group across different specifications
                                          Panel A: Unlevered Returns

               Raw


  Zip-Sale-YM F.E.


    Holding Length
+ Zip-Sale-YM F.E.

    Holding Length
+ Zip-Sale-YM F.E.
+ Zip-Buy-YM F.E.

  Zip-Sale-YM F.E.
 x Zip-Buy-YM F.E.


                     -.02                   -.015                    -.01                     -.005                   0
                                                    Average return relative to Single Male

                                                          Couple              Single Female


                                        Panel B: Levered (80%) Returns


               Raw


  Zip-Sale-YM F.E.


    Holding Length
+ Zip-Sale-YM F.E.

    Holding Length
+ Zip-Sale-YM F.E.
+ Zip-Buy-YM F.E.

  Zip-Sale-YM F.E.
 x Zip-Buy-YM F.E.


                     -.02                   -.015                    -.01                     -.005                   0
                                                    Average return relative to Single Male

                                                          Couple              Single Female


Note: This figure plots the difference in annualized returns between single women and couples, relative to single men,
conditional on the set of control variables listed on the y-axis. Panels A and B correspond to the coefficient estimates
in Panels A and B of Table 2, respectively. The levered returns are calculated following the formula in Section II.D,
assuming an initial LTV of 80%. See Section II.B for more details on the definition of gender groups (single female,
single male, and couple).




                                                          31
                 Figure 2: Distribution of annualized returns by gender group
                                         Panel A: Unlevered Returns
      .3




      .2




      .1




      0


                Mean              p10               p25             p50             p75              p90

                                    Couple Seller           Female Seller          Male Seller


                                        Panel B: Levered (80%) Returns


      .8



      .6



      .4



      .2



      0


                Mean              p10               p25             p50             p75              p90

                                    Couple Seller          Female Seller           Male Seller


Note: This figure plots summary statistics for the annualized returns for housing transactions by three gender groups:
couples, single women, and single men. The levered returns are calculated following the formula is Section D, assum-
ing an initial LTV of 80%.




                                                          32
            Figure 3: Density of unlevered annualized returns by gender group
                                        Panel A: Full Distribution


            .04



            .03



            .02



            .01



              0
                  -.5                         0                        .5                          1
                                                  Annualized Return

                                        Couple               Female                Male


                               Panel B: Loss Aversion (Zoomed Distribution)

            .05



            .04



            .03



            .02



            .01

                        -.04           -.02               0                 .02              .04
                                                  Annualized Return

                                        Couple               Female                Male


Note: This figure plots the density of the annualized unlevered returns for housing transactions by three gender
groups: couples, single women, and single men. Returns are truncated at -50% and +100% in Panel A. Returns are
truncated at -4% and +5% in Panel B.



                                                      33
                     Figure 4: Gender gap in unlevered returns across states


            SC
             HI
            WV
            WA
            TN
            NJ
              IL
            PA
            AL
            MA
            KY
             FL
            MO
            CT
            OH
            NY
            NH
             MI
            MN
            DE
            AZ
            OR
            CA
            VT
            NC
            MD
            GA
            OK
            LA
            AR
            CO
            NE
            VA
            NV
            ME
             IN
            UT
            WY
            TX
            KS
            MS
            AK
            NM
            SD
            ND
            MT
             RI
             ID
            WI
             IA
                    -.1        -.05     0        .05      .1     .15                                 .2
                              Single Female - Single Male Avg. Returns

Note: This figure plots the average difference in unlevered annualized returns between single men and women across
states. The points represent the estimated difference in realized returns, while the bars represent the 95% confidence
interval. Standard errors are clustered at the zip-code level.


                                                         34
               Figure 5: Average unlevered returns over time by gender group

            0.20



            0.15



            0.10



            0.05



            0.00

                   1995             2000              2005              2010               2015
                                                       Sale Year

                               Overall              Couple               Female                Male


Note: This figure plots the average unlevered annualized return for couples, single women, and single men by sale
year. As our sample begins in 1991, we begin this figure in 1995 to allow for sufficient data to avoid truncation.




                                                       35
                    Figure 6: Transaction price by seller-buyer gender pairing




            Female Seller - Female Buyer




               Female Seller - Male Buyer




               Male Seller - Female Buyer




                  Male Seller - Male Buyer



                                               -0.03       -0.02       -0.01        0.00              0.01
                                                              Difference in Sale Price
                                                        compared to Male Seller - Male Buyer

Note: This figure plots the average difference in log transaction prices for each possible seller-buyer gender pair,
relative to transactions involving single male sellers and single male buyers. These estimates come from a regression
of the form in Table 4 column 4, but allowing for the buyer and seller gender group indicators to interact. We plot
only the coefficients representing single male or female buyers and sellers, with male seller-male buyer as the omitted
base coefficient.




                                                          36
                         Figure 7: Discounts by seller-buyer gender pairing




             Female Seller - Female Buyer




                Female Seller - Male Buyer




                Male Seller - Female Buyer




                   Male Seller - Male Buyer



                                                  -0.20           -0.10           0.00         0.10
                                                                Difference in Discount
                                                          compared to Male Seller - Male Buyer

Note: This figure plots the average difference in discounts for each possible seller-buyer gender pair, relative to
discounts for transactions involving single male sellers and single male buyers. We measure discounts as (list price
- transaction price)/list price × 100, so a larger discount contributes to a higher return on housing investment for
buyers and a lower return for sellers. These estimates come from a regression of the form in Table 6 column 4, but
allowing for the buyer and seller gender group indicators to interact. We plot only the coefficients representing single
male or female buyers and sellers, with male seller-male buyer as the omitted base category.




                                                           37
          Figure 8: Differences between single men and women by holding period
                         Panel A: Gender Gap in Unlevered Annualized Returns
             0.00

            -0.01

            -0.02

            -0.03

            -0.04

            -0.05

            -0.06

            -0.07
                    1       2         3         4          5           6        7       8         9        10
                                                       Holding Length (years)


                                    Panel B: Gender Gap in Purchase Price
            0.04



            0.03



            0.02



            0.01



            0.00
                    1       2         3         4         5           6         7       8         9        10
                                                      Holding Length (years)


                                       Panel C: Gender Gap in Sale Price
             0.00




            -0.01




            -0.02




            -0.03
                    1       2         3         4          5           6        7       8         9        10
                                                       Holding Length (years)


Note: This figure plots the average difference in outcomes between single men and women by holding length for
the property. We exclude holding periods longer than 11 years. Panel A plots the female minus male gender gap in
returns controlling for zip-sale-year-month fixed effects. Panels B and C plot the female minus male gender gap in log
purchase and sale prices, respectively, controlling for property fixed effects and zip-year-month fixed effects. Vertical
bars represent 95% confidence intervals.
                                                           38
                                         Table 1: Summary statistics

                                                               Buyer Gender Group
                                            Single Male     Single Female       Couple         Other           Overall
Panel A: Full Sample
  Log(Sale Price)                             11.9482           11.8821         12.1105       12.1842          12.0704
  Sample Size                                11,561,755        7,614,231      13,424,894     20,282,986       52,883,866

Panel B: Listing Sample
  Log(Sale Price)                             12.0567           11.9758         12.2847       12.0711          12.1102
  Log(List Price)                             12.0739           11.9918         12.3067       12.0958          12.1308
  Purchase Discount (p.p.)                    2.7826            2.5422          2.7200        3.1715           2.8415
  Log(Days on Market)                         3.7355            3.7024          3.7856        3.7377           3.7444
  Sample Size                                4,751,834         3,240,324       5,236,683     5,711,909        18,940,750

                                                               Seller Gender Group
                                            Single Male     Single Female       Couple         Other           Overall
Panel C: Full Sample
  Log(Sale Price)                             12.0264           11.9572         12.1414       12.0748          12.0704
  Sample Size                                6,092,999         5,110,755       9,960,567     31,719,545       52,883,866

Panel D: Listing Sample
  Log(Sale Price)                             12.1459           12.0678         12.2737       12.0332          12.1102
  Log(List Price)                             12.1651           12.0914         12.2919       12.0546          12.1308
  Sale Discount (p.p.)                        2.7882            2.9663          2.5274        2.9744           2.8415
  Log(Days on Market)                         3.7176            3.6967          3.7018        3.7840           3.7444
  Sample Size                                2,484,028         2,423,657       4,554,616     9,478,449        18,940,750

Panel E: Returns Sample
  Log(Sale Price)                             12.1699           12.0844         12.3354           -            12.2292
  Annualized Unlevered Returns                0.0840            0.0685          0.0646            -             0.0712
  Annualized Levered (80%) Returns            0.3024            0.2237          0.2062            -             0.2389
  Holding Length (Years)                      5.3427            5.7665          5.9889            -             5.7456
  Log(Purchase Price)                         11.9294           11.8477         12.0807           -            11.9828
  Sample Size                                2,666,894         2,021,915       4,244,322          -           8,933,131
Note: This table reports summary statistics for the samples used in the analysis, split by four gender groups (single
male, single female, couple, and other), and also pooled. Panels A and B are split by buyer gender group, and Panels
C, D, and E are split by seller gender group. Each cell is the overall mean within the relevant the sample group.
Panels A and C represent the full sample of all arms-length sales transactions reported in the data. Panels B and D
represent the sample of sales transactions successfully matched to listings data. Panel E represents the sample of sales
transactions where we successfully match the identified gender and family structure in the sale transaction with that
in the previous purchase transaction, and also match the names of the sellers with the names of the buyers in the
previous transaction. See Section II.B for more details on how we identify gender groups (single female, single male,
couple, and other). See Section II.A for more details on how we match the data.




                                                          39
                               Table 2: Housing returns: market timing

                                          Panel A: Unlevered Returns
                                                               Unlevered Ann Return
                                             (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)
        Single Female                      -0.015***     -0.014***     -0.011***      -0.010***     -0.008***
                                           (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)
        Couple                             -0.019***     -0.012***     -0.007***      -0.007***     -0.004***
                                           (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)
        Holding Length                                                 -0.006***      -0.001
                                                                       (0.000)        (0.001)
        Zip-SaleYM FE                        No            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
        Zip-BuyYM FE                         No            No             No            Yes           Yes
        SaleYM FE x BuyYM FE                 No            No             No            No            Yes
        R-squared                          0.004          0.352         0.378         0.534         0.592
        Observations                     8,933,131      8,933,131     8,933,131     8,933,131     8,933,131

                                       Panel B: Levered (80%) Returns
                                                               Unlevered Ann Return
                                             (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)
        Single Female                      -0.079***     -0.073***     -0.058***      -0.052***     -0.037***
                                           (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)
        Couple                             -0.096***     -0.072***     -0.044***      -0.039***     -0.015***
                                           (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)
        Holding Length                                                 -0.037***      -0.026***
                                                                       (0.000)        (0.006)
        Zip-SaleYM FE                        No            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
        Zip-BuyYM FE                         No            No             No            Yes           Yes
        SaleYM FE x BuyYM FE                 No            No             No            No            Yes
        R-squared                          0.004          0.292         0.326         0.481         0.628
        Observations                     8,933,131      8,933,131     8,933,131     8,933,131     8,933,131
Note: This table shows the difference in annualized returns for single women and couples relative to single men (the
omitted category). The levered returns are calculated following the formula in Section II.D, assuming an initial LTV of
80%. Columns 2 through 5 introduce additional control variables for the location and timing of housing transactions.
Standard errors are clustered by zipcode. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.




                                                          40
            Table 3: Heterogeneity by zip-level demographics: quartile averages


     Male - Female Unlevered Ann Return               Quartile 1     Quartile 2      Quartile 3     Quartile 4
                                                           (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)

     Frac Black                                         0.0137          0.0140         0.0143         0.0194
     Frac HS Education or Less                          0.0089          0.0146         0.0196         0.0240
     Frac 60+                                           0.0118          0.0154         0.0182         0.0184
     Frac Single Female                                 0.0115          0.0135         0.0150         0.0222
     Median Family Income                               0.0234          0.0177         0.0145         0.0109
     House Price                                        0.0191          0.0165         0.0139         0.0118

Note: This table presents the average male minus female gender gap in unlevered annualized housing returns across
quartiles of various zip-level demographic characteristics from the 2010 American Community Survey. The gender
gap within each zip code is measured as the simple average across all transactions. Zip-codes within each quartile are
equally weighted to compute the quartile average.




                                                         41
                                           Table 4: Transaction price


                                              Log(Purchase Price)                Log(Sale Price)
                                                 (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)
                Single Female                  0.013***          0.018***     -0.029***       -0.026***
                                              (0.001)           (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.001)
                Couple                         0.029***          0.032***      0.014***        0.016***
                                              (0.002)           (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.001)
                Other                          0.091***          0.022***     -0.051***       -0.051***
                                              (0.005)           (0.003)       (0.002)         (0.001)
                Property FE                     Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes
                Year-Month FE                   Yes              No             Yes              No
                Zip-Year-Month FE               No               Yes            No              Yes
                R-squared                      0.794           0.886           0.793           0.886
                Observations                52,883,866      52,883,866      52,883,866      52,883,866
Note: This table examines variation in transaction prices across gender groups. Gender groups in columns 1 and 2
refer to buyers and gender groups in columns 3 and 4 refer to sellers. We use repeat sales data that allows us to control
for property fixed effects. We also control for zip-year-month fixed effects to account for time trends within a zip code.
Each observation is a transaction. To better estimate property fixed effects, we do not restrict the sample to buyers or
sellers with identified genders and matched names across sales and initial purchase. All observations corresponding
to non-identified single women, single men, and couples are included and coded as the "other" category. Single males
are the omitted category. Standard errors are clustered by zipcode. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                           42
                                               Table 5: List price


                                          Log(Purchase List Price)            Log(Sale List Price)
                                               (1)               (2)            (3)             (4)
               Single Female                 0.021***           0.022***      -0.021***       -0.018***
                                            (0.001)            (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.000)
               Couple                        0.023***           0.015***      -0.008***       -0.004***
                                            (0.001)            (0.000)        (0.001)         (0.001)
               Other                        -0.022***           -0.027***     -0.099***       -0.080***
                                            (0.002)            (0.001)        (0.002)         (0.002)
               Property FE                    Yes               Yes             Yes             Yes
               Year-Month FE                  Yes               No              Yes             No
               Zip-Year-Month FE               No               Yes             No              Yes
               R-squared                     0.916            0.961            0.918          0.962
               Observations               10,255,902       10,255,902       10,255,902     10,255,902
Note: This table examines variation in list prices across gender groups. Gender groups in columns 1 and 2 refer to
buyers and gender groups in columns 3 and 4 refer to sellers. We use repeat sales data that allows us to control for
property fixed effects. We also control for zip-year-month fixed effects to account for time trends within a zip code.
Each observation is a listing matched to a sales transaction and the sample is restricted to properties for which we
observe at least two transactions. To better estimate property fixed effects, we do not restrict the sample to buyers or
sellers with identified genders and matched names across sales and initial purchase. All observations corresponding
to non-identified single women, single men, and couples are included and coded as the "other" category. Single males
are the omitted category. Standard errors are clustered by zipcode. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                          43
                               Table 6: Discount relative to the list price


                                              Purchase Discount               Sale Discount
                                                (1)              (2)          (3)           (4)
                 Single Female                -0.276***        -0.256***     0.167***      0.092***
                                              (0.007)          (0.005)      (0.007)       (0.005)
                 Couple                       -0.117***        -0.084***    -0.280***     -0.228***
                                              (0.012)          (0.005)      (0.012)       (0.005)
                 Zip-Year-Month FE              No              Yes           No            Yes
                 R-squared                    0.001           0.222          0.002        0.257
                 Observations              13,690,139      13,690,139      9,658,833    9,658,833
Note: This table examines how negotiated transaction discounts vary by gender group. Gender groups in columns 1
and 2 refer to buyers and gender groups in columns 3 and 4 refer to sellers. We measure purchase and sale discounts
as (list price - transaction price)/list price × 100, so a larger purchase discount contributes to a higher return on
housing investment and a larger sale discount contributes to a lower return on housing investment. Standard errors
are clustered by zipcode. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                          44
                                          Table 7: Days on market


                                                 Sale Log(Days on Mkt)          Log(Sale Price)
                                                     (1)             (2)               (3)
                  Single Female                    -0.027***       -0.009***          -0.024***
                                                   (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.001)
                  Couple                           -0.048***       -0.049***          -0.006***
                                                   (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.001)
                  Other                            -0.002          -0.049***          -0.087***
                                                   (0.003)         (0.003)           (0.002)
                  Sale Log(Days on Mkt)                                               0.002***
                                                                                     (0.000)
                  Property FE                        No              Yes               Yes
                  Zip-Year-Month FE                  Yes             Yes               Yes
                  R-squared                         0.283         0.659               0.937
                  Observations                   10,412,065     10,412,065         10,412,065
Note: Columns 1 and 2 examine how days on market, measured as the number of days between the earliest available
listing associated with a transaction and the sale date, varies with seller gender group. Column 3 examines variation
in sale prices by gender group after controlling for the number of days on market. Standard errors are clustered by
zipcode. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                         45
                  Table 8: Controlling for timing and property characteristics


                                                             Unlevered Ann Return
                                                          (1)          (2)           (3)
                      Single Female                    -0.012***     -0.007***     -0.006***
                                                       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
                      Couple                           -0.015***     -0.004***     -0.004***
                                                       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
                      Log(Age of Unit)                                              0.006***
                                                                                   (0.000)
                      Garage                                                       -0.006***
                                                                                   (0.000)
                      Pool                                                         -0.002***
                                                                                   (0.000)
                      Cooling                                                      -0.002***
                                                                                   (0.000)
                      Fireplace                                                    -0.004***
                                                                                   (0.000)
                      Basement                                                      0.001**
                                                                                   (0.000)
                      Waterfront                                                    0.003***
                                                                                   (0.001)
                      Bathrooms                                                     0.001
                                                                                   (0.001)
                      Log(Sq Ft)                                                    0.003***
                                                                                   (0.001)
                      Bedrooms                                                      0.001***
                                                                                   (0.000)
                      Upgraded                                                      0.008***
                                                                                   (0.000)
                      New Construction                                             -0.004***
                                                                                   (0.000)
                      Property Type FE                   No            No            Yes
                      Zip-SaleYM FE                      No            Yes           Yes
                      Zip-BuyYM FE                       No            Yes           Yes
                      SaleYM FE x BuyYM FE               No            Yes           Yes
                      R-squared                         0.003        0.646         0.649
                      Observations                    3,008,113    3,008,113     3,008,113
Note: This table examines how the gender gap in housing returns varies with additional control variables for market
timing and property and listing agent characteristics. The sample is restricted to observations for which we have
matched listings data on property characteristics. Standard errors are clustered by zipcode. *,**, and *** denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                        46
          Table 9: Maintenance and housing returns in the American Housing Survey


                                  Maint/price     Est Unlevered Return               Real Unlevered Return
                                       (1)                   (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)
  Single Female                     -0.000233           -0.00595**         -0.0120**       -0.0102**
                                    (0.000159)           (0.00241)         (0.00509)       (0.00511)
  Couple                           0.000372***         -0.00784***          -0.00634       -0.00377
                                    (0.000133)          (0.00213)          (0.00506)       (0.00479)
  Age of House                    0.0000975***         0.000367***        0.000226***     0.000226***   0.000224***
                                  (0.00000210)         (0.0000319)        (0.0000477)     (0.0000476)   (0.0000476)
  Age of Householder              0.0000469***         -0.000617***        -0.0000800      -0.000140     -0.000146
                                  (0.00000322)          (0.0000529)       (0.0000734)     (0.0000935)   (0.0000974)
  Single Female with Child                                                                               -0.0193**
                                                                                                         (0.00776)
  Single Female w/o Child                                                                                 -0.0103*
                                                                                                         (0.00576)
  Male with Child                                                                                         -0.0124
                                                                                                         (0.00859)
  Couple with Child                                                                                       -0.0105
                                                                                                         (0.00643)
  Couple w/o Child                                                                                        -0.00565
                                                                                                         (0.00567)
  Number of Children                                                                      -0.00293**
                                                                                           (0.00123)
  Number of Adults                                                                         -0.00231      -0.00197
                                                                                           (0.00180)     (0.00178)
  Some College                                                                              0.00145       0.00156
                                                                                           (0.00368)     (0.00366)
  College Degree                                                                            0.00101      0.000987
                                                                                           (0.00320)     (0.00321)
  Graduate Degree                                                                          -0.000806    -0.000769
                                                                                           (0.00365)    (0.00365)
  Black                                                                                     -0.00689      -0.00737
                                                                                           (0.00627)     (0.00631)
  American Indian                                                                           -0.0114       -0.0114
                                                                                           (0.00941)     (0.00971)
  Asian                                                                                     -0.0117*      -0.0120*
                                                                                           (0.00695)     (0.00698)
  Other Race                                                                               -0.00701      -0.00782
                                                                                           (0.0143)      (0.0146)
  Log Family Income                                                                        0.00239*      0.00246*
                                                                                           (0.00128)     (0.00128)
  MSA x Survey or Sale Year FE         Yes                 Yes                Yes            Yes             Yes
  R-squared                           0.063               0.023              0.294           0.298           0.298
  Observations                       124,505             135,669             3,716           3,678           3,678

Note: This table uses data from the American Housing Survey. In column 1, the dependent variable is reported annual
maintenance scaled by home purchase price. In column 2, estimated unlevered return is the annualized unlevered
return, calculated using the homeowner's self reported estimate of current home value relative to purchase price.
In columns 3-5, real unlevered return is the annualized unlevered return, calculated using the actual purchase price
and sale price. Standard errors are double clustered by household and survey year. *,**, and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
                                                        47
                                            Table 10: Controlling for listing agents
                    Unlevered Ann Return   Purchase Discount   Sale Discount   Log(Purchase List Price)   Log(Sale List Price)   Log(Purchase Price)   Log(Sale Price)
                             (1)                  (2)               (3)                  (4)                      (5)                    (6)                 (7)
Single Female               -0.012***           -0.233***          0.068***             0.013***                 -0.013***              0.016***            -0.024***
                           (0.000)              (0.005)           (0.004)              (0.000)                  (0.000)                (0.001)             (0.001)
Couple                      -0.010***           -0.042***         -0.175***             0.010***                 0.004***               0.025***            0.014***
                           (0.000)              (0.004)           (0.004)              (0.000)                  (0.000)                (0.001)             (0.001)
Other                                            0.431***          0.246***            -0.017***                -0.030***               0.017***            -0.042***
                                                (0.006)           (0.006)              (0.000)                  (0.001)                (0.003)             (0.001)
Property FE                 No                    No                No                   Yes                      Yes                   Yes                 Yes
Zip-Year-Month FE           Yes                  Yes               Yes                   Yes                      Yes                   Yes                 Yes
Listing Agent FE            Yes                  Yes               Yes                   Yes                      Yes                   Yes                 Yes
R-squared                   0.454                0.286             0.285                0.975                    0.975                  0.887               0.888
Observations              5,377,609           19,941,435        19,941,435           10,210,719               10,210,719             28,673,949          28,673,949

  Note: This table re-estimates the main regressions from Tables 2, 4, 5, and 6, controlling for listing agent fixed effects.
  The sample is restricted to observations with matched listing agent data. Agents are identified using their listing agent
  code on a listing matched to a transaction. Standard errors are clustered by zipcode. *,**, and *** denote statistical
  significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                                               48
                                  Table 11: Variation by market tightness

                           Unlevered Ann Return   Purchase Discount    Sale Discount   Log(Purchase Price)   Log(Sale Price)
                                    (1)                   (2)               (3)                (4)                 (5)
Single Female                      -0.017***            -0.284***          0.039***           0.024***            -0.029***
                                  (0.000)               (0.019)           (0.014)            (0.001)             (0.001)
Couple                             -0.012***            -0.240***         -0.012              0.013***            0.017***
                                  (0.000)               (0.018)           (0.014)            (0.001)             (0.001)
Other                                                    0.014             0.389***           0.032***           -0.060***
                                                        (0.016)           (0.016)            (0.002)             (0.002)
Singe Female X Tightness           0.020***              0.284***          -0.487***          -0.039***           0.019***
                                  (0.002)               (0.095)           (0.066)            (0.004)             (0.004)
Couple X Tightness                 -0.001                0.413***         -0.026              -0.004              -0.024***
                                  (0.002)               (0.091)           (0.065)            (0.006)             (0.005)
Other X Tightness                                        0.068             0.135*             -0.006              0.059***
                                                        (0.077)           (0.074)            (0.008)             (0.009)
Property FE                        No                    No                 No                Yes                 Yes
Zip-Year-Month FE                  Yes                   Yes               Yes                Yes                 Yes
R-squared                          0.354                 0.207             0.208              0.886               0.886
Observations                     8,265,449            19,845,356        19,845,356         46,602,251          46,602,251

 Note: This table re-estimates the main regressions from Tables 2, 4, and 6, interacting the gender group indicators with
 a measure of market tightness. Market tightness is defined as the number of sales in a given county-month, scaled by
 the outstanding number of listings currently for sale in that county-month. Standard errors are clustered by zipcode.
 *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                           49
             Appendix for

The Gender Gap in Housing Returns
    Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham   Kelly Shue




                    50
                                      A. Impact on Wealth Accumulation
In this section, we estimate that gender differences in the housing market can explain up to 30% of the
gender gap in wealth accumulation at retirement.17
     Before proceeding to the calculations, we note that wealth is measured at the household level and
shared by married couples. Therefore, we estimate wealth accumulation by women and men who re-
main single until retirement, which represent approximately 10 and 13 percent of the US population,
respectively.18 Our estimations may still be informative when considering the welfare of ever-married
individuals because we offer insight into each party's financial outside options if they were to remain
single, which may affect bargaining power within married households. The limitations of our calcu-
lations are similar to those faced when considering how the gender pay gap contributes to differences
in wealth accumulation, which likewise can only be estimated for single households but may matter
for bargaining power and welfare within married households.
     We assume that men and women buy their first house at age 30. They remain homeowners until
age 65 when they retire and sell their home. House value grows at 2.5% annually. People pay off their
mortgages in full by retirement and remain single from age 30 to 65. People move to new homes four
times, at ages 35, 40, 45, and 54 (this timing is designed so that people move less frequently as they
age). Men and women invest the same initial amount in housing at age 30 and do not move additional
income into housing other than to cover transaction costs, which we assume to be the same for men
and women. Men trade at fair market prices whereas women lose 2% of housing wealth at each house
purchase and sale.
     Under these assumptions, women accumulate 18.4% lower housing wealth relative to men by age
65. Intuitively, the difference arises because the initial male investment in housing grows at a rate of
2.5% annually. The initial female investment in housing grows at the same rate, but women experience
a loss of 2% of housing wealth at each purchase and sale.
     The gender gap in median net worth at retirement for single homeowners is approximately 40%,19
and a single woman with the median level of wealth has 70% of her net worth invested in housing
(see Appendix Figures A1 and A2). This implies that approximately 32.3% (= (70% × 18.4%)/40%)
of the gap in wealth accumulation at retirement can be explained by the gender gap in housing mar-
kets. Note that this calculation does not make any assumptions regarding the degree of leverage or
mortgage debt taken by men and women, other than to assume that mortgages are paid in full by
retirement.
     We can modify our baseline calculation by changing the number of housing transactions. Women
are less disadvantaged if they engage in fewer transactions. We assume that people move three times
instead of four, at the ages of 35, 42, and 52, between the initial purchase at age 30 and final sale at
age 65. Under these modified assumptions, the gender gap in housing wealth at retirement is 15.0%,
implying that 26.3% of the gap in total wealth accumulation can be explained by the gender gap in
housing markets.
     We can also modify our baseline calculation by allowing people to invest more in housing with
each move. This is equivalent to allowing people to contribute to their housing portfolio over time by
moving to more expensive homes. We assume that men invest an additional 15% of the market value
of their current house into their next house each time they move. We assume women move at the
same time and invest the same additional dollar amount as men each time they move. Under these
modified assumptions, the gender gap in housing wealth at retirement is 14.3%, implying that 25.1%
of the gap in total wealth accumulation can be explained by the gender gap in housing markets.
     These estimates may be conservative because they rely on an estimate of the gender gap in exe-
  17 We   thank Tim Landvoigt for recommending this exercise and for detailed suggestions regarding execution.
  18 The numbers come from the 2018 American Community Survey, and represent the percentage of never-married women

and men aged 55 to 64.
  19 Our estimate of the gender gap in wealth accumulation is similar to the estimated gap of 36% for never-married men

and women at age 65 presented in Ruel and Hauser (2013).


                                                            51
cution prices at purchase and sale, which comes from regression results in Table 4, which control for
property fixed effects and zip-year-month fixed effects. These regressions estimate the gender gap in
execution prices among men and women who choose to transact in the same zip-year-month. Our
calculation does not take into account that women also earn lower returns due to market timing, in
that they are more likely to buy when aggregate prices are high and sell when they are low.

                                          B. Measurement Error
In this section, we discuss the potential bias in our estimates that may arise due to measurement error
in our gender group variables (single male, single female, couple, and other).
     The result below is a simple extension of Aigner (1973). We show that measurement error would
cause us to underestimate the extent to which single women earn lower returns on housing relative to
single men under the following assumptions: (1) measurement error in our measured gender groups
(single male, single female, couple, and other) is random (not correlated with true gender groups), (2)
observations observed empirically as couples are not true single men or women (because we identify
an observation as a couple only if we observe two separate full names with identified genders, so there
are unlikely to be false positives in the identification of couples), (3) the rates of false identification of
true single men as single women and true single women as single men are low (based on the fact
that our gender identification algorithm uses a 95% confidence cutoff), (4) a true couple is more likely
to be mistakenly identified as a single man than as a single woman (because of pre-existing norms
described in Section II.B), and (5) couples earn weakly lower returns on housing relative to single men
(based on supplementary results from the American Housing Survey).
     With these assumptions at hand, we show below that our estimate of the gender return gap be-
tween single women and single men will be smaller than the true gender gap due to measurement
error.

Result We focus on the simple returns regression, without controlling for location or timing, for
clarity of exposition. The true returns regression is

                                          ri =  0 + Ci  c + Fi  f + i ,                                  (A1)

where Mi , Fi , and Ci denote the true gender group status on a transaction i, corresponding to single
male, single female, and couple.
    Let mi , f i , ci denote our empirically measured gender group, with oi denoting the "other" category
for which we cannot identify the gender group.
    Note that the measurement error for each term is:

                                                  ci = Ci + uc,i ,                                       (A2)
                                                   f i = Fi + u f ,i ,                                   (A3)
                                                 m i = Mi + u m , i ,                                    (A4)

where u·,i  {-1, 0, 1} such that mi , f i , ci , and oi  {-1, 0, 1} and mi + f i + ci + oi = 1. We assume that
the vector of u are i.i.d. random draws (with probabilities outlined below).
    We can empirically estimate the following regression:

                                r i =  0 + c i  c + f i  f - u c ,i  c - u f ,i  f + i ,                 (A5)

or in compressed notation:
                                        r i = X i  - u c ,i  c - u f ,i  f + i ,                         (A6)
where Xi = (1 ci f i ), and  = (  0 ,  c ,  f ) .
   Note that we condition on oi = 0 in our regressions. We revisit this below.

                                                           52
    Now consider the estimator of  from Equation A6:


                       ^ =  - ( X n X n ) -1 X n ( u c,n  c + u f ,n  f ) + ( X n X n ) -1 X n
                                                                                                       n,    (A7)

where Xn is an n × 3 stacked matrix of Xi , and uc,n is an n × 1 stacked vector of uc,i (and the same for
u f ,n and n ). For simplicity of notation, let the observed number of single female and single males be
n f = an, and nc = bn, respectively, where a, b  (0, 1).
       We can derive the following:

                                                            
                                       n             nc n f
                           ( Xn Xn ) = n c
                                                     nc 0  ,                                                 (A8)
                                       nf            0 nf
                                                                      -1                 -1
                                                    1
                                                                                                    
                                               n (1- a - b )     n (1- a - b )      n (1- a - b )
                                                   -1              n (1- a )              1
                        ( X n X n ) -1 = 
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    ,        (A9)
                                               n (1- a - b )   bn(n(1- a-b))        n (1- a - b )   
                                                   -1                  1              n (1- b )
                                               n (1- a - b )     n (1- a - b )    an(n(1- a-b))

                                                in=1 uc,i
                                                               

                             Xn u c,n =        in=1 ci uc,i  ,                                              (A10)
                                               in=1 f i uc,i
                                                in=1 u f ,i
                                                                

                             Xn u f ,n =       in=1 ci u f ,i  .                                            (A11)
                                               in=1 f i u f ,i

    Hence, the bias for  f will be


                            in=1 uc,i          n c u                 n(1 - b) in=1 f i uc,i
             ^ f -  f =c
                                          -  c i = 1 i c ,i -  c                                            (A12)
                         n (1 - a - b )       n (1 - a - b )          an(n(1 - a - b))
                              n                   n
                             i = 1 u f ,i        i = 1 c i u f ,i     n(1 - b) in=1 f i u f ,i
                     + f                  - f                     - f                          + o p (1).   (A13)
                         n (1 - a - b )       n (1 - a - b )           an(n(1 - a - b))

If we take limits, and assume all three groups will be non-trivial in size, then we get:


                       ^ f -  f =  c E ( u c ,i ) -  c E ( c i u c ,i ) - ( 1 - b )  c E ( f i u c ,i )
                                                                                                            (A14)
                                  1-a-b             1-a-b                     a (1 - a - b )
                                   f E ( u f ,i )  f E ( c i u f ,i ) ( 1 - b )  f E ( f i u f ,i )
                                +                 -                     -                               .   (A15)
                                  1-a-b             1-a-b                      a (1 - a - b )

    Now consider the joint distribution of our observed data and the true data:

                                                     C            F     M
                                        c ( 1 -  c -  C - C )  C  0     0
                       Pr ( Xi , xi ) = f          C C           F F  M  M                                  (A16)
                                        m          C  C          F  F  M  M
                                        o          c C           F F  M  M ,

where  M = Pr ( f i = 1| Mi = 1),  M = Pr ( Mi = 1),  M = Pr (mi = 1| Mi = 1) and  M = Pr (oi =
1| Mi = 1). C , C , C , C ,  F ,  F , F , and  F are defined similarly. Note that we assume that observed


                                                              53
couples do not correspond to true single male or female. Since we condition on o = 0, we can recon-
dition this distribution, by scaling the terms by Pr (o = 0) = 1 - (c C +  F  F +  M  M ) = .
     Finally, we use this joint distribution to consider the joint probability of our measured variables
and error terms (recall that Pr (uc,i = -1) = Pr (Ci = 1, ci = 0), Pr (uc,i = 0) = Pr (Ci = 1, ci =
1) + Pr (Ci = 0, ci = 0) and Pr (uc,i = 1) = Pr (Ci = 0, ci = 1), conditional on oi = 0):20
                         fi
                                                   0                                      1                                      f ( u f ,i )
     u f ,i
                -1                          F  F /                                     0                                   F  F /
                 0                ((1 - c - C )C +  M  M )/                          F  F /                   ((1 - c - C )C +  M  M +  F  F )/
                 1                             0                               ( M  M +  C  C ) /                     ( M  M +  C  C ) / 
              f ( fi )        ((1 - c - C )C +  M  M +  F  F )/            ( F  F +  M  M +  C  C ) /                         1
                         ci
                                           0                                1                                     f ( u f ,i )
     u f ,i
                -1                      F  F /                           0                                     F  F /
                 0            (  F  F +  M  M + C  C ) /      (1 -  c -  C - C )  C /             ((1 - c - C )C +  M  M +  F  F )/
                 1                 ( M  M +  C  C ) /                    0                                ( M  M +  C  C ) / 
                                           .
                                           .
              f ( ci )                     .                  (1 -  c -  C - C )  C /                                  1
                         fi
                                                       0                                      1                  f ( u c ,i )
     u c ,i
                -1                                 C  C /                               C C /              ( C +  C )  C / 
                 0            (  F  F +  M  M + (1 -  C -  C - C )  C ) /        ( F  F +  M  M ) /              ...
                 1                                    0                                   0                       0
              f ( fi )               (  F  F + (1 -  c )  C +  M  M ) /          ( F  F +  M  M ) /               1
                         ci
                                               0                                    1                        f ( u c ,i )
     u c ,i
                -1                      ( C +  C )  C /                            0                     ( C +  C )  C / 
                 0             (( M +  M ) M + ( F +  F ) F )/          (1 -  c -  C - C )  C /                ...
                 1                            0                                    0                            0
              f ( ci )        ( F  F +  M  M +  M  M +  F  F ) /             (1 -  c )  C /                     1


    Solving for expectations yields:


                                                   E ( u c ,i ) = - (  C +  C )  C /  ,                                                         (A17)
                                                   E ( u f ,i ) = (  M  M +  C  C -  F  F ) /  ,                                                (A18)
                                                E(ci uc,i ) = 0,                                                                                (A19)
                                               E ( f i u c ,i ) = -  C  C /  ,                                                                  (A20)
                                               E(ci u f ,i ) = 0,                                                                               (A21)
                                               E ( f i u f ,i ) = (  M  M +  C  C ) /  .                                                        (A22)

    Now we consider our bias term for  f again:
 20 For   space reasons, we omit certain cells, but these are simply the sum of the terms in each column or row.




                                                                        54
                  ^ f =  f -  c ( C +  C )  C /  + (1 - b )  c  C  C / 
                                                                                                     (A23)
                                   1-a-b                 a (1 - a - b )
                         f ( M  M +  C  C -  F  F ) /  (1 - b )  f ( M  M +  C  C ) / 
                      +                                    -                                         (A24)
                                   1-a-b                                a (1 - a - b )
                                a   - (1 - b - a ) C  C
                      =  f - c C C                                                                   (A25)
                                        a (1 - a - b )
                           a  + (1 - b - a)( M  M + C C )
                      - f F F                                                                        (A26)
                                        a (1 - a - b )
                                  a  + (1 - b - a)( M  M + C C )
                      = f 1 - F F                                                                    (A27)
                                               a (1 - a - b )
                          a   - (1 - b - a ) C  C
                      - c C C                          .                                             (A28)
                                  a (1 - a - b )

     Our measure of the gender gap in returns,      ^ f , can be biased due to two factors expressed in lines
A27 and A28. The first represents attenuation towards zero as in Aigner (1973) if we assume that
a F  F +(1-b- a)( M  M +C C )
           a (1- a - b )
                               [0, 1]. We believe this assumption is reasonable because of the following:
F  F is the probability that the true gender group is single female and is mistakenly identified as single
male.  M  M is the probability that the true gender group is single male and is mistakenly identified
as single female. Both terms are weakly positive and likely to be close to zero because we identify first
names as male or female only if our matching algorithm output exceeds a 95% confidence level. C C
is the probability that the true gender group is couple and is mistakenly identified as single female.
This term is weakly positive and also likely to be close to zero. Empirical patterns suggest that some
couples list only the male name on deeds records. However, it is much more rare for a true couple to
list only the female name on deeds records (see discussion in Section II.B).
                                                                                          a   - (1- b - a ) 
     The second bias factor in line A28 represents upward bias if we assume that -  c C Ca(1-a-b) C C >
0. We believe this assumption is reasonable because of the following: First note that aC C - (1 - b -
a)C C > 0 if a/(1 - b - a) > C /C . a/(1 - b - a) is the ratio of the observed share of single women
to the share of single men, and is equal to approximately 0.7 in our data (see Appendix Figure A3).
C /C is the ratio of the probability that a true couple is identified as a single female to the probability
that a true couple is identified as a single male. As discussed in Section II.B, it is much more common
for a couple to list only the male name than to list only the female name, so this fraction is likely to be
close to zero and therefore less than 0.7. Finally,  C is the return earned by couples relative to single
men.  C is likely to be weakly less than zero because we estimate that couples slightly underperform
single men using supplementary data from the American Housing Survey (AHS). In the AHS, marital
status and gender are measured with minimal error because they are reported by survey respondents
rather than inferred from names.




                                                    55
Figure A1: Share of net worth invested in housing versus stocks, Survey of Consumer Fi-
nances


                      1.00
                      0.90
                      0.80
                      0.70                                                     Housing Share
    Portfolio Share




                      0.60
                      0.50
                      0.40
                      0.30
                      0.20
                      0.10                                                                  Stock Share
                      0.00
                             5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100
                                             Percentile in Wealth Distribution

                                     Couple                     Single Female                           Single Male
                                     Couple                     Single Female                           Single Male


  Note: This figure plots the average share of net worth invested in housing and financial equities (stocks) across the
  wealth distribution, for individuals between the ages of 60 and 70, split by single women, single men, and couples.
  Single women and single men are defined by gender of head of household, and not living with a partner. Couples are
  defined as those living with partner or married. Housing share is total housing equity divided by net worth. Stock
  share is the share of wealth in all equity investments (including retirement accounts, IRA/Keogh accounts, directly
  held pooled investment funds held by household, directly held stocks held by household, account-type pension plans
  from the head of household and spouse's current jobs, and trusts investments) divided by net worth. Both share
  variables are set to zero if the numerator is negative or zero, or net worth is negative or zero. We pool across all years
  in the Survey of Consumer Finance (1989-2016), and all variables are measured in 2016 dollars.




                                                             56
                Figure A2: Wealth at retirement, Survey of Consumer Finances
                          Panel A: Median Networth of Homeowners, age 60-70




         Couples                                                                               397,662




      Single Men                                                 240,603




  Single Women                                    160,311




                   0             100,000              200,000          300,000            400,000            500,000


                           Panel B: Mean Networth of Homeowners, age 60-70




         Couples                                                                                            1,397,252




      Single Men                                                   753,536




  Single Women                              394,635




                   0                          500,000                        1,000,000                      1,500,000


Note: This figure plots the mean and median net worth across couples, single males, and single females between the
ages of 60 and 70. Age is defined by the head of the household, as reported in the survey. Single women and single
men are defined by gender of head of household, and not living with partner. Couples are defined as those living
with partner or married. We pool across all years in the Survey of Consumer Finance (1989-2016), and all variables
are measured in 2016 dollars.



                                                        57
              Figure A3: Composition of transactions by gender group over time



       0.50



       0.40



       0.30



       0.20



       0.10
              1990                          2000                            2010                           2020
                                                         Sale Year

                                        Couple                    Female                    Male


Note: This figure plots the relative composition of sale transactions across couples, single males, and single females
within the sample of transactions used for returns estimation.




                                                         58
                            Figure A4: Original LTV over time by gender group
     Panel A: LTV Conditional on Mortgage                                             Panel B: Missing Mortgage Data
   0.86                                                                       0.70



   0.84                                                                       0.60


   0.82
                                                                              0.50

   0.80
                                                                              0.40

   0.78

                                                                              0.30
   0.76
          1992   1996       2000        2004        2008   2012   2016               1992   1996       2000        2004        2008   2012   2016
                                   Purchase Year                                                              Purchase Year

                        Couple             Female          Male                                    Couple             Female          Male




Note: This figure presents average loan-to-value (LTV) at the time of purchase for couples, single women, and single
men. In Panel A, we plot the average LTV at time of purchase, conditional on having on mortgage data. In Panel B,
we plot the share of transactions with missing mortgage data. This combines two forces: full cash transactions and
observations with missing mortgage amount data.




                                                                         59
               Figure A5: Median unlevered returns over time by gender group

             0.15




             0.10




             0.05




             0.00
                    1995             2000               2005               2010               2015
                                                         Sale Year

                                Overall               Couple                Female                Male


Note: This figure plots the median unlevered annualized return for couples, single women, and single men by sale
year. As our sample begins in 1991, we begin this figure in 1995 to allow for sufficient data to avoid truncation. See
Section II.B for more details on the definition of gender and family structure.




                                                         60
                        Figure A6: Unlevered returns by holding period


       0.50


       0.40


       0.30


       0.20


       0.10


       0.00
              1         2        3         4         5       6        7          8          9       10
                                               Holding Length (years)

                                     Couple                  Female                  Male


Note: This figure plots the average unlevered annualized returns for couples, single women, and single men by
holding length. We exclude holding periods longer than 11 years.




                                                     61
                             Figure A7: Transaction share by holding length



       0.15




       0.10




       0.05


               1         2        3        4       5      6      7              8         9       10      11+
                                                Holding Length (years)

                                        Couple                   Female                    Male


Note: This figure plots the distribution of transactions for couples, single women, and single men by holding lengths
within our returns sample. We restrict the sample to properties with a minimum holding period of 3 months.




                                                         62
                              Figure A8: Sale and purchase discount distributions
               Panel A: Purchase Discount                                             Panel B: Sale Discount
  .2                                                                     .2




 .15                                                                    .15




  .1                                                                     .1




 .05                                                                    .05




  0                                                                      0
       -10           0                   10           20           30         -10         0                  10          20           30
                                  Purchase Discount                                                     Sale Discount

                         Couple             Female          Male                              Couple            Female         Male



             Panel C: Purchase Discount, > 0                                        Panel D: Sale Discount, > 0
 .04                                                                    .04




 .03                                                                    .03




 .02                                                                    .02




 .01                                                                    .01




  0                                                                      0
       0         5                10            15         20      25         0       5                10           15        20      25
                                  Purchase Discount                                                     Sale Discount

                         Couple             Female          Male                              Couple            Female         Male



Note: This figure plots the distribution of purchase and sale discounts for couples, single women and single men. We
measure discounts as (list price - transaction price)/list price × 100, so a larger purchase discount contributes to a
higher return on housing investment and a larger sale discount contributes to a lower return on housing investment.
In Panels A and B, we plot the full distributions for all three groups. In Panels C and D, we restrict the distribution to
values greater than zero to exclude the spike at 0.




                                                                   63
                                Figure A9: Days on market distribution

             .15




              .1




             .05




               0
                   0                   100                200                     300                  400
                                                     Days on Market

                                          Couple                 Female                 Male


Note: This figure plots the distribution of days on market for listings sold by couples, single women, and single men.
Days on market equals the number of days between the earliest available listing associated with a transaction and the
sale date.




                                                         64
          Table A1: Housing returns: market timing with less conservative screens

                                          Panel A: Unlevered Returns
                                                               Unlevered Ann Return
                                              (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)
        Single Female                      -0.016***      -0.013***     -0.011***     -0.010***      -0.009***
                                           (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)
        Couple                             -0.020***      -0.012***     -0.007***     -0.007***      -0.004***
                                           (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)
        Holding Length                                                  -0.006***     -0.001
                                                                        (0.000)       (0.001)
        Zip-SaleYM FE                        No             Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
        Zip-BuyYM FE                         No             No            No            Yes            Yes
        SaleYM FE x BuyYM FE                 No             No            No             No            Yes
        R-squared                           0.005         0.354         0.379          0.534         0.592
        Observations                      9,351,419     9,351,419     9,351,419      9,351,419     9,351,419

                                        Panel B: Levered (80%) Returns
                                                           Levered (80%) Ann Return
                                              (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)
        Single Female                      -0.078***      -0.071***     -0.057***     -0.051***      -0.037***
                                           (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)
        Couple                             -0.099***      -0.071***     -0.043***     -0.038***      -0.015***
                                           (0.002)        (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)
        Holding Length                                                  -0.037***     -0.028***
                                                                        (0.000)       (0.006)
        Zip-SaleYM FE                        No             Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
        Zip-BuyYM FE                         No             No            No            Yes            Yes
        SaleYM FE x BuyYM FE                 No             No            No             No            Yes
        R-squared                           0.004         0.295         0.330          0.482         0.628
        Observations                      9,351,419     9,351,419     9,351,419      9,351,419     9,351,419
Note: This table re-estimates Table 2, using less conservative screens to identify the gender groups single male, single
female, and couple of the owners. These less conservative screens do not require county-years to satisfy certain cut-
offs of single female owner share and couple share (see Section II.B). Standard errors are clustered by zipcode. *,**,
and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                          65
                        Table A2: Housing returns with estimated leverage

                                         Panel A: Unlevered Returns
                                                      Unlevered Ann Return (Post-2000)
                                             (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)
        Single Female                     -0.019***      -0.015***     -0.013***     -0.011***     -0.009***
                                          (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
        Couple                            -0.024***      -0.013***     -0.008***     -0.007***     -0.004***
                                          (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
        Holding Length                                                 -0.010***     -0.005***
                                                                       (0.000)       (0.002)
        Zip-SaleYM FE                        No            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
        Zip-BuyYM FE                         No            No            No            Yes           Yes
        SaleYM FE x BuyYM FE                 No            No            No            No            Yes
        R-squared                          0.005         0.414         0.442         0.589          0.636
        Observations                     5,359,865     5,359,865     5,359,865     5,359,865      5,359,865

                                 Panel B: Levered (Estimated LTV) Returns
                                                    Levered Ann Return (Estimated LTV)
                                             (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)
        Single Female                     -0.095***      -0.082***     -0.065***     -0.060***     -0.035***
                                          (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)
        Couple                            -0.188***      -0.116***     -0.079***     -0.073***     -0.040***
                                          (0.004)        (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)
        Holding Length                                                 -0.075***     -0.084***
                                                                       (0.001)       (0.028)
        Zip-SaleYM FE                        No            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
        Zip-BuyYM FE                         No            No            No            Yes           Yes
        SaleYM FE x BuyYM FE                 No            No            No            No            Yes
        R-squared                          0.002         0.245         0.254         0.380          0.428
        Observations                     5,359,865     5,359,865     5,359,865     5,359,865      5,359,865
Note: This table re-estimates Table 2, using the initial loan-to-value estimates from the underlying Corelogic data
in Panel B. When mortgages are missing in the underlying data, we assume that it is a cash purchase (LTV of 0%).
We restrict the sample in both panels to observations with purchase year in 2000 or later, where there is less missing
mortgage data (see Panel B of Appendix Figure A4). Standard errors are clustered by zipcode. *,**, and *** denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                         66
                                            Table A3: Match rates
                                        Panel A: Overall Match Rates

                                                 Buyer Gender
                 Seller Gender       Single Male Single Female             Couple          Overall
                 Single Male             0.1385             0.0868          0.1010         0.3262
                                        [0.1207]           [0.0830]        [0.1225]
                 Single Female           0.0936             0.0748          0.0752         0.2437
                                        [0.0901]           [0.0620]        [0.0915]
                 Couple                  0.1378             0.0930          0.1993         0.4301
                                        [0.1591]           [0.1095]        [0.1615]
                 Overall                 0.3700             0.2546          0.3755             1



                                   Panel B: Zip-Year-Quarter Match Rates
                                                      Buyer Gender
                 Seller Gender       Single Male       Single Female       Couple          Overall
                 Single Male             0.1503             0.0997          0.1141         0.3372
                                        [0.1400]           [0.0936]        [0.1204]
                 Single Female           0.1032             0.0869          0.0866         0.2535
                                        [0.0990]           [0.0736]        [0.0940]
                 Couple                  0.1533             0.1088          0.2225         0.4642
                                        [0.1596]           [0.1171]        [0.2000]
                 Overall                 0.3799             0.2696          0.3958             1
Note: This table presents the joint probability of a seller of a given gender group matching with a buyer of a given
gender group. The first number in each cell is the empirical match rate as seen in the data. The number in brack-
ets is the theoretical number if match rates were random (using the product of the two marginal empirical rates).
Non-categorized observations (the other category) are excluded from the matching exercise. Panel A pools the full
sample, while Panel B calculates the actual and random match rates at the zip-year-quarter level, and then reports the
unweighted average across zip-year-quarters.




                                                         67
                     Table A4: Housing returns: weighted by holding length

                                         Panel A: Unlevered Returns
                                                              Unlevered Ann Return
                                            (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)
        Single Female                     -0.005***     -0.005***     -0.004***     -0.005***     -0.004***
                                          (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
        Couple                            -0.004***     -0.001***      0.000***     -0.001***      0.000***
                                          (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
        Holding Length                                                -0.002***      0.003***
                                                                      (0.000)       (0.001)
        Zip-SaleYM FE                       No            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
        Zip-BuyYM FE                        No            No            No            Yes           Yes
        SaleYM FE x BuyYM FE                No            No            No            No            Yes
        R-squared                          0.001         0.383         0.388         0.559         0.601
        Observations                     8,933,131     8,933,131     8,933,131     8,933,131     8,933,131

                                       Panel B: Levered (80%) Returns
                                                              Unlevered Ann Return
                                            (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)
        Single Female                     -0.017***     -0.017***     -0.014***     -0.017***     -0.014***
                                          (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
        Couple                            -0.007***     -0.002***      0.004***     -0.001***      0.006***
                                          (0.001)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
        Holding Length                                                -0.007***      0.001
                                                                      (0.000)       (0.003)
        Zip-SaleYM FE                       No            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
        Zip-BuyYM FE                        No            No            No            Yes           Yes
        SaleYM FE x BuyYM FE                No            No            No            No            Yes
        R-squared                          0.000         0.321         0.326         0.509         0.618
        Observations                     8,933,131     8,933,131     8,933,131     8,933,131     8,933,131
Note: This table re-estimates Table 2, weighting each observation by holding length. Standard errors are clustered by
zipcode. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                         68
                           Table A5: Selection of property characteristics


                                        New Construction         Log(House Age)         Log(Sq Ft)
                                                 (1)                     (2)                (3)
              Single Female                     0.003***               -0.021***          -0.066***
                                               (0.000)                 (0.003)            (0.001)
              Couple                            0.033***               -0.137***           0.143***
                                               (0.001)                 (0.004)            (0.002)
              Zip-Year-Month FE                  Yes                     Yes                Yes
              R-squared                         0.271                   0.513              0.445
              Observations                    8,933,131               2,131,508          1,937,762
Note: This table examines gender differences in preferences for property characteristics. Standard errors are clus-
tered by zipcode. The sample is restricted to observations with matched listings data covering the relevant housing
characteristic. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                        69
                                               Table A6: Upgrades


                                 Had Upgrades          Returns (Not Upgraded)             Returns (Upgraded)
                                         (1)                         (2)                             (3)
      Single Female                     -0.010***                   -0.010***                      -0.017***
                                       (0.001)                     (0.000)                        (0.000)
      Couple                            0.000                       -0.009***                      -0.020***
                                       (0.001)                     (0.000)                        (0.001)
      Zip-Year-Month FE                  Yes                         Yes                            Yes
      R-squared                        0.296                       0.415                           0.387
      Observations                   3,432,795                   2,330,733                       1,102,062
Note: Properties are considered to be upgraded if the listing text contain synonyms for upgrades, renovations, new
features, or expansions. Column 1 measures relative upgrade rates across gender groups. Columns 2 and 3 estimate
the gender gap in unlevered annualized returns for subsamples of the data that have not been upgraded or have
been upgraded, respectively. The sample is restricted to observations that are matched to listings with non-missing
property descriptions. Standard errors are clustered by zipcode. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                           70
