                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE ECONOMICS OF NICOTINE CONSUMPTION

                                         Dean R. Lillard

                                       Working Paper 26912
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26912


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Dean R. Lillard. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Economics of Nicotine Consumption
Dean R. Lillard
NBER Working Paper No. 26912
March 2020
JEL No. D8,I1,I12,I18

                                          ABSTRACT

The development of nicotine replacement therapies and e-cigarettes emphasize and highlight that,
in tobacco demand, nicotine is one of, if not, the primary object people want. This chapter
presents a simple model of utility maximization that focuses specifically on nicotine as the object
of interest. It yields a derived demand for a nicotine delivery technology and predictions
researchers can use to account for patterns in consumption over the life-cycle of individuals and
the market as a whole. The model is informed by available evidence about the neurological
effects of nicotine and differences in the relative efficiency and associated physical costs of
nicotine delivery devices, and genetic differences across individuals that partly explains variation
in nicotine consumption. The analysis highlights that one of the key theoretical objects of interest
is the price per unit of nicotine delivered to the brain. The limited empirical literature on e-
cigarettes does not measure that price. All told, economists have much to offer in modeling and
empirically studying demand for the new nicotine delivery products. In addition, a range of
studies could look back, reconfigure prices and measured consumption, to better explain patterns
in historical time-series data on consumption and substitution across different nicotine delivery
devices.


Dean R. Lillard
Department of Human Sciences
The Ohio State University
1787 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
lillard.13@osu.edu
This chapter reframes the economics of smoking and tobacco consumption to focus more
specifically on the economics of nicotine. Chaloupka and Warner (2000) and DeCicca et al.
(2018) review the theoretical and empirical literatures on the economics of smoking and smoking
prevention. The literature they review and the broader and extensive literature on smoking and
tobacco use has always recognized the central role nicotine plays (Burns, 2007; Kluger, 1996).
But those literatures infrequently study demand for nicotine as the central focus. Here I refocus
on the economics of nicotine because recent technological developments emphasize and
highlight that, in tobacco demand, nicotine is one of, if not, the primary object people want. The
new frame makes nicotine a key object of interest because entrepreneurs and scientists have
developed new methods that efficiently deliver nicotine but do not require that people consume
tobacco. Starting in 1984, US consumers could buy newly developed nicotine replacement
therapies that deliver nicotine by chewing gum, lozenge, inhaler, and transdermal patch. The
2006 launch of e-cigarettes introduced delivery of nicotine using a battery-powered device that
vaporizes liquid containing nicotine. Consumers then inhale the steam. This process is
commonly known as "vaping." 1 Vaping liquids can and do contain a wide range of substances
other than nicotine - primarily flavors and tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). 2 Recently, the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) has issued warnings about vaping because some people have injured
their lungs or died after ingesting vapors (Pray et al. 2020). 3 Despite these cases, it is clear that
the vaping technology is here to stay.
     This chapter presents a simple model of utility maximization that focuses specifically on
nicotine as the object of interest. It yields a derived demand for a nicotine delivery technology and
predictions researchers can use to account for patterns in consumption over the life-cycle of
individuals and over time for the market as a whole. The model is informed by available
evidence, both positive and negative, about the neurological effects of nicotine. I draw heavily
from the 2019 book titled Neuroscience of Nicotine that reviews evidence on neurological and
physical effects of nicotine in humans and animal models (Preedy 2019). The model is also
informed by evidence that nicotine delivery technologies differ quite a bit in their relative efficiency
and associated physical costs. This evidence is important because it highlights that one of the key
theoretical objects of interest is the price per unit of nicotine delivered to the brain. To date,
researchers use prices of different tobacco or nicotine delivery products that are, at best, only
crudely comparable. The limited empirical literature on e-cigarettes ignores factors that
researchers can use to approximate the shadow price of nicotine. The model also recognizes and
incorporates the newest evidence that genetic differences across individuals partly explains
variation in nicotine consumption, including smoking behavior. A small but growing literature
exploits genome-wide association studies that generate polygenic scores that measure the

1 The new verb, "vape," entered the common vernacular sufficiently that, in November 2014, Oxford
Dictionaries designated it as "word of the year."
2 THC is the chemical responsible for most of marijuana's psychological effects. Evidence suggests that a

substantial fraction of youth who vape do so with liquids that only contain flavors (Miech et al. 2017).
3 As of January 2020, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has recorded 2,608 cases of lung

injury and 60 deaths. Over 80 percent of cases involved the vaping of liquids containing THC. Only 14
percent involved the vaping of nicotine. Most people got liquids from informal sources. Current evidence
suggests the illnesses might have been caused by vaping liquids contaminated with vitamin E acetate
(Pray et al. 2020).
                                            3
association between genetic variants and various aspects of smoking behavior. Economic models
of nicotine consumption (and of a wide range of other behaviors) will increasingly control for
genetic differences across individuals to estimate price elasticities of demand for nicotine and
cross-price elasticities of substitution between particular nicotine delivery devices (e.g. traditional
cigarettes and e-cigarettes).
       Before presenting the model, I first describe patterns in life-course cigarette smoking (because
it is the technology for which data are available over the longest time span). I review those patterns
in section 1.1 to lay out stylized facts the model must explain. In section 1.2, I review evidence
on the neurological effects of nicotine and available evidence about the costs and benefits of
nicotine consumption at each stage of life. Section 1.3 briefly reviews evidence linking genetic
variation to nicotine consumption. I point interested readers to literature that describes the
methods that researchers use to connect genetic variants to nicotine consumption. I also revisit
the above evidence to highlight that both costs and benefits of nicotine consumption vary with
individual differences in genetic makeup. In section 1.4, I briefly review the history of nicotine
delivery technologies. In section 1.5, I discuss the measurement of the shadow price of a unit of
nicotine. In section 1.5.1 I review evidence of biological processes that generate differences in the
shadow price of a unit of nicotine delivered by a particular device. In section 1.5.2 I review how
the shadow price of nicotine varies across delivery devices because the risk of degrading one's
health varies with the way one ingests nicotine. Both types of factors matter and should shape
how empirical researchers measure the effective price of nicotine. In section 1.6, I lay out a
simple model that incorporates the costs and benefits of nicotine consumption over different
parts of the life-cycle and present the full shadow price of nicotine. I discuss the simple first-
order conditions and, in section 1.6.1, review some of the model's implications. In section 1.7, I
briefly discuss the role of imperfect information. This discussion proposes that consumers are
less likely to know (or be able to make inferences about) particular types of evidence of costs
or benefits of nicotine in particular life-cycle stages. Relaxing the full information assumption
also rationalizes a role for advertising in consumers' nicotine consumption decisions. Section 1.8
highlights selected evidence from the more recent empirical literature studying newer nicotine
delivery technologies. Section 1.8.1 reviews evidence e-cigarettes and smoking cessation.
Section 1.8.2 reviews evidence on the growing trend of simultaneous use of multiple nicotine
delivery methods. Section 1.8.3 reviews the role of taxes and price in substitution between
nicotine delivery methods. Section 1.8.4 relates studies that explore factors that the above model
puts in the shadow price of nicotine. I conclude in section 1.9.

1.1    Life-course patterns of smoking behavior
The model of nicotine consumption must explain patterns of consumption not only of
nicotine but also of traditional methods people use. Here I focus on life-cycle patterns of
cigarette consumption as that was the predominant method of nicotine delivery until recently.
Figure 1 plots the life-course smoking prevalence rate of seven cohorts
Figure 1. Life-cycle smoking prevalence of 7 cohorts of US men and women



                                           4
Reproduced from Lillard (2015). Data source: Tobacco Use Supplement to the Current Population Survey (TUS-
CPS). 1967, 1968, 1985, 1989, 1992, 1993, 1995, 1996, 1998­2003, 2006, 2007. Washington, DC: US Census
Bureau.
of US men and women. Patterns for both men and women show three stylized facts the model
must explain. First, most people start smoking regularly between the age of 13 and 26 (Lillard et
al. 2013). 4 Second, smoking prevalence peaks around age 25. Third, after age 25, patterns of
smoking prevalence begin to diverge across cohorts and especially for women. Further, as Lillard
and Christopoulou and colleagues show, one observes strikingly similar patterns of life-course
smoking initiation and peak smoking prevalence in ten developed and developing countries
(Lillard and Christopoulou, 2015). The countries differ in their languages, cultures, policy
environments, and attitudes about smoking. At the same time, one observes differences. For
example, patterns for women in older cohorts differ much more relative to men than do patterns
for women and men in younger cohorts. In the youngest cohorts, life-course patterns of smoking
prevalence of women and men are nearly indistinguishable. Consequently, the model of nicotine
consumption must be rich enough to explain the patterns observed over time, between countries,
and across demographic groups. It must also explain cross-sectional and longitudinal patterns in
the nicotine delivery method people choose.
   The model must be informed by plausible reasons that explain why people might rationally
consume nicotine. To date, the literature offers hypotheses and evidence to answer the related but
different question, "Why do people smoke?" Many of the factors already identified as predictive
of smoking belong in a model of the demand for nicotine. The literature has already identified
4Shown in multiple and independently drawn US samples (Harris, 1983; Burns et al., 1998; Lillard et al.
2013; Christopoulou and Lillard, 2016)
                                             5
neurological effects of nicotine as a key factor. Researchers also suggest a role for psycho-social
factors. For example, it is common to suggest that youth smoke may smoke as a form of
rebellion (Jarvis 2004), to take risks (Burt et al., 2000), as a coping mechanism to deal with
anxiety (Patton et al., 1998), or because it is behavior one needs to join a social group (Simons-
Morton and Farhat, 2010). Jarvis (2004) (and others) also suggests that people continue to smoke
(have difficulty quitting) because they get addicted to nicotine. Still other suggest that people
start and continue to smoke because they are myopic, less than fully informed, or have
hyperbolic discount rates (Avery et al. 2007; Lillard, 2017; Gruber and Koszegi, 2001).
1.2 Life-cycle costs and benefits of nicotine
To properly model the economics of nicotine, one must understand the costs and benefits of
nicotine consumption at each age over the life-cycle. The scientific community is still
discovering evidence about those costs and benefits. In this review, drawn largely from
Preedy (2019), I focus on evidence from studies that use animal models to understand the
neurological effects of nicotine. Observational data from humans includes selection effects
that make it difficult to identify causal effects of nicotine. I also emphasize studies that
expose the animals (typically rats or mice) to nicotine (or cotinine) rather than studies that
expose them to tobacco smoke. 5 An obvious point bears repeating - no single survey can
adequately summarize the extensive body of evidence on the effects of nicotine. This brief
survey is incomplete and it is possible, even likely, that countervailing evidence exists.
     With those caveats, the evidence suggests three main conclusions that broadly inform an
economic model of nicotine consumption. First, exposure to nicotine results in both positive
and negative neurological effects. Second, the effects vary by age of exposure and sex. Third,
unsurprisingly, effects depend on the quantity consumed. Unless otherwise noted, I discuss
evidence from studies that expose animals (mice, rats, and monkeys) to nicotine at various life-
cycle stages.
     Exposure to nicotine in utero harms fetal development (Chen et al. 2019). In animal models,
exposure to nicotine reduces blood flow in the uterus, lowers the delivery of nutrients and
oxygen to the fetus and results in low birth weight. Exposure to nicotine also affects the growth
and development of nerve tissue, formation of synapses between neurons, causes long-lasting
abnormalities in neurotransmitter signaling, and cognitive deficits in later life (Alkam and
Nabeshima, 2019).
     Nicotine exposure in adolescence has both negative and positive effects (Izenwasser 2019).
Rats exposed to nicotine in adolescence will self-administer two to three times as much nicotine
when they are adults as will rats first exposed to nicotine as adults. Evidence also suggests that
effects of nicotine exposure in adolescence vary by sex. Male, but not female, rats exposed daily
to nicotine as adolescents increase their loco-motor activity and, with repeated exposure, the
response to nicotine neither diminishes nor increases. The latter effect, labeled sensitization in
studies of psychostimulants, does occur in adults. Sensitization implies that, to get the same
increase in loco-motor activity, adult male rats need less nicotine. However, other studies show
that when male rats consume nicotine in adolescence, they become more sensitive to alcohol,
cocaine, and amphetamines as adults. That implies that even a small experimental dose might

5In the section on choice of nicotine delivery method, I briefly summarize the evidence on negative effects
of exposure to the by-product of each delivery method (e.g. cigarette smoke).
                                            6
lead them to addiction. However, the evidence from animal studies is mixed. Some studies using
mice found that nicotine administration decreased cocaine addiction (Kelley & Middaugh, 1999;
Kelley & Rowan, 2004; cited in Izenwasser 2019). Bajrektarevic et al. (2019) review studies of
nicotine delivered to humans using transdermal patches. Those studies find that subjects
experienced improved attention, information processing, memory, perception, and vigor with
minimal side effects.
      Evidence suggests that exposure to nicotine (and its primary metabolite cotinine) in
adulthood also has positive and negative effects (Brown and Gill, 2019; Echeverria and Zietlin,
2019; Hritcu and Mihasan, 2019). Evidence from animal models suggest that exposure to
nicotine and/or nicotinic agonists have also been shown to increase receptor expression of a
family of biomolecules in mammalian brains important to the growth, survival, differentiation,
and maintenance of developing and mature neurons (Koskela et al., 2017). Although this effect
potentially strengthens neuronal connections (Tyler, Perrett, & Pozzo-Miller, 2002) there is also
evidence that it is through this process that nicotine consumption is a double-edged sword. In its
role as an agonist at the nicotinic acetylcholinergic receptors (nAChR), nicotine causes the brain
to release more dopamine. The process cuts two ways because the additional dopamine raises
the probability of addiction but also increases overall neuronal activity in these regions in ways
that improves cognition in animal models of Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease; reduces
Alzheimer type plaques; mitigates cognitive loss after brain injury; decreases neuro-
inflammation associated with several neurological disorders; 6 and improves or prevents
symptoms of diseases. 7 Some of these findings are supported by post-mortem autopsy of
humans. An autopsy of smokers and non smokers found fewer senile plaques in female smokers
and more neurofibrillary tangles in patients who had smoked more (Ulrich et al. 1997).
Postmortem studies of Alzheimer patients who smoked compared to nonsmoking patients find
fewer beta-amyloid peptides, which are toxic to neurons (Hritcu and Mihasan, 2019).
      Echeverria and Zeitlin's (2019) survey of the effects of cotinine concludes that exposure at
different ages has positive effects. They note that a broad set of studies establish that cotinine
promotes higher cognitive functioning, improves memory, reduces anxiety, depression and
depressive behavior, mitigates symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder, and diminishes
contextual fear in mice, rats, and monkeys.
      All of the above suggests that people may demand nicotine partly because it confers positive
benefits. It is likely that people learn about some, but not, of the above effects through
experience.
      There is evidence that people use nicotine to medicate. Even across nicotine delivery
methods that differ widely in the amount of nicotine each makes available to the body, people
still only consume nicotine up to a given and fairly constant ceiling (daily intake of nicotine per
kilogram of body weight) (Gori and Lynch, 1985; Kozlowski et al. ). Gori and Lynch argue that,
because one observes the same parallel distributions of plasma nicotine and cotinine across
products with all Federal Trade Commission measured nicotine levels, the pattern of ceiling
nicotine levels is less likely to result from metabolic differences in the rate of excretion and more
likely due to individual differences in nicotine demand and how people use each method to
satisfy it. Evidence supports this observation. Smokers of low nicotine cigarettes adjust how they

6   Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, schizophrenia, major depressive disorder, and bipolar disorder.
7   Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, brain injury, memory impairment and neuro-inflammation
                                              7
    smoke low nicotine cigarettes to achieve blood nicotine levels comparable to the level they attain
    smoking cigarettes of higher nicotine content. (Benowitz 2001).
         I note again that the above discussion barely scratches the surface of an extensive literature
    on the effects of nicotine and cotinine. The 50-plus surveys in Preedy (2019) cite several
    thousand published articles and still only represent a fraction of published work. The point for
    economists is to realize that strong evidence documents that people who consume nicotine
    (cotinine) get physiological benefits and pay health costs. Because these benefits and costs vary
    systematically over the life cycle, one can model them. The fact that it will be difficult or
    impossible for people to know or recognize some of the effects suggests that assumptions about
    perfect information will usually be inappropriate. Other effects people can observe through self-
    observation. In modeling consumption of nicotine theoretically, it is critical to review and
    understand those effects (as best one can) so that one can predict the theoretically optimal time
    path of consumption and so that one can understand how and why, in observational data, people
    might deviate from that optimal path.
;
    1.3 Genetic variation and nicotine consumption
    An economic model of nicotine consumption can and should incorporate a role for genetic
    makeup. Since the mapping of the human genome in 2000, geneticists, neuroscientists, and
    social scientists have rapidly progressed in our understanding of the connection between genetic
    variants at particular locations on the genome, social and economic behaviors. 8 This advance
    includes a growing understanding of specific locations on the genome at which people differ that
    are associated with either observed smoking behavior or with neurological structures and
    functions that interacts with nicotine. In both cases, differences across people at these genetic
    variants (called single nucleotide polymorphisms or SNPs), predict differences in smoking
    behavior. The science is still evolving on understanding the complex processes that connect the
    SNP variants with smoking but, especially for smoking, evidence strongly suggests that genetic
    factors influence the number, operation, and efficiency of receptors in the brain to which nicotine
    attaches.
       For example, studies reviewed by Namba et al. (2019) establish that the majority of SNPs
    associated with nicotine-related phenotypes involve nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR)
    genes. The nAChR genes are associated with nicotine dependence, lung cancer, other cardio-
    pulmonary diseases, and whether smokers successfully quit. For some of those SNPs, studies
    identify the likely biological pathway. For example, even before the mapping of the genome,
    researchers established that 42 nAChRs are densely expressed in the brain's dopamine reward
    pathway and that they directly regulate nicotine addiction and dependence (Epping-Jordan,
    Picciotto, Changeux, & Pich, 1999; Tapper et al., 2004). Eggan and McCallum (2019) review
    studies showing that, when nicotine binds with the 34 nAChR, nicotine likely causes the
    release of glutamate in the primary reward pathways. Glutamate plays a central role in processes
    believed to underlie how addiction develops and gets maintained (Tzschentke and Schmidt,
    2003).

    8Scientists announced the working draft of the genome, covering about 80 percent of the genome, in June
    2000. The human genome project was declared to be complete in April 2003 but it covered about 92
    percent of the genome to the accuracy criterion established by the project (Schmutz et al. 2004). Work
    continues to the present.
                                              8
   Genetic differences may also influence the rate at which an individual metabolizes nicotine.
When nicotine metabolizes at a slower rate, an individual experiences the effect of a given input
of nicotine longer. As importantly, he extracts more nicotine from a given dose than people who
metabolize nicotine faster.
   A full model of nicotine consumption should include the role genetics plays in how nicotine
operates to create both costs and benefits not only because it is theoretically important but also
because, increasingly, major social science surveys collect the data needed for empirical studies.
The surveys collect individual data on both genetic variants and (some) types of nicotine
consumption (usually cigarette consumption). US surveys include the Health and Retirement
Study, Wisconsin Longitudinal Study, and the National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent
Health. Including data on nicotine-related genetic variants will not only capture previously
unexplained individual variation associated with nicotine costs and benefits but will also allow
researchers to explore whether demand for nicotine in response to policies is heterogeneous
across the distribution of genetic variants.

1.4 Nicotine delivery technologies
The new focus on nicotine consumption must also explain the method consumers choose to get
nicotine into their blood and brain. I label these methods as nicotine delivery technologies. The
simplest way for the model to predict which method people choose is to recognize the variation
in the relative costs and benefits associated with each method. A model that recognizes those
differences can use temporal variation in the available nicotine delivery technologies to explain
the relative demand for nicotine delivered by each method.
   Incorporating this source of variation into the model has an added advantage. The new
nicotine delivery technologies are recent enough that the consumption behaviors in above survey
data span the whole period over which major new technologies were developed.
   Until recently, people got nicotine from tobacco by smoking (cigarettes, cigars, pipes, water
pipes), chewing, or sniffing it. 9 A seventh delivery technology, gum, became commercially
available in the US in 1984. 10 The FDA approved an eighth delivery technology, the transdermal
patch, as a way to deliver drugs through the skin in 1979 but did not approve it as a way to
deliver nicotine until 1992. In 1996 and 1998, the FDA approved a ninth and tenth delivery
technology, the nicotine nasal spray and a nicotine inhaler respectively (CDC 2000). In 1999, the
FDA approved the sale of an eleventh delivery technology, nicotine sublingual tablets. In 2002,
the FDA approved a twelfth delivery technology - a nicotine lozenge. In 2006, firms introduced
vaping to US consumers, counted here as the thirteenth nicotine delivery technology. Finally, in
2010, the FDA approved the fourteenth technology, a nicotine mouth spray.

1.5 Defining the shadow price of nicotine
The shadow price of nicotine is the pecuniary and non pecuniary cost of a unit of nicotine
delivered successfully into the blood stream (brain). The pecuniary cost of a unit of delivered
nicotine equals the price of a standard unit of a nicotine product (cigarettes, cigars, nicotine

9A much rarer delivery method was a tobacco smoke enema described in Sydenham (1809).
10A medicated-chewing-gum was commercially introduced in 1928 (Conway 2003). It was adapted to
deliver nicotine in 1971 (Brantmark et al. 1973; Fernö 1973) but not commercially launched until 1978.
                                            9
liquid) divided by the amount of nicotine that a consumer actually gets when he consumes that
product. The non pecuniary cost is the social cost (or desirability) of a given nicotine delivery
                                                                                         
mechanism. The shadow price of a unit of nicotine delivered by device j at time t,  , is given
by:
                                          
                                                     
                                 =            +                (1.1)
                                          
                                                                                                 
where the first term measures the money price per unit of delivered nicotine. The numerator,  ,
is the price of a unit of the nicotine containing product delivered by device j. The denominator is
the amount of nicotine delivered to the blood when a person uses delivery method j. It is raw
nicotine in product j,  , times the fraction that gets absorbed into a person's blood,  , under
normal use That is,  , measures the efficiency of the nicotine delivery device. Across products,
  varies substantially. For a given product,   is usually, but not always constant over short
time spans. However, even for a given product,   can differ over time. The introduction of
low nicotine cigarettes is an obvious example.
                             
     The second term,  , is an index of the social desirability associated with a particular
nicotine delivery technology. No single data source measures social desirability but some
researchers use approximations of it. For example, Kim and Shanahan (2003) find that when
smoking stigma is higher in a given state, smokers are more likely to quit. DeCicca et al (2008)
use a similar index in a model of smoking. More generally, the social desirability index could
(should) not only be a function of public sentiments about particular types of smoking (e.g.
sentiment against cigar smoke) but also advertising of all types that try to create a positive image
in the public's mind about particular nicotine delivery devices. Further, manufacturers actively
seek to place tobacco products into films, television programs, and video games to shape
viewer's attitudes about the products. Evidence suggests the product placements have the
intended effects. Gibson and Maurer (2000) show that viewers have more positive attitudes about
smoking when a lead movie actor is shown smoking. Glass (2007) shows that video game
players, experimentally assigned to play games in which branded products appear, are more
likely to rate products as good, and do so more quickly, than are players assigned to play games
in which no products appear. These observations suggest that, when constructing the shadow
price of each nicotine delivery device, economists should try to capture the broader factors of
social stigma, advertising, and product placement that belong in the shadow price.
     Below I will explicitly derive a third component of the shadow price. That term will capture,
in monetary units, the life-time health cost of increasing consumption of nicotine by one unit at
time t. For now, define the price of a unit of delivered nicotine at time t as the lowest available
price across all nicotine delivery methods that are available.

1.5.1 Efficiency of nicotine delivery
     The efficiency of the nicotine delivery device,  , is largely determined by the part of the
body which primarily absorbs the nicotine. When a consumer smokes cigarettes or vapes, he
absorbs nicotine mostly through his lungs. People who chew tobacco, use moist snuff (snus),
nicotine inhalers, lozenges, or mouth spray, or smoke cigars, pipes or water pipes absorb most of
their nicotine through the buccal mucosal membranes (i.e. in the mouth). People who use nasal
                                         10
spray and dry snuff absorb nicotine through the nasal mucous membranes. The transdermal patch
delivers nicotine through skin.
     Table 1 lists, for each product, the amount of nicotine in the usual dose, the peak nicotine
level a consumer experiences, and the fraction of nicotine that is absorbed (termed
bioavailability). These technologies also differ in how rapidly the body absorbs nicotine. Speed
of absorption depends not only on the site in the body but also, for tobacco products, on the pH
of the tobacco. For example, the body delivers nicotine to the brain more slowly when it is
mostly absorbed through the buccal mucosa compared to the alveolar surfaces of the lung
(Benowitz, 1988). Partly because of this, when people burn tobacco or use an inhaler, the
absorption rate varies with whether or not, and how deeply, one inhales.
     Benowitz (1993) documents how several of the delivery methods differ in the associated
nicotine absorption rate. He compares nicotine absorption from smokeless tobacco, cigarettes,
oral snuff, and nicotine gum. People absorb nicotine from smokeless tobacco more slowly than
from cigarette smoke but the two methods produce similar peak venous levels. Nicotine blood

 Table 1. Nicotine bioavailability and physical harm associated with delivery methods

 Delivery method         Absorb.     Dose     Nicotine       Peak     Bioavailability Harma
                            site     (avg.) (mg) /dose (ng/ml)           (percent)
 Cigarettes 1             Lungs        1g        1.0          25.9         80-90           99.6
 Small cigars2            Mouth 1 cigar       5.8-8.2/g       21.4         75-99            67
 Pipes  3                 Mouth 1 bowl          14.4/g          4           29  b
                                                                                            21
 Cigars4                  Mouth 1 cigar         12.0/g      3.4-5.2          29             15
 Water pipes  5           Mouth     12.5 g        32          11.7            8             14
 Smokeless tobacco1 Mouth             7.9 g      4.5          14.5           3.4            12
 Snuff1                    Nose       1.4 g      3.6          18.5           14             ---
 E-cigarettes 6           Lungs     1 dose     15.9/ml          9            91              4
 Patch7                    Skin     1 patch   15/16 hr       11-14        75-100             2
       7
 Gum                      Mouth 1 piece          2.0           7.5           78              2
 Lozenge7                 Mouth 1 piece          4.0          10.8           79              2
              7
 Nasal spray               Nose     1 dose       1.0          5-8          60-80             2
 Inhaler (deep)7          Lungs     1 dose       3.9          34.2           56              2
                   7
 Inhaler (shallow)        Mouth 1 dose           4.0          32.0           51              2
 a
   Estimated by Nutt et al. (2014) using multiple criteria decision analysis; ranked relative to
 harm associated with cigarettes. Study did not include snuff.
 b
   Bioavailability rate of cigar smokers.
 Sources: 1 Benowitz (1993), Holm et al. (1992), Temple (1976) ; 2 Armitage et al. (1978),
 Claus et al. (2018); 3 McCusker and McNabb (1982); 4 Fant and Henningfield (1998),
 Hoffmann and Hoffmann (1998); 5 Jacob et al. (2011); 6 St. Helen et al. (2015), Yingst et al.
 (2019); 7 Hukkanen et al. (2005), Molander et al. (1996)

levels drop quickly when a person stops smoking a cigarette, but stay elevated during and after a
person chews tobacco. The nicotine in average doses of chewing tobacco (7.9 g) and snuff (2.5
g) were 4.5 and 3.6 mg, respectively, and 1.0 mg per 1 gram of tobacco in the average cigarette.
                                         11
Benowitz (1993) estimated average systemic bioavailability of nicotine to be 12.0 percent, 14.0
percent, and 3.4 percent for cigarette smoke, oral snuff, and chewing tobacco, respectively.
When people smoke small cigars, peak plasma nicotine and bioavailability is approximately the
same as cigarettes (Claus et al. 2018). Peak plasma nicotine is lower for cigars because cigar
smokers seldom inhale (Fant and Henningfield, 1998; Hoffmann and Hoffmann, 1998).
     By contrast, Yingst et al. (2019) estimate that, when people vape using e-cigarettes, they get
an average of 1.33 mg of nicotine and 93.8% of the inhaled dose. They concluded that e-
cigarettes can deliver levels of nicotine comparable to or higher than typical tobacco cigarettes,
with similar systemic retention. The bioavailability of nicotine is roughly the same as e-cigarettes
when delivered by transdermal patches (though absorption is slower) while bioavailability of
other nicotine replacement therapies - gum, lozenges, and nasal spray - is at least ten percentage
points lower (Hukkanen et al. 2005). Molander et al. (1996) estimate that, when people use
nicotine inhalers, they absorb nicotine either via their mouth (if they do not inhale) or lungs (if
they inhale). On average, these two methods exposed people to 4.00 and 3.87 mg of nicotine
respectively. Mean peak plasma level was 32.0 and 34.2 ng/ml respectively. On average,
bioavailability of nicotine from an inhaler was 51 and 56 percent respectively.

1.5.2 Physical cost associated with nicotine delivery devices
      The last column of Table 1 lists a physical harm index for each technology. The index,
described in Nutt et al. (2014), ranks each method by the physical harm associated with it.
Briefly, a group of experts ranked twelve product types according to a weighted average of 14
types of harm each might cause. The broad set of harm criteria include harm that the consumer
experiences, harm to close family members (e.g. people exposed to second-hand smoke),
community, and the broader society (e.g. loss of productivity). The group rated harm in terms of
mortality and morbidity, injury to others, economic losses and environmental harm.
      Although the Nutt et al. harm index is cross-sectional, the underlying data varies over time.
One can use them to construct a time-varying index and use it to explain the share of nicotine
consumers get from each technology. Christopoulou and Lillard (2016) use something that
crudely approximates such an index and provide evidence that it adds predictive power. They
standardize cigarette consumption by the average number of cigarettes consumed and the average
tar content of the cigarettes. They show that the standardized smoking prevalence rate better
predicts a given cohort's smoking related future mortality (in thirty years) than the unadjusted
rate.
      Note also that the degradation of health also unfolds over time. Table 2 draws on evidence,
 Table 2. Disease prevalence at age 60, by smoking status, age started
                               Heart disease      Rheumatoid arthritis              COPD
 Group                      Men       Women        Men         Women           Men     Women
 Smokers (13-17)             16          12         10            11            4        12
 Smokers (18-22)             11           9          8            11            4         7
 Non smokers                  5           5          5             8            2         3
 Source: Chen (2003)
reported in Chen (2003), on how smokers and non smokers differ in the prevalence of three of
the most common diseases associated with smoking ­ rheumatoid arthritis, heart disease, and
                                         12
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) which includes chronic bronchitis and
emphysema.
     Chen (2003) reports that, at age 30, there are few differences in the prevalence of all three
diseases among smokers and non smokers of both sexes. By age 40, the prevalence rate of all
three diseases among smokers exceed rates of non smokers. The differences continue to grow so
that, by age 60 the prevalence rate of the diseases of smokers exceeds that of non smokers by
between 37 and 300 percent (see Table 2).
     In sum, all three components of the shadow price vary with device-specific and individual-
specific factors. Economists can exploit that variation to predict the fraction of people who use a
particular nicotine delivery device and how much nicotine people consume.
1.6 A model of lifetime utility with nicotine
The model assumes that individuals seek to maximize their lifetime utility. In every period,
consumers choose how much to consume of the composite good and their mental and physical
health. To produce mental and physical health, consumers choose nicotine and medical inputs.
Each person discounts his future utility by each his consumption rate of time preference. In a
given period, a person's (remaining) life-time utility is given by:

                         = =0 [ ,  ,  ;  ()]
                                             -
                                                                      (1.2)

where Ct denotes the composite consumption good; Mt and Ht denote the mental and
physical health production functions, respectively; () is the function that translates
genetic make-up into preferences; and  denotes the consumption rate of time
preference.
     Health of each type is a function of the stock carried from the previous period and
investments of nicotine, Nt, and purchased health inputs, It, (e.g. medical care). Note that the
effect of nicotine on each type of health varies systematically with a person's genes associated
with the processing and interactions with nicotine,  ( ). In each period, mental and physical
health is given by:

                     = -1 ,  ( ),  ;  ,  ,  (),  
                     = -1 ,  ( ),  ;  ,  ,  (),   (1.3)

where d[·] is a depreciation process specific to each type of health. t and t denote
shocks to mental and physical health respectively.
     This structure allows a person's mental health and physical health to evolve differently over
various life-cycle periods. For example, while most youth are physically robust during puberty,
the hormonal changes that occur during those years can affect their mental health. Similarly, at
older ages, physical health may decline faster than mental health. The two types of health are
likely to co-evolve and may follow similar trends. In addition, each type of health depreciates at
a rate that depends on calendar time (e.g. to capture changes in medical technology), age, At,
genetic make-up, (), and accumulated mental and physical health.
     Available evidence, reviewed above, suggests that nicotine can affect mental and physical
health positively and negatively depending on when a person consumes it (or gets exposed to it).
                                        13
Consequently, the marginal effects of nicotine and purchased health inputs vary with the age (or
calendar time) at which a person consumes them. I fix the initial levels for mental and physical
health (0 ; 0 ) and end conditions ( ;  ) respectively. As in Grossman (1972), a person
dies if his physical health falls below some minimum ( ) but a person can reach the end of
life with high or low mental health.
     Consumers cannot consume more than their resources allow at exogenously given prices and
a rate of interest, r. Resources available every period are given by:

                        = (1 + )-1 -   -   -                              (1.4)

where PCt, PNt, and PIt denote the price of consumption, nicotine, and health inputs respectively.
The equilibrium also depends on initial and end conditions for assets (0 and   respectively).
     The model yields a first-order condition showing that, to consume nicotine optimally,
consumers consider three key factors. First, consumers must consider whether and how nicotine
affects current mental and physical health. Second, consumers must consider whether and how a
change in current health affects the evolution of future health. Third, consumers must balance the
benefits of nicotine against the price they pay, in terms of money and degraded mental or
physical health. The first-order condition for nicotine is given by:
                  ()               ()           +1            
                        - + -1
                            =+1         -1
                                        =              -   +
                                                                
                                                                                      (1.5)
            ()             () -1 +1 - 
                  - +   -1
                        =+1  =                              -  = 0
                                      


      The terms inside the upper and lower brackets respectively capture the sum of the marginal
utility from increasing mental and physical health by one unit. This sum consists of the direct
marginal utility from changing health today plus the cumulative marginal utility of health in each
future period that accrues if and when a change in current health affects future health. Although I
have subsumed it here, remember that the model allows the health effect of nicotine to vary
systematically with individual differences in genetic make-up.
      To estimate empirically the consumption of nicotine, one needs to identify which terms in
(1.5) constitute marginal benefits and which terms constitute marginal costs. PNt is the marginal
cost of a (delivered) unit of nicotine. But, as noted above, the effect of nicotine on mental and
physical health likely varies over the life course. So it is not obvious whether the two other terms
are costs or benefits. The terms in brackets are both positive (utility increases with improvements
in mental and physical health) so consumption of nicotine increases utility only when nicotine
improves mental or physical health, i.e. when  ,  > 0 respectively.
                                                                   
      Note also that absolute value or sign of these derivatives can change with technological
shocks. The introduction of filtered cigarettes, discovery of combination chemotherapy as a
cancer treatment, and development of e-cigarettes are three examples of such shocks. These
technological shocks have generally been to reduce the negative effects associated with
particular nicotine delivery methods. The temporal variation in them offers empirical researchers
a way to revisit demand for nicotine and changes in demand for particular nicotine delivery
methods.
                                         14
      Collecting the negative terms, one can restate the shadow price of a unit of nicotine, across
all J nicotine delivery devices available at time t, as:
                                                    
                                
                                                         ()
  =                 =               +         -               ( )(1 + )-(-)      (1.6)
                                                        
                                                    =

Where the last term captures all of the degradations in mental and physical health associated with
nicotine consumption delivered by device j. The term  ( ) is the money value of an
improvement in health at every age. Note that this value is also likely to vary over time. People
who demand nicotine will choose delivery method j in year t if it satisfies (1.6).

1.6.1 Implications
The above model yields several testable predictions. It predicts who will demand nicotine, how
much they will demand, and the nicotine delivery method they will choose. I list a few here.
Initiation: Unlike the Becker and Murphy (1988) model of rational addiction, this model yields
testable predictions about who is likely to start smoking. Because nicotine is known to reduce
anxiety and mood swings and because the health costs of smoking take a long time to
accumulate, the model predicts that youth going through puberty are more likely to start
smoking. The model also predicts that any shock to mental health (e.g. marital problems,
divorce, unemployment, natural disasters) will also lead people to start smoking or, in the case of
former smokers, relapse and re-start.
Level/intensity of nicotine consumption: A nice feature of the model is that people the previous
finding about a ceiling on consumption of nicotine flows from the biological processes that
naturally imply decreasing productivity of marginal units of nicotine. In addition, because
nicotine is used to affect mental and physical health, it implies a natural ceiling on consumption.
Such ceilings are observed in data on cigarette consumption.
      This observation suggests that changes in technology that lower the shadow price of nicotine
will lead to only marginal changes in any given individual's nicotine consumption but will
increase the aggregate consumption of nicotine because it will induce people, previously priced
out of the nicotine market by the negative health effects, to consume again.
Choice of delivery device: The model also predicts the factors that will determine the nicotine
delivery device a new consumer will choose in any given period. The driving factor is the
shadow price of getting nicotine from a particular device. As noted, the shadow price varies over
time with the money price, the bioavailability of nicotine a device delivers, the social costs (or
benefits) associated with a particular device, and the mental and health degradation suffered
when using the device. Variation in each of these factors yields testable predictions.
      For example, a reduction in the money price of a particular delivery device that does not
change the medical effects of nicotine will increase the share of nicotine delivered by the cheaper
delivery device. A reduction in the health degradation costs of a particular delivery device will
also shift demand to the lower health cost delivery device. That prediction is not unique to this
model. It flows from basic economic theory but the prediction is repeatedly borne out as new
technologies reduced the health costs of consuming nicotine. For example, the introduction of
filtered cigarettes in 1954 led to a dramatic substitution from plain-tipped to filter-tipped

                                         15
cigarettes (Hammond and Garfinkel, 1964). While the market for e-cigarettes and nicotine
vaping liquids is still developing, similar patterns are emerging (Marynak et al. 2017).
      The model also points to factors that can explain recent empirical findings that the price
elasticity of smoking participation is falling in recent years (Hansen et al. 2017). While the
money price of cigarettes has been steadily increasing since about 1983 (Lillard et al. 2013), the
development of new nicotine delivery devices has caused a change in the composition of people
who choose to smoke cigarettes.
Substitution between delivery devices: The model also predicts patterns of substitution between
nicotine delivery devices (among individuals who choose to consume nicotine). Note that model
predicts the conditions under which there will continue to be a market for traditional nicotine
delivery devices (cigarettes, cigars, snus, chewing tobacco, snuff, water pipes). Those markets
will persist if people face relatively low social stigma when they use a particular device and
when there is a social benefit to using a particular device. These aspects of the shadow price of
each device vary with advertising, public perceptions (social norms), information, and marketing
(product placement) that can vary across demographic groups and regions. For example, in rural
areas there is less social stigma associated with chewing tobacco.
      More generally, the model suggests that it would be useful to revisit basic data on the sale
of different nicotine delivery methods, adjust them to reflect the bioavailability of nicotine and
the negative health effects associated with each. A model of demand for nicotine would then use
temporal and individual variation in those factors and social stigma associated with each type of
device to predict patterns of and changes in consumption and demand for each device. The
growing availability of data that include not only consumption but also individual genetic
makeup means that researchers can also capture individual heterogeneity in demand for nicotine
that arises because of individual differences in genetic variants associated with nicotine
consumption.
Smoking cessation: The model also predicts that decisions to quit smoking depend principally
on the underlying mental and physical health conditions affected by nicotine. Economic factors
such as information and taxes induce marginal smokers to quit. As observed above, nicotine can
improve or degrade physical health and these effects vary over the life-cycle. Consistent with the
patterns shown in Figure 1, most people start smoking between the ages of 13 and 25, a period
during which youth experience large hormonal changes, mood swings, and significant transitions
in life situations. Note that, in most cases, these conditions persist for some number of years.
That year-on-year persistence means the underlying demand for nicotine also persists year-on-
year. The consequence of that persistence is the appearance of addiction (as posited in Becker
and Murphy (1988). However, in this model people demand not because they are addicted but
because the underlying conditions persist. Conversely, the model predicts that people will quit
when those conditions get resolved (or can be treated in other ways).
      The model predicts the pattern in the life-course smoking prevalence in Figure 1. The
emerging field of Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging is
accumulating evidence that the adolescent brain is still maturing through adolescence and into
young adulthood. Paus (2005) observes that "Smooth flow of information throughout the brain
depends, to a great extent on the structural integrity and maturity of white-matter pathway." That
maturation process slows significantly after age 25, consistent with peak smoking prevalence
around age 25 for men and women across multiple cohorts shown in Figure 1 (and in multiple
                                        16
developed countries) (Lillard 2015; Lillard and Christopoulou 2015). The model predicts that
smokers will quit as underlying conditions get resolved as they age and mature. Any factors that
raises anxiety or stress will reduce the probability a smoker quits or cause ex-smokers to smoke
again. These predictions are consistent with findings that rates of smoking increase when
unemployment rates increase (Everding and Marcus, 2020; De Vogli and Santinello, 2005). The
same will be true for other life-course shocks (divorce, death of loved ones, chronic illnesses
etc). These observable and plausibly exogenous events affect mental health and, through that
mechanism, the demand for nicotine.

1.7    Deviations from full information
The above model assumes people possess full information about things they are unlikely to
know. Because the model allows the effect of nicotine to vary with life-cycle age, it generates
specific predictions about whether and at what ages uninformed people will consume too little or
too much nicotine. For example, during the 1950s and earlier, doctors and consumers knew
much less about how smoking affects fetal brain development and cognition in the short and long
run. Consequently, less informed pregnant women smoked more than they would have under full
information. On the flip side, neuroscientists are still trying to understand the potentially positive
effects of nicotine on loco-motor activity, concentration, reducing depression, formation of beta
amyloid plaques, neuro-inflammation, onset and progression of Alzheimer's and Parkinson's
disease. If those connections are true then uninformed people may be consuming too little
nicotine.
     The empirical evidence is mixed on how much nicotine consumption deviates from the
optimal level because people are not fully informed. Viscusi (1990) finds that smokers and
nonsmokers overestimate the lung cancer risk of cigarette smoking. Lillard (2017) shows that
smokers are more likely to quit when exposed to articles about the health risks of smoking
published in popular consumer magazines. If, as in Viscusi's study, people overestimate their
risks, providing full information would increase smoking.
     The model predicts that less than fully informed people will alter their consumption of
nicotine when they get new information that they believe (regardless of whether or not the
information is scientifically valid). One can similarly study how demand for nicotine (from
particular devices) varies with information on the relative risks of using each device (a la the
harm index shown in Table 1) to first the assumption that people hold accurate beliefs and then
to test how their consumption varies with the arrival of new information.

1.8 Interpreting existing literature
The recent empirical literature has begun to describe whether the use of e-cigarettes is associated
with higher rates of smoking cessation, patterns of use and dual use of traditional and newly
emerging nicotine delivery devices. An even smaller literature models demand for nicotine
replacement therapies, e-cigarettes (vaping liquids), and the effects of prices and emerging taxes
and usage bans on e-cigarettes and vaping liquids on substitution between traditional cigarettes
and e-cigarettes. Finally, I relate a strand of the empirical literature that explores factors that
broadly fit the social cost factor in the shadow price I describe above. I briefly review these
literatures, relate them to the model, and highlight areas that researchers might measure better the
theoretically indicated factors.
                                          17
1.8.1 E-cigarette and smoking cessation
Recent studies show with both longitudinal and cross-sectional data that people who use e-
cigarettes smoked fewer cigarettes on the average day, were twice as likely to attempt to quit
smoking cigarettes, and 1.6 to 8 times more likely to have quit cigarettes in the past 30 days as
non users of e-cigarettes (Berry et al. 2019; Johnson et al. 2019; Zhu et al. 2017). Hajek et al.
(2019) conclude that smokers assigned to use e-cigarettes were more likely to abstain from
smoking after one year than smokers assigned to nicotine replacement therapies.
1.8.2 Patterns of "polytobacco" consumption and substitution
While a growing number of studies try to predict the nicotine delivery device(s) consumers
choose (especially e-cigarettes), few studies try to explain whether, when, and how people
consume multiple tobacco products (polytobacco use) and substitution patterns even though a
growing fraction of tobacco consumers use multiple product types. Researchers may devote less
attention to polytobacco use because the vast majority of nicotine consumers smoke cigarettes.
Connolly and Alpert (2008) track relative sales shares of cigarettes, small cigars, roll-your-own
tobacco, and moist snuff from 2000-2007. Consumers predominantly choose cigarettes but
trends were towards other nicotine delivery types. From 2000 to 2007, the cigarette sales share
fell from 89.2 to 82.7 percent. Sales of moist snuff increased from 9.1 to 13.6 percent.
Interestingly, Connolly and Alpert use the weight of tobacco in each product to create what they
call "cigarette pack equivalent" units but they do not adjust for differences in the bioavailability
of nicotine. Smokers who use other tobacco products are more likely to be young adult males,
never married, living in the West, have tried to quit smoking before (Lee et al., 2014). The higher
polytobacco use in the West is consistent with there being regional differences in the social
stigma associated with use of smokeless tobacco.
      A burgeoning literature studies tries to understand the relationship between use of e-
cigarettes and consumption of regular cigarettes. The vast majority of these studies use cross-
sectional survey data so they only describe associations. Their focus is on two aspects of
substitution. First, do youth who use e-cigarettes later smoke cigarettes or use both products
simultaneously. Second, do established cigarette smokers use e-cigarettes to quit or to continue
smoking (dual use). Using cross-sectional data, Warner (2016) finds that, among grade 8, 10, and
12 never smokers 48, 43, and 25 percent respectively used e-cigarettes. Available longitudinal
evidence suggests that, after controlling for observables, youth who reported using e-cigarettes
were no more likely to use cigarettes one year later than youth who did not use e-cigarettes
(Conner et al. 2018). About half of e-cigarette users jointly used cigarettes (11.5 percent), cigars
(7.7 percent), and cigars and water pipes (5.2 percent) (King et al. 2018). Using data from five
nationally representative cross-sectional surveys, Levy et al. (2019) find associations that suggest
that youth are substituting e-cigarettes for cigarettes. They find that the rate of vaping among
youth is increasing, the rate of decline in smoking prevalence increased, and the proportion of
daily smokers among past 30-day smokers is falling. However, in at least one longitudinal study,
researchers did not find evidence of substitution. Sweet et al. (2019) use longitudinal data to
track consumption behavior of people who, at baseline, were consumed only cigarettes or e-
cigarettes and people who used both cigarettes and e-cigarettes. They measured consumption of
these two products 6, 12, and 18 months after the baseline interview. After six months,
abstinence from cigarette smoking among dual users was double that of cigarette smokers. The
differences did not persist to the 12 or 18-month follow-up. At 18 months, the groups did not
                                         18
differ in either their consumption of cigarettes or in quit attempts. Delnevo et al (2016) use cross-
sectional data to report that e-cigarette experimentation is most common among current cigarette
smokers and young adults, but that former smokers who quit in the past year were four times
more likely to use e-cigarettes on a daily basis compared to daily cigarette smokers. Older
smokers were also more likely to be daily e-cigarette users.
     No study adjusts for the relative efficiency of each nicotine delivery type or for the full
shadow price associated with each. That is a fruitful area for future research.
1.8.3 Effects of taxes, price, and policies on choice of nicotine delivery device
Economists inspired the vast literature on how decisions to consume tobacco respond to price
and policy changes. The literature is large and growing for the obvious reason that legislatures
have the authority to regulate nicotine product markets. While public health researchers have
suggested authorities should tax nicotine, until now, taxes and policies are aimed not at nicotine
but at particular nicotine delivery devices. States are rapidly adopting taxes aimed a e-cigarettes
and vaping liquids. As of early 2020, 22 states have adopted taxes on e-cigarettes and vaping
liquids. The form of those taxes varies widely from levies on the wholesale price of the liquids to
excise taxes based on the volume of the vaping liquid sold, without regard to the nicotine content
of the liquids.
     Several recent working papers evaluate how smoking behavior and use of e-cigarettes varies
with the introduction or cross-sectional variation in e-cigarette taxes. These studies are limited by
the use of cross-sectional data, The above model implies that this organization of regulation
likely reduces welfare because it pays little or no attention to the costs and benefits of delivered
nicotine. The above model offers useful ways to measure the effective tax on different products
that have the potential to yield better predictions
     To date, no studies relate the relative share of sales of different devices to differences and
changes in the effective price of delivered nicotine suggested above in equation (1.6). If the
above model assumptions are correct, existing empirical research suffers from specification and
omitted variable bias. With that caveat in mind, existing evidence generally supports the
prediction of basic economics that consumers will substitute toward less expensive nicotine
delivery devices.
     Agaku and Alpert (2014) describe trends in the share of tobacco sold in different forms and
relate trends in sales to federal and state taxes on various products. They show that the relatively
higher tax on cigarettes is likely inducing nicotine consumers to substitute to cigars and other
nicotine delivery devices. Cotti, Nesson, and Tefft (2018) find that households buy fewer
cigarettes and e-cigarettes when cigarette excise taxes increase (suggesting the two devices are
complements). They also find that increases in the shadow price of cigarettes (cigarette smoke-
free air laws) decrease cigarette purchases, but that similar laws about use of e-cigarettes do not
affect either cigarette or e-cigarette purchases. This evidence is difficult to interpret because the
laws banning e-cigarette use are relatively rare, new, and it is unclear how strictly they are
enforced.
     Evidence suggests that consumers substitute between at least some of the nicotine delivery
devices. Studies have estimated positive and statistically significant cross-price elasticities of
sales and consumption between cigarettes and e-cigarettes using market sales data (Zheng et al.
2017; Stoklosa et al. 2016) and longitudinal data (Cantrell et al. 2019). Huang et al. (2018) also
estimate positive and statistically significant cross-price elasticities of demand between cigarettes
                                         19
and little cigars, loose tobacco, pipe tobacco, and dissolvable lozenges. They find that cigarettes
and cigars are complements in consumption. Similarly, Zheng et al. (2017) use market level data
and product prices to conclude that consumers treat cigarettes as complements with large cigars,
smokeless tobacco, and roll-your-own tobacco. None of these studies adjusts prices for the
bioavailability of nicotine from each device or the social and health costs associated with each
device.
1.8.4 Literature related to the shadow price of nicotine: price, taxes, advertising, and
smoking bans
The above model posits that the use of a particular nicotine delivery device depends on the
shadow price of using each device. As noted above, no published study measures either price or
tax in the way that is theoretically indicated above ­ the price or tax per unit of delivered nicotine
(bioavailable nicotine) from each device. In a similar way, the literature does not frame
advertising in terms of creating a social cost/benefit of using particular devices. A large literature
explores social perceptions of smoking and implicitly frames it in the way the above model
frames it. In the context of e-cigarettes, Amin et al. (2020) review literature that explores how
social perceptions of e-cigarettes is associated with intentions to use or actual use of e-cigarettes.
They conclude that social perceptions increase intentions to use and actual use of e-cigarettes. So
this possible factor in the shadow price has potential to improve our understanding of nicotine
consumption. Although there is a huge literature trying to determine whether cigarette
advertising induces people to smoke cigarettes, it is rife with statistical challenges that prevent
inferences of causality. Two articles worth mentioning are Avery et al. (2007) and Dave et al.
(2019). Avery et al. (2007) finds credible evidence that, when smokers see more magazine
advertising of nicotine replacement products (as a group), they are more likely to attempt to quit
and successfully quit. Dave et al. (2019) uses a similar strategy to find that exposure to e-
cigarette advertising on television is associated with a higher probability that smokers quit. In the
context of the above model, it is unclear if the advertising should be considered as information
consumers currently lack or as part of the shadow price of consumption. Both studies uses
advertising data that appeared during periods when the particular nicotine delivery devices were
relatively new. That fact suggests that manufacturers might have advertised to inform not
persuade consumers.
      One can treat bans on the use of particular nicotine delivery devices as an increase in the
shadow price. Indeed, a marketing strategy of firms selling snus is that users no longer need to
spit tobacco juice produced when they chew tobacco. Some evidence supports the idea that such
bans belong in the shadow price. For example, Cotti, Nesson, and Tefft (2018) find that, in states
and localities that ban cigarette smoking in public places (cigarette smoke-free air laws)
households buy fewer cigarettes. However, similar laws about use of e-cigarettes do not affect
either cigarette or e-cigarette purchases. This evidence is difficult to interpret because the laws
banning e-cigarette use are relatively rare, new, and it is unclear how strictly they are enforced.
      Regardless, the economics of nicotine consumption and the choice of a growing number of
nicotine delivery systems, can profitably measure the shadow price as fully as is feasible. In so
doing, researchers can gain greater power to predict who consumes what, when, and with what
device.

1.9 Conclusion
                                         20
The advent of new methods to deliver nicotine has highlighted the central role demand for
nicotine plays and has always played in markets for tobacco products. Because new delivery
devices have separated nicotine from tobacco, consumers can satisfy their demand for nicotine
with fewer physical costs associated with smoking, chewing, or using powdered tobacco. This
chapter highlights some of the neuroscience of nicotine that establishes both positive and
negative effects of nicotine on physical and mental health. I propose a life-cycle model of
consumption that lets utility be a function of mental and physical health and in which mental and
physical health vary with the consumption of nicotine. The model predicts that individuals will
consume nicotine differently over different life-cycle stages according to whether or not nicotine
has net benefits that exceed costs (discounted to the present). The value of the model is that it
predicts when individuals will start and stop using nicotine, ties those predictions to underlying
evidence from neuroscience, and can be tested empirically. The model also differs from existing
models because it posits that consumers pay attention to three specific costs when they decide
whether to consume and how much to consume nicotine. The first innovation is to posit that
money price of nicotine should be measured in terms of the price per unit of nicotine actually
delivered into the bloodstream by a given nicotine delivery device. By measuring price in this
way, researchers will be able to directly compare price elasticities of demand across very
different nicotine delivery devices. Similar adjustments to taxes are needed. The second
innovation is to formally recognize, as others previously have, that social stigma, advertising,
and social approbation and condemnation figure into the shadow price. The latter is partly a
function of portrayals of use of each device in movies and television. It is also something that
varies by social group. The third component of the shadow price is the accumulated degradation
of health associated with a unit of nicotine consumption delivered by a particular device. Those
costs vary tremendously across devices and over time for a given nicotine delivery device (e.g.
filtered versus unfiltered cigarettes).
      The model yields a host of testable predictions for which data exist or could be constructed
with existing data. Tests of those predictions will reveal whether the model assumptions need to
be revisited or not. The results of those tests will also help researchers better understand patterns
of initiation, intensity of use, substitution, and cessation.
      It is important to recognize that people get benefits and pay costs when they consume
nicotine. Researchers need to delve more deeply to understand who benefits from consuming
nicotine, how they benefit, and whether the new delivery devices lower the costs of consuming
nicotine to justify government interventions into the new market for nicotine. That task remains
for researchers to pursue.

References
Agaku IT, Alpert HR. (2014). "Trends in annual sales and current use of cigarettes, cigars, roll-
    your-own tobacco, pipes, and smokeless tobacco among US adults, 2002­2012." Tobacco
    Control, 25:451­457.

Alkam T, Nabeshima T. (2019). "Prenatal Nicotine Exposure and Neuronal Progenitor Cells."
    chapter 6 in Preedy VR. ed. Neuroscience of Nicotine : Mechanisms and Treatment. San
    Diego: Elsevier Science & Technology. Accessed January 13, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central.


                                         21
Amin S, Dunn AG, Laranjo L. (2020). "Social Influence in the Uptake and Use of Electronic
   Cigarettes: A Systematic Review." American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 58(1): 129-
   141. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2019.08.023

Armitage AK, Dollery CT, Houseman TH, Kohner E, Lewis PJ, Turner DM. (1978). "Absorption
   of nicotine from small cigars." Clinical Pharmacology and Therapuetics, Vol. 23: 143 151.

Avery R, Kenkel D, Lillard DR, Mathios A. (2007). "Private Profits and Public Health: Does DTC
    Advertising of Smoking Cessation Products Encourage Smokers to Quit?" Journal of
    Political Economy, 115(3): 447-481.

Bajrektarevic D, Corsini S, Nistri A, Tortora M. (2019). "Nicotine Neuroprotection of Brain
    Neurons: The Other Side of Nicotine Addiction." chapter 11 in Preedy VR. ed. Neuroscience
    of Nicotine : Mechanisms and Treatment. San Diego: Elsevier Science & Technology.
    Accessed January 13, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central.

Becker G, Murphy KM. (1988). "A theory of rational addiction." Journal of Political Economy,
    96(4), 675-700.

Benowitz NL. (1988). "Nicotine and Smokeless Tobacco." CA-A Cancer Journal for Clinicians,
    38(4): 244-247.

Benowitz NL. (1993). "Pharmacology of Smokeless Tobacco Use: Nicotine Addiction and
    Nicotine­Related Health Consequences." chapter 4 in Smokeless Tobacco or Health: An
    International Perspective. U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service,
    National Institutes of Health, NIH publication; no. 93-3461, Smoking and tobacco control
    monographs; 2: Bethesda, MD.

Benowitz NL. (2001). "Compensatory Smoking of Low-Yield Cigarettes." chapter 3 in Risks
    Associated with Smoking Cigarettes with Low Machine-Measured Yields of Tar and
    Nicotine. U.S. National Institutes of Health. National Cancer Institute. Monograph No. 13.
    Available at https://cancercontrol.cancer.gov/BRP/tcrb/monographs/

Berry KM, Reynolds LM, Collins JM, Siegel MB, Fetterman JL, Hamburg NM, Bhatnagar A,
    Benjamin EJ, Stokes A. (2019). "E-cigarette initiation and associated changes in smoking
    cessation and reduction: the Population Assessment of Tobacco and Health Study 2013­
    2015." Tobacco Control, 28: 42-49. doi:10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2017-054108.

Brantmark B, Ohlin P, Westling H. (1973). "Nicotine-containing chewing gum as an anti-
    smoking aid." Psychopharmacologia. 31(3): 191­200. doi:10.1007/bf00422509. PMID
    4581737.

Brown RW, Gill WD. (2019). "Nicotine, Neural Plasticity, and Nicotine's Therapeutic Potential."
    chapter 9 in Preedy VR. ed. Neuroscience of Nicotine : Mechanisms and Treatment. San
    Diego: Elsevier Science & Technology. Accessed January 13, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central.

Burns DM, Lee L, Shen LZ, et al. (1998). "Cigarette smoking behavior in the United States." In:
    Burns D, Garfinkel L, Samet J, eds. Changes in Cigarette-Related Disease Risk and Their
    Implications for Prevention and Control. Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health; pp.
                                       22
    13­112.

Burns E. (2007). The Smoke of the Gods: A Social History of Tobacco. Temple University Press:
    Philadelphia.

Cantrell J, Huang J, Greenberg MS, Xiao H, Hair EC, Vallone D. (2019). "Impact of E-Cigarette
    and Cigarette Prices on Youth and Young Adult E-Cigarette and Cigarette Behaviour:
    Evidence from a National Longitudinal Cohort." Tobacco Control: tobaccocontrol-2018-
    054764

Burt RD, Dinh KT, Peterson AV, Sarason IG. (2000). "Predicting adolescent smoking: a
    prospective study of personality variables." Preventive Medicine 30, 2.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2000). "Use of FDA-Approved Pharmacologic
    Treatments for Tobacco Dependence --- United States, 1984--1998." Morbidity and
    Mortality Weekly Report, 49(29): 665-668.
    https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm4929a4.htm

Chaloupka FJ, Warner KE. (2000). "The Economics of Smoking." in A.J. Culyer & J.P.
    Newhouse (Eds.) Handbook of Health Economics (Vol. 1B, pp 1539-1627). Amsterdam:
    Elsevier Science. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1574-0064(00)80042-6.

Chen J. (2003). "Age at diagnosis of smoking-related disease." Health Reports, Vol. 14(2): 9-19.
    Statistics Canada, Catalogue 82-003.

Chen H, Chan YL, Oliver BG, Pollock CA, Saad S. 2019. "Maternal Smoking and Fetal Brain
    Outcome: Mechanisms and Possible Solutions." chapter 2 in Preedy VR. ed. Neuroscience
    of Nicotine : Mechanisms and Treatment. San Diego: Elsevier Science & Technology.
    Accessed January 13, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central.

Christopoulou R, Lillard DR. (2016). "A Novel Indicator of Life-Course Smoking Prevalence in
    the United States Combining Popularity, Duration, Quantity, and Quality of Smoking."
    American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 106(6): 1329-1335.
    http://ajph.aphapublications.org/doi/abs/10.2105/AJPH.2016.303130?af=R

Claus ED, Moeller BC, Harbour D, Kuehl PJ, McGuire M, Vivar JC, Schroeder MJ. (2018). "Use
    Behaviors, Dependence, and Nicotine Exposure Associated with Ad Libitum Cigar
    Smoking." Tobacco Regulatory Science. 4(1): 548-561
    DOI:https://doi.org/10.18001/TRS.4.1.2

Conner M, Grogan S, Simms-Ellis R, Flett K, Sykes-Muskett B, Cowap L, Lawton R, Armitage
   CJ, Meads D, Torgerson C, West R, Siddiqi K. (2018). "Do electronic cigarettes increase
   cigarette smoking in UK adolescents? Evidence from a 12-month prospective study."
   Tobacco Control, 27: 365­372.

Connolly GN, Alpert HR, (2008). "Trends in the Use of Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products,
   2000-2007." JAMA, 299(22): 2629-2630.

Conway B. (2003). "Chewing gum as a drug delivery system." The Drug Delivery Companies
                                     23
    Report. Autumn/Winter: 33-35.

Cotti C, Nesson E, Tefft N. (2018). "The relationship between cigarettes and electronic
     cigarettes: Evidence from household panel data." Journal of Health Economics, 61: 205-
     219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2018.08.001

Dave D, Dench D, Grossman M, Kenkel DS, Saffer H. (2019). "Does e-cigarette advertising
    encourage adult smokers to quit?" Journal of Health Economics, 68: 102227.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2019.102227.

De Vogli R, Santinello M. (2005). "Unemployment and smoking: does psychosocial stress
    matter?" Tobacco Control, 14(6): 389­395. doi: 10.1136/tc.2004.010611

DeCicca P, Kenkel D, Lovenheim MF, Nesson E. (2018). "The Economics of Smoking
    Prevention." in Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Economics and Finance. DOI:
    10.1093/acrefore/9780190625979.013.292

DeCicca P, Kenkel D, Mathios A, Shin YJ, Lim JY. (2008). "Youth smoking, cigarette prices, and
    anti-smoking sentiment." Health Economics, Vol. 17(6): 733-749.
    https://doi.org/10.1002/hec.1293.

Delnevo CD, Giovenco DP, Steinberg MB, Villanti AC, Pearson JL, Niaura RS, Abrams DB.
    (2016). "Patterns of Electronic Cigarette Use Among Adults in the United States." Nicotine
    & Tobacco Research, Vol. 18(5): 715­719, https://doi-org.proxy.lib.ohio-
    state.edu/10.1093/ntr/ntv237.

Echeverria V, Zeitlin R. (2019). "Cotinine and Memory: Remembering to Forget." chapter 22 in
    Preedy VR. ed. Neuroscience of Nicotine : Mechanisms and Treatment. San Diego: Elsevier
    Science & Technology. Accessed January 13, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central.

Eggan B, McCallum S. (2019). "The Medial Habenula-Interpeduncular Nucleus Pathway in
    Nicotine Sensitization: The Role of 34 Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptors and Substance
    P. chapter 32 in Preedy VR. ed. Neuroscience of Nicotine : Mechanisms and Treatment. San
    Diego: Elsevier Science & Technology. Accessed January 13, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central.

Epping-Jordan MP, Picciotto MR, Changeux JP, Pich EM. (1999). "Assessment of nicotinic
    acetylcholine receptor subunit contributions to nicotine self-administration in mutant
    mice." Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 147: 25­26.

Everding J, Marcus J. (2020). "The effect of unemployment on the smoking behavior of
    couples." Health Economics, 29(2): 154-170. https://doi.org/10.1002/hec.3961

Fant RV, Henningfield JE. (1998). "Pharmacology and Abuse Potential of Cigars." chapter 6 in
    Smoking and Tobacco Control: Cigars: Health Effects and Trends. U.S. National
    Institutes of Health. National Cancer Institute. Monograph No. 9. Available at
    https://cancercontrol.cancer.gov/brp/tcrb/monographs/

Fernö O. (1973). "A substitute for tobacco smoking." Psychopharmacologia. 31 (3): 201­204.
    doi:10.1007/BF00422510.PMID 4732726.
                                       24
Gibson B, Maurer J. (2000). "Cigarette Smoking in the Movies: The Influence of Product
    Placement on Attitudes Toward Smoking and Smokers." Journal of Applied Social
    Psychology, Vol. 30(7): 1457-1473. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1559-1816.2000.tb02530.x

Glass Z. (2007). "The Effectiveness of Product Placement in Video Games." Journal of
    Interactive Advertising, Vol. 8(1): 23-32. DOI: 10.1080/15252019.2007.10722134

Gori GB, Lynch CJ. (1985). "Analytical cigarette yields as predictors of smoke bioavailability."
    Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology, Vol. 5(3): 314-326.

Gruber J, Koszegi B. (2001). "Is addiction `rational'? Theory and evidence." Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, 116 (4), 1261­1303.

Grossman, M. (1972). "On the concept of health capital and the demand for health." Journal of
    Political Economy, 80:223-255.

Hajek P, Phillips-Waller A, Przulj D, et al. (2019). "A randomized trial of e-cigarettes versus
    nicotine-replacement therapy." New England Journal of Medicine. 380: 629-637.
    30699054

Hammond EC, Garfinkel L. (1964). "Changes in Cigarette Smoking." Journal of the National
   Cancer Institute, 33(1), 49­64, https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/33.1.49

Hansen B, Sabia J, Rees D. (2017). "Have cigarette taxes lost their bite? New estimates of the
   relationship between cigarette taxes and youth smoking." American Journal of Health
   Economics, 3(1): 60-75.

Harris JE. (1983). "Cigarette smoking among successive birth cohorts of men and women in the
    United States during 1900­80." J Natl Cancer Inst. Vol. 71(3): 473­479.

Hoffmann D, Hoffmann I. (1998). "Chemistry and Toxicology" chapter 3 in Smoking and
    Tobacco Control: Cigars: Health Effects and Trends. U.S. National Institutes of Health.
    National Cancer Institute. Monograph No. 9. Available at
    https://cancercontrol.cancer.gov/brp/tcrb/monographs/

Holm H, Jarvis MJ, Russell MAH, Feyerabend C. (1992). "Nicotine intake and dependence in
   Swedish snuff takers." Psychopharmacology, Vol. 108: 507­511.

Hritcu L, Mihasan M. (2019). "6-Hydroxy-L-Nicotine and Memory Impairment." chapter 21 in
    Preedy VR. ed. Neuroscience of Nicotine : Mechanisms and Treatment. San Diego: Elsevier
    Science & Technology. Accessed January 13, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central.

Huang, J., C. Gwarnicki, X. Xu, R. S. Caraballo, R. Wada, and F. J. Chaloupka. 2018. "A
   Comprehensive Examination of Own-and Cross-Price Elasticities of Tobacco and Nicotine
   Replacement Products in the US." Preventive Medicine 117:107-114.

Hukkanen J, Jacob P 3rd, Benowitz NL. (2005). "Metabolism and disposition kinetics of
   nicotine." Pharmacological Review, Vol. 57(1):79­115.
                                         25
Izenwasser S. (2019). "Nicotine Effects in Adolescents." chapter 3 in Preedy VR. ed.
    Neuroscience of Nicotine : Mechanisms and Treatment. San Diego: Elsevier Science &
    Technology. Accessed January 13, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central.

Jarvis MJ. (2004). "Why people smoke." British Medical Journal, Vol. 328(7434): 277-279.
    https://www.jstor.org/stable/41709000.

Jacob P III, Raddaha AHA, Dempsey D, Havel C, Peng M, Yu L, Benowitz NL. (2011). "Nicotine,
    Carbon Monoxide, and Carcinogen Exposure after a Single Use of a Water Pipe." Cancer
    Epidemiology, Biomarkers and Prevention, Vol. 20(11): 2345-2353.

Johnson L, Ma Y, Fisher SL, Ramsey AT, Chen LS, Hartz SM, Culverhouse RC, Grucza RA,
    Saccone NL, Baker TB, Bierut LJ. (2019). "E-cigarette Usage Is Associated With Increased
    Past-12-Month Quit Attempts and Successful Smoking Cessation in Two US Population­
    Based Surveys." Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 21(10): 1331-1338. doi:10.1093/ntr/nty211

Kelley BM, Middaugh LD. (1999). "Periadolescent nicotine exposure reduces cocaine reward in
     adult mice." Journal of Addictive Diseases, 18: 27­39.

Kelley BM, Rowan JD. (2004). "Long-term, low-level adolescent nicotine exposure produces
     dose-dependent changes in cocaine sensitivity and reward in mice." International Journal
     of Developmental Neuroscience, 22, 339­348.

Kim SH, Shanahan J. (2003). "Stigmatizing Smokers: Public Sentiment Toward Cigarette
    Smoking and Its Relationship to Smoking Behaviors." Journal of Health Communication,
    Vol. 8(4): 343-367. https://doi.org/10.1080/10810730305723.

King JL, Reboussin D, Cornacchione Ross J, Wiseman KD, Wagoner KG, Sutfin EL. (2018).
    "Poly tobacco Use Among a Nationally Representative Sample of Adolescent and Young
    Adult E-Cigarette Users." Journal of Adolescent Health, 63: 407-412.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2018.04.010

Kluger R. (1996). Ashes to Ashes: America's Hundred Year Cigarette War, the Public Health,
    and the Unabashed Triumph of Philip Morris. Knopf: New York.

Koskela M, Bäck S, Võikar V, Richie CT, Domanskyi A, Harvey BK, et al. (2017). "Update of
    neurotrophic factors in neurobiology of addiction and future directions." Neurobiology,
    97(Pt B): 189­200.

Lee YO, Hebert CJ, Nonnemaker JM, Kim AE. (2014). "Multiple tobacco product use among
    adults in the United States: cigarettes, cigars, electronic cigarettes, hookah, smokeless
    tobacco, and snus." Preventive Medicine. Vol. 62: 14­19. doi: 10.1016/j.ypmed.2014.01.014.

Lillard DR. (2015). "Smoking in the United States." chapter 5 in Lillard DR, Christopoulou R,
     eds. Life-course smoking behavior: Patterns and national context in ten countries. Oxford
     University Press: New York.

Lillard, DR. (2017). "Educational Heterogeneity in the Association between Smoking Cessation
                                       26
    and Health Information." in Kristian Bolin, Björn Lindgren, Michael Grossman, Dorte
    Gyrd-Hansen, Tor Iversen, Robert Kaestner, Jody L. Sindelar (ed.) Human Capital and
    Health Behavior (Advances in Health Economics and Health Services Research, Volume 25)
    Emerald Publishing Limited, pp. 183 - 206.

Lillard DR, Christopoulou R, eds. (2015). Life-course smoking behavior: Patterns and national
     context in ten countries. Oxford University Press: New York.

Lillard DR, Molloy E, Sfekas A. (2013). "Smoking Initiation and the Iron Law of Demand."
     Journal of Health Economics, 32: 114-127.

Marynak KL, Gammon DG, King BA, Loomis BR, Fulmer EB, Wang TW, Roger T. (2017).
   "National and State Trends in Sales of Cigarettes and E-Cigarettes, U.S., 2011­2015."
   American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 53(1), 96-101.
   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2017.01.016

McCusker K, McNabb E. (1982). "Plasma Nicotine Levels in Pipe Smokers." JAMA. Vol. 248(5):
   577-578. doi:10.1001/jama.1982.03330050059032

Miech R, Patrick ME, O'Malley PM, Johnston LD. (2017). "What are kids vaping? Results from a
    national survey of US adolescents." Tobacco Control, Vol. 26: 386-391.
    doi:10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2016-053014

Molander L, Lunell E, Andersson SB, Kuylenstierna F. (1996). "Dose released and absolute
    bioavailability of nicotine from a nicotine vapor inhaler." Clinical Pharmacology and
    Therapeutics. Vol. 59(4): 394-400. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0009-9236(96)90107-1

Namba MD, Powell GL, del Franco AP, Goenaga JG, Gipson CD. (2019). "Brain Gene Expression
   in the Context of Nicotine Rewards: A Focus on Cholinergic Genes." chapter 40 in Preedy
   VR. ed. Neuroscience of Nicotine : Mechanisms and Treatment. San Diego: Elsevier Science
   & Technology. Accessed January 13, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central.

Nutt DJ, Phillips LD, Balfour D, Curran VH, Dockrell M, Foulds J, Fagerstrom K, Letlape K,
    Milton A, Polosa R, Ramsey J, Sweanor D. (2014). "Estimating the Harms of Nicotine-
    Containing Products Using the MCDA Approach." European Addiction Research. Vol. 20:
    218­225. doi: 10.1159/000360220.

Patton GC, Carlin JB, Coffey C, Wolfe R, Hibbert M, Bowes G. (1998). "Depression, anxiety, and
    smoking initiation: a prospective study over 3 years." American Journal of Public Health
    88, 10.

Paus T. (2005). "Mapping brain maturation and cognitive development during adolescence."
    Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9(2): 60-68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2004.12.008.

Pray IW, Atti SK, Tomasallo C, Meiman JG. (2020). "E-cigarette, or Vaping, Product Use­
    Associated Lung Injury Among Clusters of Patients Reporting Shared Product Use --
    Wisconsin, 2019." Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 69(9): 236­240.

Preedy VR. ed. (2019). Neuroscience of Nicotine : Mechanisms and Treatment. San Diego:
                                       27
    Elsevier Science & Technology. Accessed January 13, 2020. ProQuest Ebook Central.

St. Helen G, Havel C, Dempsey DA, Jacob P III, Benowitz NL. (2015). "Nicotine delivery,
     retention and pharmacokinetics from various electronic cigarettes." Addiction. Vol. 111(3):
     535-544. https://doi.org/10.1111/add.13183

Schmutz J, Wheeler J, Grimwood J, Dickson M, Yang J, Caoile C, Bajorek E, Black S, Chan YM,
    Denys M, Escobar J, Flowers D, Fotopulos D, Garcia C, Gomez M, Gonzales E, Haydu L,
    Lopez F, Ramirez L, Retterer J, Rodriguez A, Rogers S, Salazar A, Tsai M, Myers RM.
    (2004). "Quality assessment of the human genome sequence". Nature. 429 (6990): 365­
    368. doi:10.1038/nature02390. PMID 15164052.

Simons-Morton B, Farhat T. (2010). "Recent findings on peer group influences on adolescent
    smoking." Journal of Primary Prevention 31, 4.

Stoklosa, M, Drope J, Chaloupka FJ. 2016. "Prices and E-Cigarette Demand: Evidence from the
    European Union." Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 18 (10):1973-1980.

Sweet L, Brasky TM, Cooper S, Doogan N, Hinton A, Klein EG, Nagaraja H, Quisenberry A, Xi
    W, Wewers ME. (2019). "Quitting Behaviors Among Dual Cigarette and E-Cigarette Users
    and Cigarette Smokers Enrolled in the Tobacco User Adult Cohort." Nicotine & Tobacco
    Research, 21(3): 278-284. doi:10.1093/ntr/nty222.

Sydenham, Thomas (1809), "Schedula Monitoria, or an Essay on the Rise of a New Fever", in
    Benjamin Rush (ed.), The works of Thomas Sydenham, M.D., on acute and chronic
    diseases: with their histories and modes of cure. Philadelphia: B. & T. Kite

Tapper AR, McKinney SL, Dashmi R, Schwarz J, Deshpande P, Labarca C, Whiteaker P, Marks
    MJ, Collins AC, Lester HA. (2004). "Nicotine activation of 4* receptors: sufficient for
    reward, tolerance, and sensitization." Science, 306, 1029­1032.

Temple DJ. (1976). "The Absorption of Nicotine from Tobacco Snuff through the Nasal Mucosa."
   Archiv der Pharmazie (Weinheim). Vol. 309(12): 984-987.
   https://doi.org/10.1002/ardp.19763091207

Tyler WJ, Perrett SP, and Pozzo-Miller LD. (2002). "The role of neurotrophins in
    neurotransmitter release." Neuroscientist, 8: 524­531.

Tzschentke TM, Schmidt WJ. (2003). "Glutamatergic mechanisms in addiction." Molecular
    Psychiatry, Vol. 8: 373­382.

Urlich J, Johannson-Locher G, Seiler WO, Stähelin HB. (1997). "Does smoking protect from
     Alzheimer's disease? Alzheimer-type changes in 301 unselected brains from patients with
     known smoking history." Acta Neuropathologica, 94, 450­454.

Viscusi WK. (1990). "Do smokers underestimate risks?" Journal of Political Economy, 98(6):
    1253­1268. https://www-jstor-org.proxy.lib.ohio-state.edu/stable/2937757.

Warner KE. (2016). "Frequency of E-Cigarette Use and Cigarette Smoking by American
                                        28
    Students in 2014." American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 51(2): 179-184.
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2015.12.004

Levy DT, Warner KE, Cummings KM, Hammond D, Kuo C, Fong GT, Thrasher JF, Goniewicz
    ML, Borland R. (2019). "Examining the relationship of vaping to smoking initiation among
    US youth and young adults: a reality check." Tobacco Control, 28: 629-635.
    doi:10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2018-054446.

Yingst JM, Foulds J, Veldheer S, Hrabovsky S, Trushin N, Eissenberg TT, et al. (2019). "Nicotine
    absorption during electronic cigarette use among regular users." PLoS ONE 14(7):
    e0220300. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0220300.

Zheng Y, Zhen C, Dench D, Nonnemaker JM. 2017. "U.S. Demand for Tobacco Products in a
    System Framework." Health Economics 26 (8):1067-1086.
Zhu SH, Zhuang YL, Wong S, Cummins SE, Tedeschi GJ. (2017). "E-cigarette use and
    associated changes in population smoking cessation: evidence from US current population
    surveys." BMJ, 358: j3262. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.j3262.




                                       29
