                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         FOREIGN AID AND STATE CAPACITY

                                     Erika Deserranno
                                     Aisha Nansamba
                                        Nancy Qian

                                    Working Paper 26928
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w26928


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           April 2020, Revised October 2020




This paper supersedes NBER Working Paper 26928, entitled "Aid Crowd-Out: The Effect of
NGOs on Government-Provided Public Services". We thank Christopher Blattman, Oeindrilla
Dube, Claudio Ferraz, Andrea Guariso, Thomas Fujiwara, Ilyana Kuziemko, Ameet Morjaria,
Gerard Padro-i-Miquel, Suresh Naidu, Edoardo Teso and David Yanagizawa-Drott for their
insights; and the participants of the Princeton Political Economy Workshop, the Northwestern
Development Lunch, the Wharton Applied Economics Workshop, the UCSD Development
Workshop, the UBC Vancouver School of Economics Development Workshop, the World Bank
Development Workshop, the Georgetown Development Workshop, the University of Wisconsin
Development Workshop, Tufts Economics Seminar, Johns Hopkins SAIS Seminar, the CEPR
Conference on Development, the Utah Winter Political Economy Conference and the
Development Conference for Chicago Area Economists for useful comments. We thank Andre
Cazor Katz, Carlo Medici, Joris Mueller and Efrat Shamir for outstanding research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Erika Deserranno, Aisha Nansamba, and Nancy Qian. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Foreign Aid and State Capacity
Erika Deserranno, Aisha Nansamba, and Nancy Qian
NBER Working Paper No. 26928
April 2020, Revised October 2020
JEL No. O1,O2

                                        ABSTRACT

We document that, in rural Uganda, the entry of foreign aid reduces government provision of
similar services because the organization that delivers aid often hires the government worker,
thereby reducing state capacity. Access to any public services and population well-being worsen
in villages where such "poaching" occurs. In villages with no ex ante government presence,
foreign aid has no effect on state capacity, increases access to any services and improves
population well-being.



Erika Deserranno                               Nancy Qian
Northwestern University                        MEDS
erika.deserranno@kellogg.northwestern.edu      Kellogg SOM
                                               Northwestern University
Aisha Nansamba                                 2001 Sheridan Rd.
nansamba.aisha@gmail.com                       Evanston, Il 60208
                                               and NBER
                                               nancy.qian@kellogg.northwestern.edu
1       Introduction
The efficacy of foreign aid, one of the most important policy tools with which rich
countries can transfer resources to help poor ones, is one of the most controversial is-
sues in development economics. During 1960-2013, OECD countries gave $3.5 trillion
(2009 USD) of Official Development Assistance (OECD, 2015). Over approximately
fifty years, African nations received $568 billion (2003 USD) (e.g., Easterly, 2003).
Critics point out that aid has failed in its ultimate goal of achieving sustainable
development, and may even have unintentionally increased dependence on foreign as-
sistance (e.g., Deaton, 2013; Easterly, 2003; Moyo and Ferguson, 2009). A well-known
argument is that the availability of foreign aid may reduce a government's incentive
to make the necessary investments in state capacity and institutional quality required
for development (e.g., Svensson, 2000). A distinct, but related, criticism is that aid
is often allocated based on the strategic objectives of donors rather than the needs of
the recipient countries (e.g., Alesina and Dollar, 2000; Kuziemko and Werker, 2006;
Nunn and Qian, 2014).1 Partly in response to these criticisms, the amount of aid from
major donors disbursed by non-government organizations (NGOs), which are more
independent from donor country objectives (e.g., Faye and Niehaus, 2012; Werker and
Ahmed, 2008), have quadrupled in the past twenty years (e.g., Werker and Ahmed,
2008).2
     NGOs are meant to function as a stopgap until the government can provide simi-
lar services in the long run and have become essential in assisting the poor in many
countries. Their rising prominence has been accompanied by increasing scrutiny and
criticism. Aid workers have noted the lack of coordination between NGOs and re-
cipient governments and that NGOs often compete with the government over scarce
resources. A common example is that NGOs poach workers from the public sector
by offering much higher wages than the local labor market (Carnahan, Durch, and
Gilmore, 2006; Koch and Schulpen, 2018).3 The public health community has been
    1
      Dreher, Klasen, Vreeland, and Werker (2013) finds that politically driven World Bank aid is less
effective.
    2
      For example, also see Pfeiffer, Johnson, Fort, Shakow, Hagopian, Gloyd, and Gimbel-Sherr
(2008).
    3
      For example, Koch and Schulpen (2018) surveys foreign NGOs funded by the Dutch bilateral


                                                  1
particularly vocal. Prominent members have called for NGOs to "Limit hiring of pub-
lic systems", "Limit pay inequity between the public and private sectors" and "Commit
to joint planning [with the recipient government]" (Pfeiffer, Johnson, Fort, Shakow,
Hagopian, Gloyd, and Gimbel-Sherr, 2008). Farmer (2008) argues that NGOs can
reduce state capacity of the recipient country by taking away valuable resources from
the government: "The NGOs that fight for the right to health care by serving the
African poor directly frequently do so at the expense of the public sector. Their
efforts too often create a local brain drain by luring nurses, doctors, and other pro-
fessionals from the public hospitals to `NGO land', where salaries are better". In a
recent book, Moyo and Ferguson (2009) worry that "A short-term efficacious inter-
vention [...] can unintentionally undermine whatever fragile change for sustainable
development may already be in play".4
     Existing arguments are mostly impressionistic or based on anecdotal evidence
because of three main challenges: measurement, data limitations and establishing the
causal effect of aid. State capacity is traditionally defined as the ability for a state
to raise taxes (e.g., to wage war) (Tilly, 1993), which may be difficult to measure
at sub-national levels and less relevant in the very poor countries that receive aid.
Establishing the causal impact of foreign aid is often confounded by the endogeneity
of aid allocation to local conditions. If foreign aid is allocated to places with low
state capacity, then the negative association between aid and state capacity will
capture reverse-causal effects. Low state capacity and aid receipts may also be jointly
determined by a third factor, such as a history of armed conflict. Moreover, we
note that most of the empirical literature on foreign aid relies on country-level data,
which may be too crude to capture important heterogeneity such as the ability of the
recipient government to provide similar services when aid enters a region.5
     The primary contribution of this paper is to make progress on understanding
how foreign aid affects state capacity with rigorous and novel empirical evidence.
Like Besley and Persson (2010), our definition of state capacity expands beyond the
agency and documents that they pay high-skilled (low-skilled) staff five to seven times (two to
three times) more than the local labor market. Carnahan, Durch, and Gilmore (2006) show that
international organizations and NGOs pay more than 10 times government wages in Sierra Leone,
Burundi, Liberia, and the DRC, and pay twice as much in Haiti and Timor-Leste. Another concern is
that NGOs can create inefficiencies by replicating government services (e.g., Rahman, 2003; Pfeiffer,
Johnson, Fort, Shakow, Hagopian, Gloyd, and Gimbel-Sherr, 2008).
   4
     We provide more examples in Section 2.
   5
     We discuss the literature at the end of this Section.



                                                 2
original definition of Tilly (1993). A key function of the government in very poor
communities is to provide basic local public goods. We measure state capacity as the
supply of government health workers and basic health services. Compared to existing
studies of aid, our household and village-level data are more detailed and granular.
This will help us measure underlying heterogeneity important for understanding the
effects of aid and the underlying mechanisms.
    To establish causality, we exploit random variation in foreign aid entry across very
poor communities in rural Uganda, where the only sources of modern medical care
are government and aid workers. As is often the case, aid rollout did not take into
account existing public infrastructure.6 There was a pre-existing government worker
in half of the villages prior to aid entry. The foreign NGO that delivers aid has similar
aims and provides similar health services as the government: improve basic health
care and outcomes, such as infant mortality. Both organizations only hire local agents
to work part time. Government workers, like part-time local public goods providers
in many other contexts, are unpaid volunteers.7
    To investigate the effect of foreign aid on state capacity, we estimate the effect of
aid entry on the number of health workers and health services from the government.
The effects are ambiguous ex ante. On the one hand, the concerns we discussed earlier
suggest negative effects. On the other hand, entry could stimulate the interests of
local villagers to become health workers, for example, by demonstrating the usefulness
of the services for improving their neighbors' well-being. Since the effect can differ
depending on whether there was already a government worker, we divide our sample
into villages with and without a pre-existing government worker.
    We find that in villages with a pre-existing government worker, aid entry reduces
the number of government workers and the probability that a household receives
health care from a government health worker by 25 percentage-points. This is ex-
plained by the fact that the NGO hires the government health worker in approximately
half of the villages, and provides strong evidence in support of concerns of poaching.
In villages without any pre-existing health worker, aid has no effect on the number
   6
      See Section 2 for a background discussion.
   7
      Volunteer-provided local public services are prevalent in rich and poor countries: e.g., volunteer
tax collectors in Pakistan (Khan, Khwaja, and Olken, 2015); election poll workers, police auxiliaries,
firefighters, recreation program staff, library aides, and senior citizen center assistants in the United
States (Duncombe, 1985); community-based health workers and agriculture extension workers across
developing countries (Bhutta, Lassi, Pariyo, and Huicho, 2010; Gilmore and McAuliffe, 2013; Leon,
Sanders, Van Damme, Besada, Daviaud, Oliphant, Berzal, Mason, and Doherty, 2015).


                                                   3
of government health workers. These results support the concern that aid reduces
state capacity, and provide no support for positive spillover effects of foreign aid on
government capacity. Note that like many other contexts where aid is most needed,
overall state capacity in Uganda is very low. The government does not have central-
ized data on the locations of government or aid workers, or the capacity to efficiently
redirect resources to locations without foreign aid.8
    The implications for policy are not straightforward since policy makers need to
balance the negative effect of foreign aid on state capacity and future aid dependence
with the short-run impact of aid on population well-being. The latter will be positive
if aid workers provide better care than government workers. The remainder of the
paper addresses this by examining the impact of aid on total service access and
health outcomes. These effects depend on whether aid workers offset the reduction in
government services by providing higher quantity and/or quality of services, which,
in turn, depend on the incentives for aid workers to provide health care.
    One advantage of our context is that the NGO we study uses a popular, and thus
policy-relevant business model. The aid worker sells commodities during household
healthcare visits, which saves distribution costs for the NGO and search costs for
useful health products (which are often only available in urban areas) for poor rural
households. Profits from sales help fund the free-of-charge health services. This
increases financial sustainability while reinforcing one of the main perceived strengths
of NGOs over traditional bilateral aid ­ independence from the strategic objectives
and constraints of institutional donors. The so-called "dual-task," "direct selling" or
"Avon" model of aid has been applauded by the highest levels of the aid community,
the popular press and widely adopted by prominent NGOs across the world.9
    We find that in villages with no pre-existing government health worker, NGO entry
increases total access to health services and improves health outcomes. In villages
with a pre-existing government health worker, access declines and health outcomes
(e.g., infant mortality) worsen when the NGO hires the government worker. These
findings are consistent with the main results on state capacity and the concern that
foreign aid can be harmful in places where resources ­ in our case, skilled workers
­ are most scarce. Furthermore, they show that aid can reduce well-being if aid
  8
    See Background Section 2.2.
  9
    The dual-task model is used by the two largest international NGOs and has received positive
press coverage and numerous awards. See Section 5 for more discussion.



                                              4
workers are not given the appropriate incentives for delivering services to the poor.10
We provide a detailed interpretation and discussion of the results in Section 6.
    The estimates are specific to the context of our study. At the same time, we note
that the main features of our environment ­ low overall government capacity, higher
pay for aid workers than government workers and the dual-task model ­ are common
where foreign aid is most important, and, thus, relevant.
    This study is the first to provide rigorous micro empirical evidence of the effect
of foreign aid on state capacity. We add to the large empirical literature on aid ef-
ficacy.11 In examining state capacity, we are related to two recent studies. Young
and Padilla (2019) finds that there is no cross-country relationship between aid and
state capacity, where the latter is defined as the ability to collect taxes. Emphasizing
the importance of state capacity for poor countries, Guariso and Verpoorten (2018)
finds that domestic policies to boost coffee production and quality contributed more
to recent Rwandese economic growth than external factors such as aid. Empirical
studies on aid dependence mostly focus on outcomes such as corruption (e.g., An-
dersen, Johannesen, and Rijkers, 2020; Svensson, 1999a), democracy (e.g., Kersting
and Kilby, 2014; Knack, 2004; Svensson, 1999b) and institutional quality (e.g., Jones
and Tarp, 2016; Werker, 2012). We are the first to provide rigorous evidence on the
poaching of government workers by aid organizations, the importance of NGO and
government coordination and labor market distortions for aid efficacy.12
    In attempting to improve identification and measurement by using sub-national-
level data, we add to several recent studies. Dube and Naidu (2015) finds a positive
relationship between U.S. military aid and conflict in Colombia. Crost, Felter, and
Johnston (2014) finds that aid increases conflict mortality in the Philippines. Beath,
Christia, and Enikolopov (2011) finds that aid has heterogeneous effects on insurgen-
  10
     This is consistent with recent observations that commercial activities can crowd out health
services in the dual-task model (Reichenbach and Shimul, 2011; Wagnerly, Asiimwe, and Levine,
2020).
  11
     The evidence from the voluminous literature is mixed. For well-known studies, see, for example
Stern (1974), Bauer (1975), Boone (1996), Collier and Hoeffler (2004), Svensson (1999a), Burnside
and Dollar (2000), Easterly (2003), Easterly, Levine, and Roodman (2004), and Sachs (2006). See
the literature overviews by Easterly (2009) and Qian (2015) for additional references.
  12
     Existing studies have argued for better coordination between donors (e.g., Bigsten and Tengstam,
2015) or between NGOs (Barr and Fafchamps, 2006). The notion that foreign aid can distort local
labor markets has been raised in several theoretical studies (e.g., Knack and Rahman, 2004; Koch
and Schulpen, 2018), case studies and descriptive studies (e.g., Dollar and Pritchett, 1998; Harris,
2006).



                                                 5
cies depending on the insurgent's location in Afghanistan. Lowes and Montero (2018)
finds that a negative colonial legacy reduces the effectiveness of World Bank projects
in the D.R.C. Cruzatti, Dreher, and Matzat (2020) finds that regions in Africa that
receive Chinese project aid experience increases in infant mortality relative to other
regions. In examining the causal effect of aid in the sub-Saharan African context, we
add to Nunn and Qian (2014)'s cross-country evidence that U.S. food aid can increase
conflict.
    We also contribute to the relatively new and rapidly growing literature on the
origins of state capacity (e.g., Besley and Persson, 2009, 2010). In using detailed
micro data to study a context where capacity is in its infancy and potentially fragile,
we add to recent evidence about the origins of rudimentary state formation (Sanchez-
de-la-Sierra, 2019), the effect of citizen voice on the willingness to pay taxes (Weigel,
2020) and the influence of historical institutions on contemporary values for state
functions (Lowes, Nunn, Robinson, and Weigel, 2017) in the Democratic Republic of
Congo.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the context. Section 3
describes the data and provides descriptive statistics. Section 4 presents the main
results on state capacity. Section 5 presents the results on total service access and
health outcomes. Section 6 interprets the results. Section 7 concludes.


2     Background
2.1    Some Examples
Aid workers are often paid much more than local market wages. For example, Koch
and Schulpen (2018) examines salaries in the D.R.C. and documents that the entry-
level national civil servant salary is approximately $78 USD per month, while lower
skilled workers (e.g., janitorial staff) employed by the United Nations in the same
location earn $1,164 per month. A financial assistant earns $87 working for the
government, $80 to $592 per month working for local NGOs, $583 working for an
American NGO and $709 working for a European NGO. Pfeiffer, Johnson, Fort,
Shakow, Hagopian, Gloyd, and Gimbel-Sherr (2008) documents that NGO salaries
are five to twenty times higher than public-sector salaries for health workers and, in
addition, provide more non-wage amenities (e.g., better working conditions, vehicles)


                                           6
in Mozambique. Dost and Khan (2015) documents that, in Afghanistan, a driver earns
$40 per month from the government, $110 from a small local NGO, $500 from a large
international NGO and over $800 from the United Nations or other multinational
donor agencies. Ammitzbøll and Tychsen (2007) notes that "In Kosovo [. . . ] local
UN staff salary levels are about 300% higher than most government salaries".
    The pay gap is often the largest in places where the necessary skilled labor is
the most scarce. Carnahan, Durch, and Gilmore (2006) documents that pay for
similar workers from the United Nations is higher than from the government by
approximately twice in Timor-Leste, three times in Kosovo and Haiti, ten times in
Sierra Leone, eleven times in Burundi, 25 times in Liberia and forty times in the
D.R.C.13
    Concerns regarding the potential harm of paying aid workers much more than
local market wages have been circulating in the aid community for many years. In an
article in The Lancet, Kassaye (2006) points out that "There is growing recognition of
the danger posed by indiscriminate recruitment by foreign agencies of skilled health
professionals from the public sector in developing countries. The drop in salaries and
attendant demoralization amid an increasingly acquisitive and competitive culture in
the towns has made health professionals vulnerable to the financial temptation offered
by non-governmental organizations (NGOs). This `local' brain drain is potentially
damaging to the effective delivery of health services in a country, where it constitutes
a huge financial loss and could have a negative effect on the economy. It is surprising
to see that many agencies, while advocating against international brain drain, are the
main perpetrators of the local form".
    In Afghanistan, many observe that NGO poaching of government workers can
reduce state capacity . A former senior UN staff member stated that "Unfortunately,
it seems that (with Afghanistan as an example) there appears to be a brain drain with
government employees shifting to NGOs, and from there, shifting to UN or bilateral
organizations. Certainly, the salary structure of international organizations prevents
the desired effect, which should be that the best and brightest from their national
cadres should shift into senior government positions" (Dost and Khan, 2015). The
head of a national NGO based in Kabul further notes that "Unfortunately the brain
drain damaged the state system. First the skilled men left the country for abroad and
  13
    NGOs are aware of this and have tried to address it in initiatives such as Project FAIR (Fairness
in Aid Remuneration). See http://project-fair.org for more information.



                                                 7
the remaining skilled employees in the government left jobs for work with international
and non-governmental organizations for high salaries. Due to this situation, most
of the governmental administration is managed by unskilled persons, bureaucracy
and corruption are largely prevailing and badly affect the functioning of the state"
(Ammitzbøll and Tychsen, 2007). Ashraf Ghani, the current Afghan president and
former finance minister, noted that "within six months of starting my job as finance
minister, my best people had been stolen by international aid organizations who
could offer them forty to a hundred times the salary we could" (Dost and Khan,
2015). Pfeiffer, Johnson, Fort, Shakow, Hagopian, Gloyd, and Gimbel-Sherr (2008)
expresses similar concerns about health workers in Mozambique: "this internal `brain
drain' has had a more severe impact on the local health system than has the more
widely recognized international migration of health workers".


2.2    Uganda
Since 2004, Ugandan GDP has grown at 6.2% to 10.8% per year and tax revenues are
14% of total GDP.14 With this increase in national state capacity, the government
has begun to build basic public health services in rural areas, where they have been
heretofore absent. Despite this positive development, the levels of income, living
standards and state capacity are still very low in Uganda. Average per capita gross
income was $560 in 2010.15 Neonatal, infant and under-5 mortality rates in 2011 were
estimated to be 30, 66 and 111 per 1,000 live births, respectively ­ among the highest
in the world (DHS, 2011).
    Our study takes place in rural areas, where income, living standards and state
capacity will be lower than in urban areas and the national average. Broadly speaking,
modern health care was unavailable in rural areas. To address this, the Ugandan
government founded the Village Health Team (VHT) program in 2001. However, in
many rural areas of Uganda, the government did not have the capacity to implement
it until nearly ten years later. In the regions that we study, government workers were
hired around mid-2009.16
  14
     See the World Bank Indicators.
  15
     See the World Bank National Accounts Data.
  16
     See the "Ugandan Annual Health Sector Performance Report 2008/2009" and the "Village Health
Team, Strategy and Operational Guidelines" (Uganda Ministry of Health, 2010). A survey of gov-
ernment workers in Northern Uganda indicates that 87% of them were hired between 2009 and
2010 (Kimbugwe, Mshilla, Oluka, Nalikka, Kyangwa, Zalwango, Kilizza, Turyasiima, Ntambazi,


                                               8
     The main goal of the program is to improve health outcomes and reduce mortality,
especially among young children. To accomplish this, health workers make home
visits to poor households with expecting mothers or young children, during which
they provide the following services: (i) health education (e.g., about the benefits of
a hospital delivery), (ii) pre- and post-natal check-ups, (iii) basic medical care and
referrals to health clinics that are usually located in more urban areas. The latter
includes helping patients decide on the optimal timing of seeking medication attention
from clinics and hospitals in urban areas, as well as coordinating with the medical
staff of these facilities to ensure that there is staff onsite during the visit (Uganda
Ministry of Health, 2011). Government workers also provide basic medicines, such as
ACT (artemisinin combination therapy for malaria), ORS (oral rehydration solution),
zinc, antibiotics, and deworming tablets free of charge, as well as distribute free bed
nets during national malaria campaigns.
     Government health workers work part-time and typically maintain other daily oc-
cupations such as farming or small shop-keeping. The government recruits local resi-
dents to be health workers. Government workers are mostly women, even though men
are also eligible. The work is unpaid and recruiters focus on altruistic motivations,
which includes personal gains in reputation and feelings of warm glow from helping
their community (e.g., Ludwick, Brenner, Kyomuhangi, Wotton, and Kabakyenga,
2013; Wagnerly, Asiimwe, and Levine, 2020). Thus, government workers need to have
sufficient income from other activities to allow them to provide part-time volunteer
services. According to our interviews with workers and recruiters, the supply of indi-
viduals who are willing and able is extremely limited, such that in many communities,
recruiters could not find anyone.
     The government program was rolled out nationwide and aimed to employ two
workers per village. Hired workers are given five days of basic training, a uniform
that makes them easily identifiable (e.g., a t-shirt with the official logo), and free
medical products to disperse to the community. Training covers key health topics,
including diagnosing, treating and recognizing danger signs for referral to urban clin-
ics. Each government worker is affiliated with a nearby health facility: she refills
her stock of health products, attends occasional meetings, and reports to the person
in charge of the health facility. District-level health officials interviewed by the au-
thors of this paper stated that each health facility is responsible for keeping track of
Walugembe, et al., 2014).


                                           9
resignations of affiliated community health workers and finding a replacement, but
most health facilities are severely under-staffed and neither keep track of community
health workers nor replace those that drop out of the program. Moreover, there is no
aggregation of district-level records at higher regional or national levels.
    The data deficit is consistent with the low overall administrative capacity in
Uganda and means that higher levels of the government which make policy do not
know which communities have a government health worker. The government similarly
does not know where NGOs operate, which means that it does not have the capacity
to respond to NGO entry by reallocating resources elsewhere. Similarly, NGOs can-
not avoid entering locations with government workers in a centralized or systematic
way.17
    The government lacked the resources for conducting additional recruiting after
the initial rollout.


2.3     The NGO
Foreign aid is often delivered by foreign NGOs in Uganda (Barr and Fafchamps,
2006). The one we study is one of the largest in the world. Its aims, services and
recruitment strategies are similar to the government program. Aid workers are all
women, recruited locally and provide free basic health services to the community.
They all work part-time and are easily identifiable from wearing NGO uniforms.
Unlike government workers, aid workers also sell household products for which they
are paid a piece rate during healthcare home visits. Thus, aid workers earn a much
higher income than volunteer government workers. The main results on state capacity
focuses on the pay gap. We will return to discuss the pay structure in more details
in Section 5.
    The NGO and the government provide similar training about health services.
Career progression is similarly limited for aid and government workers. We know of
no cases or discussions of part-time rural community workers progressing to jobs in
  17
    The lack of personnel records is not unique to our context, but also present in many other
developing countries (Cain and Thurston, 1998; World Bank, 2000). Cain and Thurston (1998)
documents serious discrepancies in Uganda, Ghana and Zimbabwe between the numbers of staff
recorded on the nominal rolls (maintained by the ministries) and the numbers of staff actually
working. Part of the problem has been attributed to the lack of digital record-keeping in those
countries and the difficulty to centralize staff information (which could otherwise be shared with
NGOs or other organizations).



                                               10
urban areas.
    In interviews conducted by the authors, NGO recruiters discussed how the NGO
attempted to avoid hiring government workers, but could not effectively do so since
government workers could easily hide their occupation. Anecdotally, there are also
cases where the NGO knows that the applicant works for the government and still
hires her because she is the best candidate. Since the NGO looks for individuals with
the same skills and follows the same hiring criteria as the government, government
workers who apply are typically more competitive than other applicants. In a similar
context, Deserranno (2019) finds that 45% of government workers apply to work
for the NGO when it enters the village and 60% of these applicants are hired by
the NGO. Interestingly, 29% of government worker applicants faced no competition,
which is consistent with the belief that the supply of such workers is very limited.


3        Randomization and Data
3.1      NGO Rollout and Survey Timing
The NGO entered our study area of 127 villages in twelve geographical areas of
Uganda in June of 2010 by rolling out its program in a random sub-sample of 66
villages, of which 36 already had the government program in place for at least six
months.
    The main analysis uses survey data collected by the NGO. The baseline survey
was collected in May 2010.18 The endline survey was collected in December 2012, two
years and seven months after the NGO rollout. Each wave includes a household-level
survey about health services obtained by the household as well as health outcomes.
We will discuss the other variables as they become relevant. The household survey
is a random sample of 20% of the households that had a child below age of five in
2010. The respondent of the household survey is the female household head, who is
presumably the most knowledgeable about the topics of inquiry. We also have access
to village-level survey data answered by the village chief that includes information
about the presence of health workers.
    We supplement the surveys with census data collected before the baseline in 2010.
    18
    The data collection and randomization were conducted by one of the authors as part of an
internal evaluation of the NGO.



                                            11
These include information about household size, mortality and occupation for all
households in each village. The census data are aggregated at the village level to
check the balance of the randomization and provide additional robustness controls.
    Finally, we have access to an internal survey conducted by the NGO for its aid
workers in January 2012, eighteen months after the NGO rolled out, between the
baseline and the endline surveys. Government health workers appear in this survey
if they had switched to becoming aid workers.


3.2    Descriptive Statistics
In the baseline survey, one year after the government program had been rolled out,
57% of the villages (73 villages) had a government worker and no village had more
than one worker. In the other 54 villages, the government was either unable to recruit
or retain a health worker (i.e., the recruited worker had stopped delivering health
services by 2010). This is consistent with the perception of the limited labor supply
of those who are both qualified and willing to work as volunteer health workers. Data
for government workers from similar contexts as ours show that they work on average
ten hours per week (Mays, O'Neil, Mworozi, Lough, Tabb, Whitlock, Mutimba, and
Talib, 2017).
    Note that a health worker can in principle work for both the government and
NGO. Our survey is structured so that the village chief should report the presence of
a government worker and a NGO worker in this case. We discuss the potential bias
caused by measurement error in this variable after we present the main results.
    The self-reported survey of aid workers show that they work an average of thirteen
hours per week and are paid an average of 19 USD (53 thousand UGX) per month.19
Their income is thus much higher than the one of government workers, who are
volunteers. As a benchmark, consider that a rural aid worker earns in 13 hours what
the average Ugandan household earns in half a week of working full-time.20
    In villages with a government worker at baseline, we find that 39% of aid workers
used to work for the government. In villages that had a government worker at baseline
but lost that worker at endline, 82% of aid workers report previously having worked
  19
     See Appendix Table A.1. We use the December 2012 exchange rate: 1 USD = 2,691 UGX
(Ugandan Shillings).
  20
     19 USD is 51% of the average weekly household income in Uganda (which includes urban areas
that are much richer than the rural communities we study) in 2013.



                                              12
for the government. These descriptive facts are consistent with the concern that the
NGO employs government health workers. The fact that the new aid worker is often
the same person as the one who used to work for the government is important to keep
in mind for interpreting our results on well-being later in the paper.
    Table 1 presents village-level summary statistics and balance checks. Baseline
observable characteristics are balanced between villages that are randomly assigned
to treatment (NGO entry) and those that are randomly assigned to control. They
are balanced both within the entire sample of 127 villages (column 3), the subsample
of 73 villages with a government worker in 2010 (column 4) and the subsample of 54
villages without a government worker (column 5). See Data Appendix A for more
details on the balance checks.21
    Government and aid workers are the only source of modern medicine in the vil-
lages. Other medical services are provided by traditional healers and drug stores,
which dispense basic advice with drug sales. Traditional healers are present in 48%
of villages and drug stores are present in 68% of villages. In urban areas, modern
medical services are available from government clinics and private clinics.22 56% of
villages have a government clinic within a ten kilometer radius, and 83.5% of villages
have a private clinic within a ten kilometer radius.
    On average, 182 households reside in a village, with an average of one infant per
every three households. Infant mortality is high. The number of infants who died in
the year prior to the survey as a share of birth is 4%.
    57% of the households are involved in farming as their main activity. The overall
level of education is low, with only 38% of household heads having completed primary
education. Households are poor. The average household owns half of the items on
a list of "essential" household items (e.g., clothes, pair of shoes, cooking pots). Food
availability is unstable. Approximately half of the households live in homes with
low-quality construction material.
  21
     26% of households attrit between the baseline and endline. In the Data Appendix A, we show
that (i) attrition rates are balanced across groups; (ii) there is no evidence of differential attrition
across groups by household baseline characteristics; and (iii) our main results on access to health
services hold if we use Lee bounds that account for attrition (Lee, 2009).
  22
     Government clinics and private clinics provide the same type of health services (e.g., assist
women during a delivery, child vaccination, disease diagnosis and treatment). The former provide
these services for free while the latter provide these for pay.




                                                  13
4          Government Health Workers and Services
4.1          Health Workers
Our first measure of state capacity is the number of government health workers. To
allow the effects of NGO entry to differ between villages that had a government
worker at baseline (i.e., the intensive margin, where the effect can be negative, null or
positive) and villages that had no health worker (i.e., the extensive margin, where the
effect can be null or positive), we divide the data into two subsamples and estimate
the following equation in each:

                                  yi =  + N GOi + X i + a + i .                        (1)

The number of health workers in village i in 2012, yi , is a function of: a dummy
variable that equals one if the village is randomly assigned to participate in the NGO
program in 2010, N GOi ; a vector of village-level variables that may be correlated
with the number of health workers and other outcomes we examine in the paper (e.g.,
mortality), X i ; and area fixed effects, a . The controls in X i make little difference to
the estimates in this section, but will increase the precision of the mortality estimates
later in the paper. We include the same baseline controls for consistency.23 We
estimate Huber-White robust standard errors to address heteroskedasticity for village-
level regressions.
    Since NGO entry is randomly assigned,  can be interpreted as a causal effect.
Table 2 Panel A examines villages with a government worker at baseline. Column
(1) shows that NGO entry reduces the number of government health workers by
approximately one per every other village. The coefficient is -0.430. Column (2)
shows that NGO entry increases the number of aid workers by one. Column (3)
shows that NGO entry increases the total number of health workers by one per every
other village. The estimates are statistically significant at the 1% level.
    The results are consistent with the descriptive statistics discussed earlier, which
indicate that when the NGO enters a village with a government health worker, the
government worker switches to work for the NGO in approximately 40% of cases.
    Panel B examines villages with no government health worker at baseline. We
find that NGO entry has no effect on the number of government workers (column 4),
    23
         Results without the controls are available upon request.


                                                     14
increases the number of NGO health workers by almost one (column 5) and increases
the total number of health workers by one (column 6). The estimates in columns (5)
and (6) are statistically significant at the 1% level. At the bottom of the table, we
also present randomization inference p-values against the null hypothesis. We do not
discuss them since they are always consistent with the standard errors presented in
the tables.
    The estimates show that the NGO is always able to recruit one aid worker in each
village it enters, even in those where the government was unable to recruit anyone.
However, NGO entry reduces state capacity: entry has a negative effect in villages
with a government worker at baseline and no positive spillovers on the supply of
government workers in other villages.
    The main caveat for interpreting the results is mis-measurement of the number of
health workers, which is reported by the village chief. If, for example, he is unaware
of a change in employer for a former government worker from the government who
moves to the NGO (or that she now works for both), then our estimates under-
state the negative effect of NGO entry on the number of government workers. If, for
example, he under-reports the presence of a government worker because the survey
is conducted by the NGO (which increases NGO salience), then our estimates over-
state the negative effect of NGO entry. Given the importance and rarity of health
workers, and the small size of the communities that we study, we do not believe that
measurement error is likely to drive our estimates. Nevertheless, they are addressed
in the next section, which examines service access from government and aid workers
reported in the household survey.


4.2    Health Services
Our second measure of state capacity is the health services provided by the govern-
ment. The outcome variable is a dummy variable that equals one if the household
answers "yes" to the question on whether it "received medical care" from a government
worker in the past year. The question was constructed to elicit a binary response to
minimize reporting error (as opposed to a question about the number of visits). As
before, we separately estimate the effects in the two sub-samples of villages. The
number of observations is much larger than the analysis on the number of health
workers because this estimate uses household-level data. We cluster the standard


                                         15
errors at the village level for this and subsequent household-level regressions.
    Table 3 Panel A examines villages with a government worker at baseline. Column
(1) shows that NGO entry reduces the probability of obtaining services from the
government health worker by 24.1 percentage-points. The estimate is statistically
significant at the 1% level.
    Column (2) shows that NGO entry increases the probability that a household
will obtain services from an aid worker by 31.4 percentage-points. The estimate is
statistically significant at the 1% level.
    Panel B examines villages with no health worker at baseline. Column (4) shows
that NGO entry slightly reduced the probability that a household obtains services
from the government by two percentage-points. The estimate is statistically signifi-
cant at the 10% level.24 Column (5) shows that NGO entry increased the probability
of obtaining health services from an aid worker by 31.2 percentage-points. The esti-
mate is statistically significant at the 1% level.
    The estimates for services mirror those for labor supply and show that NGO entry
reduced state capacity. In villages with a government worker, NGO entry reduced
government services. In villages without a government worker, NGO entry did not
have observable positive spillovers on government services.
    We will discuss columns (3) and (6) later in the paper.


5        Total Service Access and Population Well-being
In this section, we consider the possibility that aid workers may provide more and/or
better care than government workers and improve population well-being, albeit at
the cost of a reduction in state capacity. This could occur if the NGO selects higher
quality workers, the NGO provides better training or if the positive income increases
their capacity to work. The effect will partly depend on the incentive structure of
the dual-task model used by the NGO. This so-called "Avon model of aid" is widely
acclaimed and used by many of the largest and most well-known NGOs (e.g., BRAC,
Grameen) in poor countries such as India, Bangladesh, and many countries in sub-
    24
     This estimate reflects the fact that a very small number of households (in villages with no
government health worker) will travel to nearby villages to obtain care from a government health
worker. Note that this is unlikely to cause spatial contamination of our estimates because our sample
villages are far apart and their neighboring villages will not be in our sample.



                                                 16
Saharan Africa and Latin America.25 The NGO leverages its scale to obtain high
quality products at low wholesale prices. Aid workers buy products from the NGO at
a price that is slightly above the wholesale price and then sell to households at a retail
price that is set by the NGO to be equivalent to or slightly below the market price in
that location. The difference between the wholesale price and the buying price for the
health worker goes towards the revenues of the NGO at large. The difference between
the buying price and the retail price constitutes the income of the health worker. The
medicines that are distributed free of charge by government workers (oral rehydration
salts, pain reliever, zinc, antimalarials, cold capsules, deworming tablets) are sold at
very low retail prices and provide negligible profits to the NGO agent. The products
that provide the highest profits to the NGO workers are, on average, less related to
the most concerning health outcomes: fortified oil, cotton, soap, fortified flour and
toothpaste.26
    This dual-task model presents tradeoffs in terms of population well-being. On the
one hand, it can benefit the population because the income it offers can increase the
amount of free services and the pool of job candidates (i.e., women who are willing but
too poor to provide volunteer services; the number of hours an aid worker can deliver
health services instead of farming). On the other hand, the commercial incentives can
crowd out free health delivery (Wagnerly, Asiimwe, and Levine, 2020). Our estimates
  25
      It is used by several of the largest NGOs today, including Living Goods, Grameen, BRAC,
and other smaller NGOs such as InVenture, SWAP, VisionSpring, SolarSister, HealthStore Foun-
dation, Accesso Chakipi (a Clinton Foundation Program), Marie Stopes Kenya (a branch of the
U.K.'s Women's Health Organization) and HoneyCare Africa. Other NGOs that use this model
or similar social marketing approaches include Population Services International, Marie Stopes In-
ternational, Healthy Entrepreneurs, Réseau Confiance, LifeNet International, One Family Health,
BlueStar Healthcare Network, Project Muso, GSN, AMUA, World Health Partners, K-MET Post
Abortion Care Network, Partners in Health, Alive and Thrive, Happy Mothers Network, Health-
Keepers. See http://healthmarketinnovations.org/ for a more extensive list. It has received positive
press coverage and numerous awards. For example, "The `Avon Ladies' of Africa" published in the
New York Times (2012), "How one social enterprise is leading the fight against malaria" published by
The Guardian (2013), "East Africa's healthcare `Avon ladies' help to keep children alive" published
by Reuters (2017), "How BRAC, the world's biggest charity, made Bangladesh richer" or "Selling
sisters" published in the Economist (2019 and 2012) explain the advantages of the dual-task model
as a self-sustainable way to aid the poor. Living Goods, one of the pioneers of this model, has
received multiple prizes and awards.
   26
      Appendix Figure A.1 documents the retail price (what households pay) and the profit margin for
the NGO worker for the products they sell. In Appendix Section C.4, we provide evidence that NGO
entry has little effect on the price of treating diseases. In an interview that the authors conducted
with one of the NGO directors, she explains that the "Provision of these products which have a less
direct impact on health was meant to serve as an [financial] incentive [for the health worker] and
also ensure sustainability of the health program operations".


                                                 17
will capture the net effects.


5.1     Access to Health Services
We first examine total access to health services to investigate whether aid workers
achieve more coverage than the government workers they replaced. Table 3 column (3)
examines the effect of NGO entry for villages with a government worker at baseline.
The outcome variable is a dummy variable that equals one if a household receives
medical care from any health worker. We find that NGO entry reduces the probability
of obtaining services from either the NGO or the government health worker by 11.2
percentage-points. The estimate is statistically significant at the 5% level. Thus,
NGO entry reduces the likelihood that a household receives medical care from any
health worker. Since the constant is 0.659 (65.9% of households in villages with a
government health worker and no NGO worker receive health care on average), the
estimate implies that NGO entry reduces total access to care by 17% (.112/.659 =
.17).
    The negative impact on any health access is consistent with the concern that NGO
entry crowds out government health workers and health services. It is also interesting
to note that the estimated effect of NGO entry on services from government and aid
workers in columns (1) and (2) do not add up to the estimated effect of NGO entry
on obtaining services from either health worker in column (3). This is because the
aid worker often visits the same households as the government worker in villages with
a government and an aid worker. In villages where the NGO hires the government
worker such that there is only one worker, some households previously visited by the
government are no longer visited by any health worker.27
    Column (6) shows that in villages with no government worker at baseline, NGO
entry increases the probability of obtaining advice from any worker by 28 percentage-
points.


5.2     Health Outcomes
Next, we examine infant mortality, the reduction of which is a focal point for both
government and NGO workers, as well as international agencies such as the World
  27
    Later, in Section 6, we provide descriptive evidence suggesting that the poorest households lose
the most access.


                                                18
Health Organization.28 Since we find that the effect of NGO entry differs between
villages with and without a government health worker at baseline, we continue to
allow the effect of NGO entry to differ across these two types of villages. Because
mortality is a relatively rare event, we estimate the following interaction specification
(equation (2)) with the pooled data to increase statistical power. This is conceptually
identical to the earlier estimations of equation (1) for each sub-sample. There is no
change to the underlying source of variation for identification or causal inference when
we pool the data.

             yi =  + Gov i + N GOi +  (Gov i × N GOi )+X i + a + i .                              (2)

Variable definitions are the same as before. Xi is the same vector of controls as
before, except that we additionally control for their interactions with N GOi .29 Anal-
ogous to our focus on the NGO coefficient from equation (1) for each sub-sample,
the coefficients of interest here are:  +  , the effect of NGO entry in villages with a
pre-existing government worker; and  , the effect of NGO entry in villages without a
pre-existing government worker. The causal interpretation of these two objects in the
pooled estimate is unchanged relative to the earlier interpretation of the coefficient
for NGO from equation (1). Since we control for interacted controls, the coefficients
are evaluated at the sample mean values of the controls.
    Table 4 columns (1)-(3) re-state the estimates for access to health services to
make clear the comparability between the pooled heterogeneous estimates and earlier
estimates.
    We focus our discussion on infant mortality. Column (4) examines a dummy
variable that equals one if at least one infant died within the household during the
two and half years between the two surveys.30 This is reported in the household
  28
     The government and the NGO also aim to reduce in-utero, neonatal and under-age-five mortality.
However, we do not have reliable measures of these other outcomes. See the Data Appendix B for
a detailed discussion. 46% of the overall under-5 mortality takes place in the first month, 18%
in the first 24 hours of life and 15% in the first six hours of life (Baqui, Mitra, Begum, Hurt,
Soremekun, Edmond, Kirkwood, Bhandari, Taneja, Mazumder, et al., 2016). The main causes
of neonatal mortality in Uganda are birth asphyxia/trauma (28.6%), prematurity (27.9%), sepsis
(18.2%), congenital anomalies (11.7%), acute respiratory infections (6.3%) and other causes (6.5%)
(World Health Organization, 2012).
  29
     These variables, the presence of a clinic within a ten kilometer radius, the number of households
in the village and base year morbidity (all measured at baseline, 2010), are correlated with mortality
at endline and including them as controls increases the precision of our estimates.
  30
     The results are similar when we examine a continuous measure for the number of infants who


                                                 19
survey. The sample comprises of households with at least one infant born since the
baseline survey in 2010.31 We find that the effect of NGO entry on infant mortality
in a village with no government worker at baseline is negative, but imprecise. The
joint coefficient at the bottom of the table suggests that NGO entry increases infant
mortality in villages with a government worker at baseline. The p-value for the joint
coefficient is 0.139.
    In column (5), we aggregate infant mortality at the village-level and normalize it
by the number of births. The coefficients exhibit similar patterns to those in column
(4), but are less precise, which is likely due to the reduction in observations and
the fact that the aggregation introduces measurement error.32 Note that the large
magnitude of the mortality estimates reflects the fact that rudimentary services can
produce high returns in our context where infant mortality is extremely high.33
    We also examine other health outcomes that the NGO and government programs
aim to improve. These are health behaviors (whether children in the household are
fully immunized, sleep under bed nets, drink treated water or wash their hands be-
fore eating and after using the toilet, and whether the couple regularly uses condoms
during sexual intercourse) and the incidences of the diseases that are most prevalent
for children in this environment (the percent of children under age five in the house-
hold who have experienced cough, diarrhea, worms, tuberculosis or malaria in the
past year). For each category, we construct a standardized index measure that is the
equally weighted average of z-scores of the component measures. Table 5 presents
patterns similar to those for mortality. The uninteracted NGO coefficients in column
(4) are all positive and suggest that NGO entry in villages with no government worker
at baseline may have had positive effects. But they are statistically imprecise. The
joint coefficients in column (12) are all negative and suggest that NGO entry in vil-
lages with a government worker at baseline may have had negative effects. But they
are also statistically imprecise.
    For the reasons discussed earlier, non-random assignment of the government worker
at baseline does not affect the casual interpretation of  +  and  , which are the
died in the household, since only 7% of the households experienced more than one infant death. See
the Data Appendix Section B for a detailed discussion of our mortality measures.
  31
     We discuss sample selection in Appendix Section C.3.
  32
     See Appendix Section B.
  33
     Bjorkman-Nyqvist, Guariso, Svensson, and Yanagizawa-Drott (2019) studies two NGOs, one of
which uses a similar dual-task model, that provide basic health services in rural Uganda and find
comparable elasticities.


                                               20
focus of our paper and the discussion so far. However, it matters for understanding
the mechanisms underlying the reduced form interaction coefficient,  , the differential
effect of NGO entry in villages with and without a government worker at baseline.
Taking the results at face value, one possible explanation is that there was simply
more scope for improvement in villages with no health worker at baseline. The non-
random placement of government workers at baseline also opens the possibility that
villages without a government worker differ from other villages in ways that cause
NGO entry to have a stronger effect on health outcomes. This concern is mitigated
by the balance checks, which show no difference in observables between the two types
of villages at baseline.34 Given that the interaction coefficient is not the focus of our
paper, we do not discuss it further.


5.3     Villages where the NGO Hires the Government Worker
In this section, we examine poaching more explicitly by decomposing villages into
those where the NGO hires the government worker versus where it hires a second
worker. Since the hiring decision is an outcome, these estimates should be cautiously
interpreted as descriptive rather than causal.35
    We start by examining service provision. We focus our discussion on Table 6
column (3), which examines the probability of receiving any service as the outcome.
The uninteracted NGO coefficient shows that in villages with no government health
worker at baseline, NGO entry increases the probability of obtaining any service by
31.8 percentage-points. The estimate is statistically significant at the 1% level. The
joint coefficients at the bottom of the table show that in villages with a government
worker at baseline and where the NGO hires the government worker, the probability
of any service declines by 26.6 percentage-points. In villages where the NGO hires
a second person to be the aid worker, there is no difference in services relative to a
village with no health worker. As before, these estimates are evaluated at the mean
values of the interacted control variables. We control for the triple interaction of the
control variables, NGO entry and whether it hires the government worker or a new
  34
     See Appendix Table A.2 and Appendix Section A. To address the possibility that our sample is
not large enough to precisely estimate small, but potentially important differences, we also control
for a larger and more comprehensive set of baseline characteristics interacted with NGO entry. The
results are very robust. See Appendix Table A.5.
  35
     Appendix Table A shows no difference in observables between villages where the NGO hired the
government worker and villages where the NGO hired a second person to be the aid worker.


                                                21
worker.
    Columns (4) and (5) examine mortality. The results mirror those for service
access. The uninteracted NGO coefficient in column (4) shows that in villages with
no government worker, NGO entry reduces the probability that a child died in the
household by five percentage-points. The estimate is statistically significant at the
1% level. The joint coefficients at the bottom of the table show that in villages with
a government worker at baseline and where the NGO hires the government worker,
the probability of at least one death increases by 8.2 percentage-points. The estimate
is statistically significant at the 5% level. In villages where the NGO hires a second
person to be the aid worker, there is no difference relative to a village with no health
worker. The estimates in column (5) for village mortality rates are similar, but slightly
less precise due to the smaller number of observations.
    Table 7 presents the decomposition for other outcomes. Only the estimates for the
standardized index of child health behavior are statistically signifiant. Column (4)
shows that NGO entry in villages with no government worker at baseline improves the
index measure. The joint coefficients in columns (14) and (16) show that in villages
with a government worker at baseline and where the NGO hires the government
worker, the index measure worsens by 0.137 (the sample mean is 0.722). The estimate
is statistically significant at the 1% level. In villages where the NGO hires a second
person to be the aid worker, there is no difference relative to a village with no health
worker.
    The finding that the adverse effects on any service and health outcomes manifest
in villages where the NGO hires the government worker is consistent with the central
concern that poaching is a serious problem in contexts where the supply of health
workers is especially limited. The results are also consistent with concerns that the
dual-task model may cause commercial activities to crowd out service delivery.


6    Interpretation
This section interprets the main results and provides a brief discussion to shed light
on some issues prompted by our findings.
   The negative effect of aid entry on state capacity only requires the aid-delivering
NGO to pay more than the government. This result supports concerns from the aid
community that NGOs paying more than local market conditions can impede rather

                                           22
than help create sustainable development. That these negative effects occur in villages
with a government worker supports recent calls for NGOs and the government to
coordinate in order to avoid replicating their efforts, or to avoid poaching government
workers.
    The finding that aid has positive effects in villages with no government worker
implies that the NGO successfully fulfills its main mission as a stop gap in places
where there is no other source of assistance. Together, the results imply that NGOs,
which are critically important in places where the government is not present, should
be wary of instances where the government is beginning to develop capacity and
where capacity is fragile. Similarly, NGOs should be particularly aware of the limited
supply of critical resources, such as the supply of health workers in our case.
    The long-run effects can be quite different from the short-run ones that we study.
On the one hand, the supply of health workers could grow over time, which should
reduce poaching. In addition, if the government started collecting data on the location
of government and aid workers, coordination could reduce the replication of services
in the same location. Then, aid could complement government services. On the other
hand, limited government capacity may mean that it cannot achieve such coordination
or conduct another recruiting effort if the NGO departs. In our context, we note that
the Ugandan government did not have the resources to conduct a second recruitment
drive. The population may therefore be worse off than if the NGO had never entered.
This is the scenario hypothesized by Moyo and Ferguson (2009). The long-run effects
of NGO-provided aid are ultimately empirical questions and likely to be context
specific. As such, much more research is needed.
    The negative effect of NGO entry on any service provision and population well-
being is a result of the earnings gap, which causes government workers to move to the
NGO, and the strong incentives in the dual-task model to sell commodities. These
results highlight the pitfalls of the dual-task model in addition to the problem of
poaching caused by the pay gap. Data from other similar contexts suggest that the
manifestation of the adverse effects in villages where the NGO hires a government
worker reflects aid workers allocating time away from providing services and/or a neg-
ative selection of aid workers. Reichenbach and Shimul (2011) presents self-reported
time use data for 660 workers hired by BRAC in rural Uganda.36 The data show
 36
      See Appendix Table A.6.




                                          23
that only 21-37% of total time is allocated towards delivering free health services.37
Taken literally together with the fact that aid workers in our sample work thirteen
hours per week, it implies that aid workers in our study spend approximately 2.73
to 4.81 hours per week providing free health services. This is much lower than the
ten hours per week of health services provided by government workers reported by
Mays, O'Neil, Mworozi, Lough, Tabb, Whitlock, Mutimba, and Talib (2017).38 Data
on government workers from Deserranno (2019), which studies a similar NGO and in
a broadly similar context, shows that there may be negative selection of aid workers
when the NGO poaches from the government.39 Relative to government workers who
do not apply to work for the NGO, those that apply are fourteen percentage-points
more likely to report that "earning money" is the most important feature in a new job,
and fourteen percentage-points less likely to say that "earning respect" is the most
important feature in a new job. These statistics on time allocation and selection,
though from other data, present patterns consistent with our findings.
    Interestingly, we find suggestive evidence that aid workers are less likely to visit
poor households.40 Both the NGO and the government programs aim to assist the
poorest households, which are unable to afford alternative sources of care such as
private clinics (amongst households with young children or expecting mothers). The
descriptive evidence raises the concern that NGO workers are less likely to visit house-
holds that are unable to afford the commodities sold by aid workers. This highlights
a fundamental friction in the incentive structure of the dual-task model in our con-
text ­ households that benefit the most from the free services are not the households
with the highest demand to purchase commodities. The misalignment can be mod-
  37
     The range depends on whether we count time attending refresher trainings, which include visits
to the branch office to resupply products for selling, as a health or commercial activity.
  38
     Consistent with the low level of time allocated by aid workers to provide health services, our
data show that the fraction of households that bought a health product from aid workers in the past
week (6%) is three times larger than the fraction that obtained medical advice (2%). The household
survey data from 2012 show that for villages with an NGO worker, 28% of households purchased
commodities (soap, oil, salt) from the NGO, while only 9% purchased any medical products.
  39
     Note that one difference between our context and Deserranno (2019) is that the latter focuses
on government health workers who are also members of the NGO micro-finance program. In the
context of our study, there is no micro-finance program.
  40
     Appendix Table A.7 shows that the descriptive patterns in the data support this concern. Col-
umn (1) shows that being poor is negatively associated with obtaining any health care in villages
with a government health worker at baseline and where the NGO entered. The coefficient is -0.136.
In contrast, column (2) shows that the correlation is positive, 0.152, in villages with a government
health worker in 2010 and no NGO entry. Both coefficients are statistically significant at the 5%
level. The p-value at the bottom of the table for the difference in the two coefficients is 0.001.


                                                24
erated in other contexts. For example, it is likely that the households that benefit
the most from micro-finance programs are also the households which have the highest
demands for purchasing high-quality seeds or small farming equipment. This incen-
tive alignment is important for NGOs to take into account when using this business
model.
    Taken together, the descriptive evidence provides a suggestive and consistent ex-
plaination for why health outcomes deteriorate in villages where the government
worker becomes an aid worker. The most commercially motivated workers choose
to become aid workers, and after switching jobs, allocate less time to providing free
health services and visit fewer poor households. These are all part of the crowding
out effect of foreign aid on government workers.41
    To inform the general discussion about aid efficacy, note that we find no effect
of NGO entry if we estimate the average effect of entry for the full sample of 127
villages.42 This is important for future evaluations of foreign aid because it illus-
trates how focusing on the average effects of aid can obfuscate important underlying
heterogeneity and miss both the positive and negative effects of aid.


7        Conclusion
The results of this paper piece together a nuanced picture of how foreign aid can po-
tentially help and hinder economic development. In places where no other assistance
is available, aid can fulfill its role as the stopgap between the needs of the poor and
the government's ability to provide help. However, in places where the government
has begun to develop its own capacity, and where government capacity is particularly
fragile and resources scarce, aid can hinder state capacity, which can, in turn, lead to
future aid dependence. Interestingly, we show that if one only examines the average
effect of aid without taking into account the heterogeneity of pre-existing services,
one finds that aid has no effect. In other words, both the positive and negative effects
of aid are obfuscated without taking heterogeneity into account.
    41
      In Appendix Section C, we consider alternative reasons for why aid workers can increase mortal-
ity relative to government workers. Specifically, we consider the possibility that the local population
trusts aid workers less than government workers, that aid workers are less likely to coordinate with
government hospitals and clinics to facilitate assisted deliveries, that NGO entry increases high risk
births or that NGO entry increases the drug prices for treating aliments. We find limited evidence
that these mechanisms play important role in driving our results.
   42
      See Appendix Section D.


                                                  25
    For policy makers, our results provide important, but subtle, insights. They high-
light the importance for aid organizations to set wages carefully based on the local
labor market. In our case, this means choosing the correct price for labor. In other
contexts, such as food aid, this implies choosing the price of food to not undercut lo-
cal farmers (Janzen, 2015; Levinsohn and McMillan, 2005). Our results also support
the call for NGOs, which have become crucial for aid delivery, and governments to
coordinate, which is currently not the usual practice.43 This will become increasingly
important as poor countries begin to build domestic capacity for providing public
goods, a necessary step towards self-sustainable development. Some of the implied
policies for improvement are straightforward. For example, as the government's ad-
ministrative capacity grows, keeping better records of staff location and sharing these
data with NGOs can have high returns.44
    It is important to note that our study focuses on the short run due to data
limitations. For the reasons that we discuss in the previous section, the long-run
effects can be similar or quite different. This is an important topic for future research.
Another interesting avenue to explore is the effect of the pay gap on labor allocation.
Dost and Khan (2015) observes that, in Afghanistan, "it is not uncommon to find
highly skilled people with university degrees and several years of experience working
in low skill jobs such as administrative assistant, logistics officer or even as drivers
or security guards in NGOs, attracted primarily by the higher wages. [. . . ] It is also
not uncommon to see people with Medical Doctor's degrees doing administrative or
logistical works". In The Lancet, Kassaye (2006) points out that "It is usual to see
highly educated health professionals employed in jobs unrelated to their expertise by
these international NGOs". The potential misallocation of skilled workers is another
channel through which the pay gap may lead to unintended consequences.
    Our findings highlight the tradeoffs of the dual-task model. On the one hand,
it is an innovative way of funding aid activities without large donors.45 However,
our results show that achieving good results requires careful thought, and in particu-
  43
     A large body of evidence documents that NGOs often operate in the same place as the govern-
ment or other NGOs. See Barr and Fafchamps (2006) for detailed discussion on NGOs' location.
  44
     Some governments, such as Uganda, are in the process of creating a digital database of gov-
ernment workers. See https://www.intrahealth.org/news/uganda-takes-major-steps-professionalize-
community-health-workforce. Other governments, such as Sierra Leone, have recently created a
database of all NGOs operating in the country with their location, and the type of services pro-
vided. See https://slamohs.org.
  45
     Another method has been to fund raise from individuals (Muzinich and Werker, 2008).



                                              26
lar, providing the correct incentives for aid activities relative to money-making ones.
Recently, two well-known NGOs which use the dual-task model, BRAC and Liv-
ing Goods, have begun to experiment with providing monetary incentives for health
services, or spending more on monitoring health workers. Another possible way of
aligning incentives is to change the mix of products for sale so that demand for these
and core-mission services come from similar households (see the previous Section).
These are interesting and important avenues for future research.



References
Alesina, A., and D. Dollar (2000): "Who Gives Aid to Whom and Why?," Journal of
  Economic Growth, 5(1), 33­63.

Alsan, M. (2015): "The Effect of the Tsetse Fly on African Development," American
  Economic Review, 105(1), 382­410.

Ammitzbøll, K., and M. D. Tychsen (2007): "The Unintended Economic Consequences
 of Complex Peace Operations on Host Societies," Unintended Consequences of Peacekeep-
 ing Operations, pp. 263­82.

Andersen, J. J., N. Johannesen, and B. Rijkers (2020): "Elite Capture of Foreign
 Aid : Evidence from Offshore Bank Accounts," Policy Research Working Paper Series
 9150, The World Bank.

Baqui, A. H., D. K. Mitra, N. Begum, L. Hurt, S. Soremekun, K. Edmond,
  B. Kirkwood, N. Bhandari, S. Taneja, S. Mazumder, et al. (2016): "Neonatal
  Mortality within 24 Hours of Birth in Six Low-and Lower-Middle-Income Countries,"
  Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 94(10), 752.

Barr, A., and M. Fafchamps (2006): "A Client-Community Assessment of The NGO
  Sector in Uganda," The Journal of Development Studies, 42(4), 611­639.

Bauer, P. T. (1975): "N.H. Stern on Substance and Method in Development Economics,"
  Journal of Development Economics, 2(4), 387­405.

Beath, A., F. Christia, and R. Enikolopov (2011): "Winning Hearts and Minds
  through Development Aid: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Afghanistan," Working
  Papers w0166, Center for Economic and Financial Research (CEFIR).

Besley, T., and T. Persson (2010): "State Capacity, Conflict, and Development," Econo-
  metrica, 78(1), 1­34.

Besley, T. J., and T. Persson (2009): "The Origins of State Capacity: Property Rights,
  Taxation, and Politics," The American Economic Review, 99(4), 1218­1244.

                                          27
Bhutta, Z. A., Z. S. Lassi, G. Pariyo, and L. Huicho (2010): "Global Experience
  of Community Health Workers for Delivery of Health Related Millennium Development
  Goals: A Systematic Review, Country Case Studies, and Recommendations for Integra-
  tion into National Health Systems," Global Health Workforce Alliance, 1(249), 61.

Bigsten, A., and S. Tengstam (2015): "International Coordination and the Effectiveness
  of Aid," World Development, 69, 75 ­ 85.

Bjorkman-Nyqvist, M., A. Guariso, J. Svensson, and D. Yanagizawa-Drott
  (2019): "Reducing Child Mortality in the Last Mile: Experimental Evidence on Com-
  munity Health Promoters in Uganda," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  11(3), 155­92.

Boone, P. (1996): "Politics and the Effectiveness of Foreign Aid," European Economic
 Review, 40(2), 289­329.

Burnside, C., and D. Dollar (2000): "Aid, Policies, and Growth," American Economic
  Review, 90(4), 847­868.

Cain, P., and A. Thurston (1998): "Personnel Records: A Strategic Resource for Public
 Sector Management (Summary Report)," London: Commonwealth Trust.

Carnahan, M., W. J. Durch, and S. Gilmore (2006): Economic impact of peacekeep-
 ing. United Nations, Peacekeeping Best Practices Unit.

Collier, P., and A. Hoeffler (2004): "Aid, policy and growth in post-conflict societies,"
 European Economic Review, 48(5), 1125­1145.

Crost, B., J. Felter, and P. Johnston (2014): "Aid under Fire: Development Projects
  and Civil Conflict," American Economic Review, 104(6), 1833­56.

Cruzatti, J., A. Dreher, and J. Matzat (2020): "Chinese Aid and Health at the
  Country and Local Level," CESifo Working Paper.

Deaton, A. (2013): The Great Escape: Health, Wealth, and the Origins of Inequality.
 Princeton University Press.

Deserranno, E. (2019): "Financial Incentives as Signals: Experimental Evidence from
 the Recruitment of Village Promoters in Uganda," American Economic Journal: Applied
 Economics, 11(1), 277­317.

DHS (2011): "Uganda Demographic and Health Survey 2011, Uganda Bureau of Statistic
 (UBOS)," Discussion paper.

Dollar, D., and L. Pritchett (1998): "Assessing Aid: What Works, What Doesn't and
 Why," World Bank Policy Research Report, 1(18295).

Dost, A. N., and H. Khan (2015): "Explaining NGO-State Wage Differentials in
 Afghanistan: Empirical Findings and New Theoretical Models with Policy Implications
 in General Equilibrium," .

                                           28
Dreher, A., S. Klasen, J. Vreeland, and E. Werker (2013): "The Costs of Fa-
 voritism: Is Politically Driven Aid Less Effective?," Economic Development and Cultural
 Change, 62(1), 157 ­ 191.

Dube, O., and S. Naidu (2015): "Bases, bullets, and ballots: The effect of US military
 aid on political conflict in Colombia," The Journal of Politics, 77(1), 249­267.

Duflo, E., R. Hanna, and S. P. Ryan (2012): "Incentives Work: Getting Teachers to
 Come to School," American Economic Review, 102(4), 1241­78.

Duncombe, S. (1985): "Volunteers in City Government: Advantages, Disadvantages and
 Uses," National Civic Review, 74(9), 356­364.

Easterly, W. (2003): "Can Foreign Aid Buy Growth?," Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  17(3), 23­48.

        (2009): "Can the West Save Africa," Journal of Economic Literature, 47, 373­447.

Easterly, W., R. Levine, and D. Roodman (2004): "New Data, New Doubts: A Com-
  ment on Burnside and Dollar's `Aid, Policies, and Growth' (2000)," American Economic
  Review, 94(3), 774­780.

Farmer, P. (2008): "Challenging Orthodoxies: The Road Ahead for Health and Human
  Rights," Health and Human Rights, pp. 5­19.

Faye, M., and P. Niehaus (2012): "Political Aid Cycles," American Economic Review,
  102(7), 3516­30.

Gilmore, B., and E. McAuliffe (2013): "Effectiveness of Community Health Workers
  Delivering Preventive Interventions for Maternal and Child Health in Low- and Middle-
  Income Countries: A Systematic Review," BMC Public Health, 13(1), 847.

Guariso, A., and M. Verpoorten (2018): "Aid, trade and the post-war recovery of the
 Rwandan coffee sector," Journal of Eastern African Studies, 12(3), 552­574.

Harris, S. (2006): "Disasters and Dilemmas: Aid Agency Recruitment and HRD in Post-
 Tsunami Sri Lanka," Human Resource Development International, 9(2), 291­298.

Janzen, J. P. (2015): "The Effect of U.S. International Food Aid on Prices for Dry Peas
  and Lentils," IOAE.

Jones, S., and F. Tarp (2016): "Does foreign aid harm political institutions?," Journal
  of Development Economics, 118, 266 ­ 281.

Kassaye, K. D. (2006): "Local brain drain," The Lancet, 368(9542), 1153.

Kersting, E., and C. Kilby (2014): "Aid and democracy redux," European Economic
 Review, 67, 125 ­ 143.



                                          29
Khan, A. Q., A. I. Khwaja, and B. A. Olken (2015): "Tax Farming Redux: Ex-
 perimental Evidence on Performance Pay for Tax Collectors," The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 131(1), 219­271.

Kimbugwe, G., M. Mshilla, D. Oluka, O. Nalikka, J. Kyangwa, S. Zalwango,
  U. Kilizza, M. Turyasiima, L. Ntambazi, F. Walugembe, et al. (2014): "Chal-
  lenges Faced by Village Health Teams (VHTs) in Amuru, Gulu and Pader Districts in
  Northern Uganda," Open Journal of Preventive Medicine, 4(9), 740.

Knack, S. (2004): "Does Foreign Aid Promote Democracy?," International Studies Quar-
 terly, 48(1), 251­266.

Knack, S., and A. Rahman (2004): Donor Fragmentation and Bureaucratic Quality in
 Aid Recipients. The World Bank.

Koch, D.-J., and L. Schulpen (2018): "An Exploration of Individual-Level Wage Effects
 of Foreign Aid in Developing Countries," Evaluation and Program Planning, 68, 233 ­
 242.

Kuziemko, I., and E. Werker (2006): "How Much is a Seat on the Security Council
 Worth? Foreign Aid and Bribery at the United Nations," Journal of Political Economy,
 114(5), 905­930.

Lee, D. S. (2009): "Training, wages, and sample selection: Estimating sharp bounds on
  treatment effects," The Review of Economic Studies, 76(3), 1071­1102.

Leon, N., D. Sanders, W. Van Damme, D. Besada, E. Daviaud, N. P. Oliphant,
  R. Berzal, J. Mason, and T. Doherty (2015): "The Role of Hidden Community
  Volunteers in Community-Based Health Service Delivery Platforms: Examples from Sub-
  Saharan Africa," Global Health Action, 8(1), 27214.

Levinsohn, J., and M. McMillan (2005): "Does Food Aid Harm the Poor? Household
  Evidence from Ethiopia," Working Paper 11048, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lowes, S., N. Nunn, J. A. Robinson, and J. L. Weigel (2017): "The Evolution
  of Culture and Institutions: Evidence From the Kuba Kingdom," Econometrica, 85(4),
  1065­1091.

Lowes, S. R., and E. Montero (2018): "?The Legacy of Colonial Medicine in Central
  Africa," CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP12772.

Ludwick, T., J. L. Brenner, T. Kyomuhangi, K. A. Wotton, and J. K.
  Kabakyenga (2013): "Poor Retention does not Have to be the Rule: Retention of
  Volunteer Community Health Workers in Uganda," Health Policy and Planning, 29(3),
  388­395.

Martinez-Bravo, M., and A. Stegmann (2018): "In Vaccines We Trust? The Effects
 of the CIA's Vaccine Ruse on Immunization in Pakistan," Discussion paper.


                                         30
Mays, D. C., E. J. O'Neil, E. A. Mworozi, B. J. Lough, Z. J. Tabb, A. E. Whit-
 lock, E. M. Mutimba, and Z. M. Talib (2017): "Supporting and Retaining Village
 Health Teams: An Assessment of a Community Health Worker Program in Two Ugandan
 Districts," International Journal for Equity in Health, 16(1), 129.

Mogensen, H. O. (2005): "Finding a Path through the Health Unit: Practical Experience
 of Ugandan Patients," Medical Anthropology, 24(3), 209­236.

Moyo, D., and N. Ferguson (2009): Dead Aid: Why Aid Is Not Working and How There
 Is a Better Way for Africa. Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

Mukasa, M. N., O. Sensoy Bahar, F. M. Ssewamala, G. KirkBride, A. Kivumbi,
 F. Namuwonge, and C. Damulira (2019): "Examining the Organizational Factors
 That Affect Health Workers' Attendance: Findings From Southwestern Uganda," The
 International Journal of Health Planning and Management.

Muzinich, J., and E. Werker (2008): "A Better Approach to Foreign Aid," Policy
 Review, (149), 19­28.

Nunn, N., and N. Qian (2014): "US Food Aid and Civil Conflict," American Economic
 Review, 104(6), 1630­66.

Nyamweya, N. N., P. Yekka, R. D. Mubutu, K. I. Kasozi, and J. Muhindo (2017):
  "Staff Absenteeism in Public Health Facilities of Uganda: A Study in Bushenyi District
  on Contributing Factors," Open Journal of Nursing, 7(10), 1115.

Pfeiffer, J., W. Johnson, M. Fort, A. Shakow, A. Hagopian, S. Gloyd, and
  K. Gimbel-Sherr (2008): "Strengthening Health Systems in Poor Countries: A Code of
  Conduct for Nongovernmental Organization," American Journal of Public Health, 98(12),
  2134­40.

Qian, N. (2015): "Making Progress on Foreign Aid," Annual Review of Economics, 7(1),
  277­308.

Rahman, M. (2003): "Management of NGOs: A Study in SAARC Countries," Ph.d. dis-
 sertation, University of Karachi.

Reichenbach, L., and S. N. Shimul (2011): "Sustaining Health: The Role of the NGO's
  Community Health Volunteers in Bangladesh, Afghanistan and Uganda," Discussion Pa-
  per 49.

Sachs, J. (2006): The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities of Our Time. Penguin Books,
  New York.

Sanchez-de-la-Sierra, R. (2019): "On the Origins of the State: Stationary Bandits and
  Taxation in Eastern Congo," Journal of Political Economy, 128(1), 32­74.




                                          31
Sodemann, M., S. Biai, M. Jakobsen, and P. Aaby (2006): "Knowing a Medical Doctor
  is Associated with Reduced Mortality among Sick Children Consulting a Paediatric Ward
  in Guinea-Bissau, West Africa," Tropical Medicine & International Health, 11(12), 1868­
  1877.

Stern, N. H. (1974): "Professor Bauer on Development: A Review Article," Journal of
  Development Economics, 1(3), 191­211.

Svensson, J. (1999a): "Aid, Growth and Democracy," Economics and Politics, 11(3), 275­
  297.

         (1999b): "Aid, Growth and Democracy," Economics & Politics, 11(3), 275­297.

Svensson, J. (2000): "When is Foreign Aid Policy Credible? Aid Dependence and Condi-
  tionality," Journal of Development Economics, 61(1), 61 ­ 84.

Tilly, C. (1993): Coercion, Capital and European States: AD 990 - 1992, Studies in Social
  Discontinuity. Wiley.

Uganda Ministry of Health (2010): VHT-Village Health Team, Strategy and Opera-
 tional Guidelines. Ministry of Health.

       (2011): Health Sector Quality Improvement Framework and Strategic Plan 2010/11-
  2014/15. Ministry of Health.

UNICEF (2009): "Home Visits for the Newborn Child: A Strategy to Improve Survival,"
 in Home Visits for the Newborn Child: A Strategy to Improve Survival. OMS.

Wagnerly, Z., J. B. Asiimwe, and D. I. Levine (2020): "When Financial Incentives
 Backfire: Evidence From a Community Health Worker Experiment in Uganda," Journal
 of Development Economics, 144(102437).

Weigel, J. L. (2020): "The Participation Dividend of Taxation: How Citizens in Congo
 Engage More with the State When it Tries to Tax Them*," The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 135(4), 1849­1903.

Werker, E. (2012): "The Political Economy of Bilateral Foreign Aid," in Handbook of
 Safeguarding Global Financial Stability: Political, Social, Cultural, and Economic Theo-
 ries and Models, ed. by G. Caprio, and G. Caprio Jr., pp. 47­58. Elsevier.

Werker, E., and F. Z. Ahmed (2008): "What Do Nongovernmental Organizations Do?,"
 Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(2), 73­92.

World Bank (2000): "Managing Records as the Basis for Effective Service Delivery and
 Public Accountability in Development: An Introduction to core Principles for Staff of the
 World Bank and its Partners," International Record Management Trust, 2.

World Health Organization (2012): "Global Health Observatory Data Repository,
 Causes of Death Among Children, Cause-Specific Mortality and Morbidly, World Health
 Organization," .

                                           32
        (2014): WHO Recommendations on Postnatal Care of the Mother and Newborn.
  World Health Organization.

Young, A. T., and E. L. Padilla (2019): "Foreign Aid and Recipient State Capac-
 ity," in Lessons on Foreign Aid and Economic Development, ed. by N. Dutta, and C. R.
 Williamson, chap. 8, pp. 2063­2117. Springer.




                                         33
                          Table 1: Summary Statistics and Balance Checks
                                                                                           Gov           No Gov
Sample of villages:                                         All               All        Worker in      Worker in
                                                                                           2010           2010

                                                   Mean             SD       NGO            NGO           NGO
                                                    (1)             (2)       (3)            (4)           (5)

Observations                                                127               127            73             54
A. Presence of a Health Care Provider in 2010 = {0, 1}

Gov health worker in the village                    0.575          0.496     -0.061           -              -
                                                                            (0.088)
Traditional healer in the village                   0.480          0.502     -0.016          0.069         -0.031
                                                                            (0.088)        (0.129)        (0.134)
Drug store in the village                           0.677          0.469      0.030          0.076          0.000
                                                                            (0.039)        (0.071)        (0.000)
Government clinic within 10 km                      0.559          0.498     -0.052         -0.022         -0.003
                                                                            (0.078)        (0.118)        (0.108)
Private clinic within 10km                          0.835          0.373      0.047          0.127         -0.019
                                                                            (0.045)        (0.073)        (0.057)
B. Village Size and Infant Mortality in 2010
# of HHs in the village                           182.071         125.452    -13.339       17.600         -77.696
                                                                            (22.191)      (18.330)       (44.669)
# of infants per HH                                 0.291          0.091      -0.004        -0.026          0.009
                                                                             (0.014)       (0.022)        (0.019)
# of infants who died in the past year per HH       0.041          0.060      -0.004        -0.005         -0.008
                                                                             (0.009)       (0.016)        (0.006)
C. Household (HH) Socio-Economic Background in 2010

% HHs involved in farming as main activity          0.568          0.383     0.031          0.016           0.059
                                                                            (0.023)        (0.036)        (0.036)
% HH heads who completed primary education          0.376          0.260     0.004          0.057          -0.033
                                                                            (0.030)        (0.047)        (0.042)
# of assets owned (out of 11)                       5.625          1.956     0.032          0.202           0.000
                                                                            (0.164)        (0.266)        (0.193)
Average food security (1 to 4)                      2.225          0.619     0.032          0.066           0.012
                                                                            (0.039)        (0.060)        (0.058)
% HHs with high quality house wall material         0.410          0.411     0.009          0.024           0.000
                                                                            (0.028)        (0.025)        (0.058)
% HHs with high quality house floor material        0.424          0.410     0.004          0.034          -0.020
                                                                            (0.031)        (0.029)        (0.064)
% HHs with high quality house roof material         0.584          0.406     0.015          0.037          -0.020
                                                                            (0.027)        (0.034)        (0.053)
Standardized index of wealth                        0.000          0.927     0.027          0.088          -0.015
                                                                            (0.053)        (0.063)        (0.099)

Notes: Observations are at the village level. Sample restrictions are stated in the column headings. Each row
states the sample mean and standard deviation of a variable, as well as the estimates from three separate
regressions, where the variable is regressed on an indicator for NGO entry. All regressions include area fixed
effects. In parentheses, we present robust standard errors. In Panel C, the standardized index of wealth is an
equally weighted average of z-scores of 5 variables: average number of assets owned by a HH (out of a list of
11 essential household assets), average food security (1="deficit of food the whole year", 2="occasional deficit",
3="neither deficit nor surplus, 4="surplus"), % HHs with high quality wall material, % HHs with high quality
floor material, % HHs with high quality roof material.




                                                            34
                                                      Table 2: Supply of Health Workers

                                                  Dependent Variable: Presence of Health Workers in the Village in 2012

                                 A. Villages with a Gov Health Worker in 2010                 B. Villages with no Gov Health Worker in 2010
                                     (1)              (2)              (3)                        (4)               (5)             (6)
                                Gov = {0, 1}      NGO = {0, 1}       Total = {0, 1, 2}        Gov = {0, 1}      NGO = {0, 1}       Total = {0, 1, 2}
     Mean Dep.Var.                 0.740               0.479              1.219                  0.000               0.537              0.537

     NGO                            -0.430             1.000              0.576                   0.000              0.934              0.934




35
                                   (0.098)            (0.000)            (0.098)                 (0.000)            (0.069)            (0.069)
     Constant                       0.986              0.040              1.026                   0.000              0.052              0.052
                                   (0.162)            (0.044)            (0.162)                 (0.000)            (0.061)            (0.061)
     Observations                    73                 73                 73                     54                  54                 54
     R-squared                      0.432              0.973              0.542                    -                 0.934              0.934
     NGO p-value (RI)              <0.001             <0.001             <0.001                  1.000              <0.001             <0.001
     Notes: Sample restrictions are stated in the Panel headings. Observations are at the village level. In parentheses, we present robust standard
     errors. All regressions include area fixed effects and the following controls (measured in 2010): presence of a clinic within 10km of the
     village, number of households in the village, number of infants who died in the past year. P-values from randomization inference using 500
     random permutations are presented at the bottom of the table.
                                                           Table 3: Health Services

                Dependent Variable: Household Received Medical Care from the Following in the Past Year (2012) = {0, 1}

                                   A. Villages with a Gov Health Worker in 2010             B. Villages with no Gov Health Worker in 2010
                                         (1)            (2)            (3)                         (4)            (5)           (6)
                                                                       Any (NGO or                                               Any (NGO or
                                        Gov              NGO              Gov)                   Gov               NGO              Gov)
     Mean Dep.Var.                     0.546              0.238             0.623                0.045             0.231              0.265

     NGO                               -0.241             0.314             -0.112               -0.020            0.312              0.280




36
                                      (0.063)            (0.034)           (0.048)              (0.011)           (0.050)            (0.052)
     Constant                          0.655              0.065             0.659                0.028             0.012              0.053
                                      (0.084)            (0.061)           (0.068)              (0.034)           (0.103)            (0.083)
     Observations                      1,473             1,473              1,473                1,274             1,274             1,274
     R-squared                         0.244             0.173              0.166                0.006             0.233             0.186
     NGO p-value (RI)                  <0.001            <0.001             0.040                0.078             <0.001            <0.001
     Notes: Sample restrictions are stated in the Panel headings. Observations are at the household level. In parentheses, we present
     standard errors clustered at the village level. All regressions include area fixed effects and the following controls (measured in 2010):
     presence of a clinic within 10km of the village, number of households in the village, number of infants who died in the past year. P-
     values from randomization inference using 500 random permutations are presented at the bottom of the table.
                                     Table 4: Health Services and Mortality ­ Pooled Estimates

                                                                               Dependent Variable
                                            Household Received Medical Care from the
                                             Following in the Past Year (2012) = {0, 1}                   Infant Mortality (2010-12)
                                                                               Any (NGO or
                                              Gov                NGO              Gov)               1 died = {0, 1} Deaths/1,000 births
                                               (1)                (2)               (3)                    (4)              (5)
                                                                                                      HHs with a
     Sample:                                   All                All                All            birth since 2010        All
     Mean Dep.Var.                           0.313               0.235              0.457                 0.073               65.004
     Gov                                    0.430***             -0.049            0.396***               -0.051              -54.322
                                             (0.053)            (0.038)             (0.063)              (0.023)             (24.705)
     NGO [1]                                  -0.022           0.349***            0.310***               -0.033              -37.714
                                             (0.030)            (0.045)             (0.048)              (0.021)             (22.415)




37
     Gov × NGO [2]                         -0.243***             -0.078           -0.458***               0.064               51.653
                                            (0.074)             (0.059)            (0.078)               (0.032)             (31.767)
     Constant                               0.154***           0.101***            0.199***               0.103              101.926
                                             (0.026)            (0.029)             (0.036)              (0.017)             (16.836)
     Observations                            2,747               2,747              2,747                 1,402                 127
     R-squared                               0.422               0.203              0.278                 0.033                0.252
     Gov × NGO + NGO [1] + [2]               -0.265              0.271              -0.148                0.030               13.939
      p-value                                <0.001             <0.001               0.003                0.139               0.491
     [1] p-value (RI)                         0.260             <0.001             <0.001                 0.098                0.042
     [2] p-value (RI)                        <0.001              0.350             <0.001                 0.038                0.068
     Notes: The sample comprises of all villages. Observations are at the household level in col. (1)-(4) and at the village level in col.
     (5). In parentheses, we present standard errors clustered at the village level for household-level regressions and robust standard
     errors for village-level regressions. All regressions include area fixed effects. They also include the following controls (measured
     in 2010) and their interactions with NGO entry: presence of a clinic within 10km of the village, number of households in the
     village, number of infants who died in the past year. P-values from randomization inference using 500 random permutations are
     presented at the bottom of the table.
                                                  Table 5: Other Health Outcomes ­ Pooled Estimates
                                                   (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)      (6)       (7)      (8)      (9)     (10)    (11)     (12)    (13)    (14)    (15)
                                                  Mean                                                                                               Gov × NGO +
                                                  Dep.         Gov             NGO [1]       Gov × NGO [2]     Constant                              NGO [1] + [2]    p-values (RI)
     Dependent Variables                          Var.     Coef. Std. Err.   Coef. Std. Err. Coef. Std. Err. Coef. Std. Err. Obs.             R2     Coef. p-value     [1]     [2]

     A. Child Health Behavior = {0, 1}
     Children are fully immunized                 0.905    0.028   (0.033)   0.031    (0.023)   -0.047   (0.032) 0.885     (0.022)   2,045   0.238   -0.016   0.367   0.168   0.096
     Children sleep under bednet                  0.725     0.09   (0.031)   0.020    (0.033)   -0.096   (0.048) 0.692     (0.024)   2,747   0.091   -0.076   0.020   0.606   0.076
     Children drink treated water                 0.722    0.045   (0.040)   0.018    (0.028)   -0.024   (0.048) 0.694     (0.024)   2,747   0.213   -0.006   0.887   0.768   0.696
     Children wash hands before food & after      0.878    0.049   (0.027)   0.016    (0.020)   -0.072   (0.034) 0.862     (0.019)   2,747   0.091   -0.057   0.060   0.698   0.122
     Avg. standardized effect of outcomes above   0.045    0.131   (0.055)   0.076    (0.043)   -0.143   (0.068) -0.030    (0.037)   2,045   0.157   -0.067   0.197   0.200   0.080




38
     B. Disease Incidence for Children Under Age of 5 in the Past Year (Data Available for Children Under-5 Only)
     % Children under-5 who had cough             0.593      -0.028 (0.048) 0.008 (0.035)      0.015 (0.055) 0.602         (0.032)   1,783   0.205    0.023   0.537   0.786   0.774
     % Children under-5 who had diarrhea          0.284      -0.026 (0.047) 0.001 (0.036)      0.002 (0.056) 0.296         (0.032)   1,783   0.185    0.002   0.944   0.976   0.982
     % Children under-5 who had worms             0.348      -0.012 (0.044) -0.015 (0.039) -0.001 (0.060) 0.361            (0.031)   1,783   0.277   -0.016   0.659   0.702   0.978
     % Children under-5 who had TB                0.038      -0.005 (0.036) 0.016 (0.019) -0.022 (0.039) 0.038             (0.018)   1,783   0.112   -0.006   0.818   0.286   0.414
     % Children under-5 who had malaria           0.471      -0.025 (0.042) -0.014 (0.041)     0.023 (0.053) 0.487         (0.033)   1,783   0.123    0.009   0.739   0.714   0.630
     Avg. standardized effect of outcomes above   0.000      -0.045 (0.086) 0.009 (0.057) -0.007 (0.098) 0.022             (0.053)   1,783   0.160    0.001   0.982   0.850   0.932

     C. Couple Behavior = {0, 1}
     Use of contraceptives                        0.469    -0.079 (0.054)    -0.030   (0.040)   0.059    (0.066)   0.513   (0.034)   2,510 0.037 0.029        0.545   0.514   0.424
     Notes: The sample comprises of all villages. Observations are at the household level. In parentheses, we present standard errors clustered at the
     village level. All regressions include area fixed effects. They also include the following controls (measured in 2010) and their interactions with NGO
     entry: presence of a clinic within 10km of the village, number of households in the village, number of infants who died in the past year. P-values
     from randomization inference using 500 random permutations are presented in col. (14)-(15).
                   Table 6: Health Services and Mortality ­ Pooled Estimates, Decomposition by NGO Hiring
                                                                                     Dependent Variable
                                                    Household Received Medical Care from the
                                                     Following in the Past Year (2012) = {0, 1}                Infant Mortality (2010-12)
                                                                                  Any (NGO or                                 Deaths/1,000
                                                       Gov            NGO              Gov)                 1 died = {0, 1}      births
                                                         (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)               (5)
                                                                                                             HHs with a
     Sample:                                             All               All               All           birth since 2010        All
     Mean Dep.Var.                                      0.313             0.235             0.457               0.073             65.004
     Gov                                                0.499              -0.040            0.425               -0.068           -63.305
                                                       (0.054)            (0.036)           (0.065)             (0.024)          (25.464)

     NGO [1]                                            0.001              0.351             0.318               -0.050           -56.473
                                                       (0.027)            (0.045)           (0.049)             (0.020)          (23.676)
     Gov × NGO × NGO hired Gov worker [2]               -0.524             -0.119            -0.584              0.132           110.073
                                                       (0.062)            (0.058)           (0.081)             (0.044)          (42.996)




39
     Gov × NGO × NGO hired new worker [3]               -0.020             -0.020            -0.328              0.023            26.667
                                                       (0.091)            (0.067)           (0.087)             (0.030)          (32.670)
     Constant                                           0.107              0.095             0.180               0.114           107.558
                                                       (0.024)            (0.028)           (0.035)             (0.017)          (16.853)
     Observations                                       2,747             2,747             2,747               1,402              127
     R-squared                                          0.469             0.209             0.289               0.047             0.357
     Gov × NGO × Hired Gov + NGO [1] + [2]              -0.523            0.232             -0.266               0.082            53.600
       p-value                                           0.000            0.000              0.000               0.022             0.101
     Gov × NGO × Hired new + NGO [1] + [3]              -0.019            0.331             -0.009              -0.027           -29.807
       p-value                                           0.805            0.000              0.883               0.215             0.183
     [1] p-value (RI)                                    0.982            <0.001            <0.001            <0.001            <0.001
     [2] p-value (RI)                                    0.354             1.000            <0.001            <0.001            <0.001
     [3] p-value (RI)                                    0.306             1.000            <0.001             0.978             0.974
     Notes: The sample comprises of all villages. Observations are at the household level in col. (1)-(4) and at the village level in col. (5).
     In parentheses, we present standard errors clustered at the village level for household-level regressions and robust standard errors
     for village-level regressions. All regressions include area fixed effects. They also include the following controls (measured in 2010)
     and their interactions with NGO entry and with Gov  NGO entry: presence of a clinic within 10km of the village, number of
     households in the village, number of infants who died in the past year. P-values from randomization inference using 500 random
     permutations are presented at the bottom of the table.
                            Table 7: Other Health Outcomes -- Pooled Estimates, Decomposition by NGO Hiring
                                                       (1)     (2)         (3)    (4)     (5)     (6)       (7)      (8)       (9)      (10)    (11)     (12)    (13)    (14)     (15)     (16)    (17)
                                                                                                                                                                          Gov × NGO        Gov × NGO
                                                                                                 Gov × NGO ×        Gov × NGO ×                                          × Hired Gov      × Hired N ew
                                                                                                  NGO Hired          NGO Hired                                             Worker +         Worker +
                                                      Mean           Gov                NGO      Gov Worker         New Worker           Constant                           NGO              NGO
                                                      Dep.                                                                                                                       p-               p-
     Dependent Variables                              Var.    Coef. Std. Err. Coef. Std. Err.    Coef. Std. Err.    Coef. Std. Err.    Coef. Std. Err. Obs.       R2     Coef. value      Coef. value

     A. Child Health Behavior = {0, 1}
     Children are fully immunized                     0.905   0.032 (0.034)      0.032 (0.023)   -0.064   (0.036)   -0.033   (0.031)   0.882 (0.022)     2,045 0.238 -0.032 0.156         -0.001 0.955
     Children sleep under bednet                      0.725   0.087 (0.032)      0.030 (0.031)   -0.101   (0.058)   -0.098   (0.050)   0.695 (0.024)     2,747 0.093 -0.071 0.116         -0.068 0.099
     Children drink treated water                     0.722   0.039 (0.043)      0.004 (0.028)    0.004   (0.055)   -0.011   (0.063)   0.698 (0.026)     2,747 0.215 0.008 0.864          -0.007 0.894

     Children wash hands before food & after toilet   0.878   0.059 (0.027)      0.017 (0.020)   -0.125   (0.040)    0.001   (0.043)    0.855 (0.020)    2,747 0.104 -0.108 0.002         0.018 0.642




40
     Avg. standardized effect of outcomes above       0.045   0.147 (0.057)      0.070 (0.043)   -0.207   (0.082)   -0.039   (0.076)   -0.041 (0.039)    2,045 0.165 -0.137 0.038         0.030 0.631

     B. Disease Incidence for Children Under Age of 5 in the Past Year (Data Available for Children Under-5 Only)
     % Children under-5 who had cough              0.593     -0.016 (0.048) 0.009 (0.036) -0.026 (0.060)     0.047           (0.061)   0.594   (0.033)   1,783   0.208   -0.017   0.685    0.055   0.259
     % Children under-5 who had diarrhea           0.284     -0.022 (0.048) 0.004 (0.036) -0.013 (0.064) -0.003              (0.058)   0.293   (0.033)   1,783   0.186   -0.009   0.844    0.001   0.975
     % Children under-5 who had worms              0.348     -0.004 (0.047) -0.025 (0.039) -0.018 (0.062)    0.026           (0.076)   0.356   (0.033)   1,783   0.278   -0.043   0.266    0.000   0.994
     % Children under-5 who had TB                 0.038      0.006 (0.038) 0.015 (0.019) -0.060 (0.045)     0.013           (0.037)   0.031   (0.019)   1,783   0.119   -0.046   0.163    0.027   0.297
     % Children under-5 who had malaria            0.471     -0.020 (0.042) -0.027 (0.044)   0.026 (0.057)   0.019           (0.058)   0.484   (0.033)   1,783   0.126   -0.001   0.964   -0.008   0.813
     Avg. standardized effect of outcomes above    0.000     -0.021 (0.090) -0.001 (0.059) -0.079 (0.106)    0.052           (0.107)   0.005   (0.055)   1,783   0.166   -0.080   0.247    0.051   0.526

     C. Couple Behavior = {0, 1}
     Use of contraceptives                            0.469   -0.079 (0.055) -0.020 (0.040)      0.047    (0.083)   0.067    (0.071)   0.513 (0.035)     2,510 0.039     0.027 0.682      0.048 0.391
     Notes: The sample comprises of all villages. Observations are at the household level. In parentheses, we present standard errors clustered at the village
     level. All regressions include area fixed effects. They also include the following controls (measured in 2010) and their interactions with NGO entry:
     presence of a clinic within 10km of the village, number of households in the village, number of infants who died in the past year.
Online Appendix ­ Not for
Publication
A        Balance
Table 1 column (3) in the paper compares the subsamples of villages with and without
NGO entry. To do so, we regress each base year village characteristic of Table 1 on
a dummy for NGO entry, with area fixed effects and robust standard errors. The
coefficient of the NGO dummy captures the difference across the two subsamples.
Consistent with randomization, none of the differences are statistically different from
zero. Since the randomization was not stratified on the presence of a government
health worker, we examine the balance of the randomization of NGO within the
subsample of villages with a pre-existing government worker (column 4) and the
subsample of villages without a pre-existing government worker (column 5). We find
that the characteristics are balanced in each subsample. For villages with a pre-
existing government worker, only the "presence of a private clinic within 10km" is
statistically significant at the 10% level. Villages with NGOs are more likely to have
a clinic nearby. For villages without a government health worker at baseline, only the
coefficient for the number of households is statistically significant at the 10% level. It
shows that villages with NGO entry are on average smaller. We add both variables
as controls throughout our results.
    Appendix Table A.2 Column (3) shows that villages with and without a govern-
ment health worker at baseline do not differ systematically, even though this variable
was not randomly assigned. Column (4) shows that, among villages with the NGO
entry and with a pre-existing government worker, those where the NGO hired the
government worker are similar to villages where they did not.
    Appendix Table A.3 reports household-level summary statistics and balance checks
using the base year household survey. Note that we do not have reliable information
on household-level infant mortality at the base year. Also note that 26% of households
attrit between the baseline and endline. Reassuringly, the attrition rate is balanced
across groups (Panel D). Moreover, there is no evidence of systematic differential
attrition by household baseline characteristics (Appendix Table A.4).46 As a result,
 46
      Table A.4 tests for differential attrition by regressing the likelihood that a household attrit on

                                                    1
differences between treatment and control households are comparable when estimated
in the full sample of households (attrit or not attrit) or when estimated in the sample
that did not attrit. In Appendix Table A.8, we bound the effect of NGO entry on
access to health services using the trimming procedure proposed by Lee (2009). As
shown in the table, the lower bound of the effect of NGO on access to care from NGO
worker, government worker or any worker is positive and significant.47


B      Mortality
Household-level data on mortality are collected in the 2012 endline survey. For each
household, we know the total number of children born between the two waves of
surveys ­ i.e., between baseline (May 2010) and endline (December 2012) ­ but we
do not know their birth dates. For each of these children, we also know whether
they died or not before endline. If they died, we know the age at which they died in
years (i.e., died at 0, 1, or 2 years old). We do not observe the age of death in years
and not in months. Thus, we cannot calculate under-one-month (infant) mortality or
under-five mortality.
    We calculate the village-level infant mortality ratio as the number of children in
the village who were born and who died below age one between the two waves of
surveys divided by the number of children who were born between the two waves of
surveys times 1,000. Any child born before endline (2012) and dead before the age
of one after endline (2012) increases the infant mortality ratio denominator by one
without increasing the numerator, thus causing us to underestimate infant mortality.
Bjorkman-Nyqvist, Guariso, Svensson, and Yanagizawa-Drott (2019) addresses this
by measuring age in months, which we do not observe.48
treatment assignment interacted with household baseline characteristics.
  47
     The procedure trims observations from above (below) in the group with lower attrition, to
equalize the number of observations across groups. It then re-estimates the effect of NGO entry in
the trimmed sample to deliver the lower (upper) bounds for the true treatment effect.
  48
     For example, Bjorkman-Nyqvist, Guariso, Svensson, and Yanagizawa-Drott (2019) calculates
that a child who is three months old in 2012 is exposed 1/4 [3/4] of a year while a child born after
2010 and who is more than one in 2012 is exposed a full year.




                                                 2
C      Mortality
We consider several reasons that aid workers will be less effective in reducing infant
mortality than government workers. These are complementary, but distinct, from the
crowding out channels discussed in the main paper.


C.1      Trust
Motivated by recent studies that document a connection between trust and health ser-
vice demand (Alsan, 2015; Lowes and Montero, 2018; Martinez-Bravo and Stegmann,
2018), we consider the possibility that aid workers are less effective in reducing mor-
tality than government workers because of distrust from the local population. In
the sub-Saharan African context, Lowes and Montero (2018) document the negative
effects of Colonial medical practices on trust in foreign organizations. One may be
concerned that rural Ugandans, who were formerly colonized by the British Empire,
are more trustful of health services provided by the Ugandan government than a for-
eign NGO. This could lead to an increase in mortality when the NGO enters and the
government workers switches to the NGO. Being aware of the importance of trust
and local ties, the NGO recruits only local women to be health workers. Most im-
portantly, the result on service decline is driven by places where the health worker is
generally the same person as before. Thus, trust is unlikely to play an important role
in our context.


C.2      Coordination with Government Clinics
Another reason for why aid workers may be less effective in reducing mortality than
government workers is the possibility that they coordinate less with government clinics
and hospitals in urban area. Staff absenteeism is high in such facilities and assisted
deliveries can significantly reduce risk.49 Lower coordination between aid workers and
  49
     31% of the households in our study report staff absenteeism in public health facilities as a
major constraint to the access of health services. The Uganda National Health Organization doc-
uments a 48% average rate of staff absenteeism in Ugandan public health facilities, with more
highly trained workers (doctors, clinical officers) being more likely absent than less trained work-
ers (Nyamweya, Yekka, Mubutu, Kasozi, and Muhindo, 2017; Mukasa, Sensoy Bahar, Ssewamala,
KirkBride, Kivumbi, Namuwonge, and Damulira, 2019). This creates excessively long lines, which,
for pregnant women, increases the risk of having to deliver in the health facilities without assistance
from a health professional. Existing studies show that health services improve and mortality declines
when there is someone in the community who is in close contact with the doctor/nurse of the urban


                                                  3
government medical staff may be because aid workers are less motivated to exert effort
to coordinate, or because coordination costs are lower for two public-sector workers
than between a public-sector worker and a foreign aid worker. This can be viewed
as another way in which the lack of coordination between the government and NGO
can reduce health outcomes in villages where the government worker is "poached" by
the NGO.
    We investigate this possibility by examining the effect of NGO entry on whether
a woman delivers in a clinic and whether the delivery is assisted by the clinic staff.
These variables are only available for households which have given birth within one
year of the 2012 survey, for whom such care is most salient. Thus, the sample size is
much smaller than for the main analysis shown earlier. Appendix Table A.9 column
(1) shows that NGO entry has no effect on the probability of delivering in a clinic
(versus at home) in villages with no government health workers. In villages with
a government health worker, NGO entry reduces the probability of delivering in a
clinic, but the estimate is only significant at the 20% level. Column (2) shows that
the estimates for assisted delivery are more precise. In villages with no government
health worker, NGO entry increases assisted delivery by 20.1 percentage-points. In
villages with a government worker, NGO entry reduces the probability of an assisted
delivery by 10.4 percentage-points. The estimates are statistically significant at the
10% level. These results are consistent with concerns of absenteeism in government
clinics and reduced coordination between aid workers and the clinic staff.
    In column (3), we examine the probability of a post-natal visit soon after birth,
which along with assisted hospital delivery, is one of the services promoted by the
World Health Organization and UNICEF as key to reducing infant mortality (e.g.,
UNICEF, 2009; World Health Organization, 2014). We find that NGO entry in
villages with no government health worker increases the probability of a post-natal
visit within the first two months of birth by 19.4 percentage-points. In villages with a
government worker, NGO entry reduces the probability of a visit by 21.6 percentage-
points. The estimates are statistically significant at the 1% level. These results are
interesting because post-natal visits require effort on the part of the health worker,
health facility and who can coordinate patient visits with them (Mogensen, 2005; Sodemann, Biai,
Jakobsen, and Aaby, 2006). Absenteeism is not unique to either the contexts of Uganda or the
health sector. For example, Duflo, Hanna, and Ryan (2012) document high levels of absenteeism in
teachers in India.




                                               4
but little coordination with government clinics.50
   Taken together, the results in Appendix Table A.9 are consistent with less coor-
dination between NGO workers and the government clinic as a cause of increased in-
fant mortality after the NGO enters. They also emphasize the importance of reduced
worker effort for explaining mortality. Note that the limited sample size prevents
our decomposing these results according to whether the NGO hired the government
worker.


C.3      Selection into Fertility
Increased mortality may also result from a change in fertility patterns, for example, if
NGO entry in villages with a former government worker increased higher-risk births.
This is related to worker effort since, in principle, the health worker can help to pre-
vent high-risk births by providing better prenatal care and family planning advice.
We investigate this by examining the effect of NGO entry on fertility and the types of
households giving birth (i.e., triple interaction of NGO entry, the presence of a gov-
ernment health worker, and household or village baseline characteristics). Appendix
Table A.10 shows that NGO entry reduces (has no effect on) the probability of giving
birth between the baseline and endline surveys by 4.3 percentage-points in villages
with (without) a government health worker. However, NGO entry in villages with
a government health worker does not cause differential fertility across a number of
proxies for health risk (e.g., mother's age and education) or access to health care (e.g.,
household wealth, distance to a clinic, baseline mortality rates). This goes against
selection into fertility driving the increase in mortality. Note that we can further
decompose the estimates according to whether the NGO hired a government worker
(i.e., estimate quadruple interaction effects). Appendix Table A.10 shows that they
are similarly unsuggestive of differential fertility patterns.


C.4      Drug Prices
Since government health workers give out drugs for free, while aid workers sell the
same drugs at a low price, the crowding out of the government worker can increase
  50
    In principle, post-natal visits can be provided by clinic staff as well as the community health
workers that we study. In practice, they are provided by the latter in our context. We do not have
data on prenatal visits.



                                                5
the price of medical treatments. This can, in turn, cause the shift of workers from the
government to the NGO to increase mortality. We investigate this by examining the
cost of treatment (drug prices, the cost of transportation to obtain treatment, and the
cost of diagnostic medical tests) for the three most relevant diseases in our contexts
(malaria, diarrhea and pneumonia). Using these measures as dependent variables in
our baseline (equation 2), we find no evidence that this alternative mechanism plays
a major role. See Appendix Table A.11.


D     Average Effect of NGO Entry
Appendix Table A.12 presents the average effects of NGO entry, where we regress
the main outcomes of interest on the uninteracted NGO dummy variable, controlling
for area fixed effects, for the full sample of villages (those with and without a pre-
existing government health worker). NGO entry increases medical care from NGO
health workers by 31.5 percentage-points (column 1) and reduces medical care from
government health workers by 17.2 percentage-points (column 2). Both estimates
are statistically significant at the 1% level. NGO entry has no effect on total health
care. The estimate in column (3) is small in magnitude and statistically imprecise.
Columns (4) and (5) show that NGO entry has, on average, no effect on mortality:
the estimates are small in magnitude and statistically imprecise.
    A comparison of the estimates of the average impact of NGO entry with the main
results presented earlier highlights the importance of allowing for heterogeneity, which
reveals both the positive and negative effects of NGO entry.


E     Non-Linear Estimation
The main results are estimated with a Linear Probability Model. We can alterna-
tively estimate non-linear Logistic regressions for the binary outcomes of whether a
household received medical care from the NGO or government worker and for mor-
tality (measured as a dummy variable that equals one if at least one infant died in
the household). The estimates, shown in Appendix Table A.13, are consistent with
those from the main regressions.




                                           6
                                       Figure A.1: Unit Price & Margin per Product Sold by the NGO
                                5000

                                4500

                                4000
    PRICE AND MARGIN (IN UGX)




                                3500

                                3000

                                2500

                                2000

                                1500

                                1000

                                500

                                  0




                                                    NGO PRICE   WORKER PRICE   UNIT MARGIN


Notes: This figure presents the list of products sold by the NGO workers, ranked from lowest to highest unit
margin. The unit margin equals the price at which the health worker sells the products in her community
("worker price") minus the price at which she buys the products from the NGO ("NGO price"). Prices are
expressed in Ugandan Shillings (1$=3,691 UGX in December 2012).




                                                                     7
                               Table A.1: NGO Workers Characteristics
                                                                          Mean           SD
                                                                           (1)           (2)
    Observations (# NGO workers)                                                   66
    Age                                                                   33.545        10.218

    Completed primary education = {0, 1}                                  0.652         0.480

    Completed secondary education = {0, 1}                                0.258         0.441




8
    Was working as Gov health worker = {0, 1}                             0.212         0.412

       ..among villages with Gov health worker in 2010                    0.389         0.494

       ..among villages with Gov health worker in 2010 and none in 2012   0.824         0.393

    # of working hours as a health worker in the past week                13.106        8.891

    Health worker earnings in the past month (in thousand UGX)            52.335        66.986

    Notes: Observations are at the NGO worker level.
             Table A.2: Summary Statistics and Balance Checks (Part 2)
                                                                                               NGO Entry and Gov
Sample of villages:                                            All                  All
                                                                                                Worker in 2010

                                                     Mean              SD          Gov           NGO Hired Gov
                                                         (1)           (2)          (3)                 (4)

Observations                                                   127                  127                 36
A. Presence of a Health Care Provider in 2010 = {0, 1}

Traditional healer in the village                    0.480            0.502        -0.027              -0.187
                                                                                  (0.125)             (0.206)
Drug store in the village                            0.677            0.469        -0.023               0.203
                                                                                  (0.044)             (0.116)
Government clinic within 10 km                       0.559            0.498        -0.054              -0.312
                                                                                  (0.108)             (0.261)
Private clinic within 10km                           0.835            0.373         0.006               0.120
                                                                                  (0.047)             (0.095)
B. Village Size and Infant Mortality in 2010
# of HHs in the village                             182.071          125.452      -45.290              -76.953
                                                                                 (29.111)             (31.802)
# of infants per HH                                  0.291            0.091        -0.024               -0.001
                                                                                  (0.019)              (0.043)
# of infants who died in the past year per HH        0.041            0.060        -0.007               -0.037
                                                                                  (0.006)              (0.024)
C. Household (HH) Socio-Economic Background in 2010

% HHs involved in farming as main activity           0.568            0.383         0.025               0.018
                                                                                  (0.027)             (0.049)
% HH heads who completed primary education           0.376            0.260        -0.016               0.050
                                                                                  (0.035)             (0.104)
# of assets owned (out of 11)                        5.625            1.956         0.133               0.608
                                                                                  (0.177)             (0.677)
Average food security (1 to 4)                       2.225            0.619         0.024              -0.077
                                                                                  (0.041)             (0.137)
% HHs with high quality house wall material          0.410            0.411        -0.027               0.053
                                                                                  (0.044)             (0.050)
% HHs with high quality house floor material         0.424            0.410        -0.028               0.057
                                                                                  (0.045)             (0.063)
% HHs with high quality house roof material          0.584            0.406        -0.001               0.046
                                                                                  (0.031)             (0.057)
Standardized index of wealth                         0.000            0.927        -0.006               0.113
                                                                                  (0.070)             (0.156)
Notes: Observations are at the village level. Sample restrictions are stated in the column headings. Each row states
the sample mean and standard deviation of a variable, as well as the estimates from two separate regressions,
where the variable is regressed on an indicator for presence of a gov health worker in 2010 (col. 3), and an
indicator for whether the NGO hired the gov health worker after its arrival (col. 4). All regressions include area
fixed effects. In parentheses, we present robust standard errors.




                                                           9
                 Table A.3: Summary Statistics and Balance Checks (Part 3)

                                                                                                            Gov Worker in        No Gov Worker in
Sample of Villages:                                                  All                      All               2010                  2010
                                                             Mean           SD      NGO             Obs.    NGO       Obs.        NGO        Obs.
                                                              (1)           (2)      (3)             (4)     (5)       (6)         (7)        (8)

A. Household Received Medical Care from [...] in the Past Year (2010) = {0, 1}
Gov health worker                                            0.037         0.189     -0.008         3,727    -0.015   2,119        0.001     1,608
                                                                                    (0.006)                 (0.010)               (0.008)
Traditional healer                                           0.024         0.154     -0.002         3,727    -0.001   2,119        0.004     1,608
                                                                                    (0.005)                 (0.008)               (0.006)
Drug store                                                   0.151         0.358     -0.002         3,727    -0.016   2,119        0.003     1,608
                                                                                    (0.019)                 (0.016)               (0.037)
Government clinic                                            0.251         0.434     -0.016         3,727    -0.034   2,119        0.022     1,608
                                                                                    (0.021)                 (0.033)               (0.029)
Private clinic                                               0.391         0.488     -0.013         3,727    -0.023   2,119        0.010     1,608
                                                                                    (0.020)                 (0.024)               (0.030)
B. Socio-Economic Background in 2010
# of infants                                                 0.283         0.485      0.023         3,745     0.017   2,131         0.047    1,614
                                                                                    (0.018)                 (0.028)               (0.022)
Involved in farming as main activity = {0, 1}                0.519         0.500     -0.034         3,745    -0.056   2,131        -0.008    1,614
                                                                                    (0.018)                 (0.031)               (0.022)
Mother's age                                                 31.22         10.167    -0.098         3,537    -0.223   2,004        -0.128    1,533
                                                                                    (0.395)                 (0.620)               (0.431)
Mother completed primary education = {0, 1}                  0.383         0.486     -0.005         3,745     0.037   2,131        -0.048    1,614
                                                                                    (0.024)                 (0.033)               (0.037)
# of assets owned (out of 11)                                5.600         2.838     -0.022         3,745     0.098   2,131        -0.007    1,614
                                                                                    (0.125)                 (0.201)               (0.155)
Food security (1 to 4)                                       2.223         0.876      0.029         3,727     0.031   2,119         0.026    1,608
                                                                                    (0.028)                 (0.037)               (0.050)
High quality house wall material = {0, 1}                    0.413         0.492     -0.005         3,745     0.018   2,131        -0.035    1,614
                                                                                    (0.025)                 (0.021)               (0.051)
High quality house floor material = {0, 1}                   0.427         0.495     -0.007         3,745     0.024   2,131        -0.044    1,614
                                                                                    (0.027)                 (0.021)               (0.056)
High quality house roof material = {0, 1}                    0.593         0.491     -0.003         3,745     0.019   2,131        -0.056    1,614
                                                                                    (0.024)                 (0.029)               (0.046)
Standardized index of wealth                                 0.000         0.802     -0.001         3,745     0.039   2,131        -0.049    1,614
                                                                                    (0.035)                 (0.035)               (0.069)
C. Health Outcomes and Behavior in 2010
Children sleep under bednet = {0, 1}                         0.687         0.464     -0.020         3,745    -0.023   2,131        -0.017    1,614
                                                                                    (0.022)                 (0.032)               (0.033)
Children drink treated water = {0, 1}                        0.684         0.465     -0.003         3,745    -0.008   2,131        -0.003    1,614
                                                                                    (0.023)                 (0.037)               (0.036)
Children wash hands before food & after toilet = {0, 1}      0.928         0.259     -0.005         3,745    -0.015   2,131        -0.003    1,614
                                                                                    (0.011)                 (0.017)               (0.014)
% Children under-5 who had cough in past year                0.533         0.456      0.008         3,650     0.016   2,064        -0.012    1,586
                                                                                    (0.019)                 (0.024)               (0.032)
% Children under-5 who had diarrhea in past year             0.325         0.429      0.002         3,650     0.006   2,064         0.012    1,586
                                                                                    (0.016)                 (0.026)               (0.023)
% Children under-5 who had worms in past year                0.297         0.431      0.001         3,650    -0.028   2,064         0.043    1,586
                                                                                    (0.018)                 (0.024)               (0.028)
% Children under-5 who had TB in past year                   0.015         0.107     -0.003         3,650    -0.004   2,064        -0.002    1,586
                                                                                    (0.004)                 (0.005)               (0.005)
% Children under-5 who had malaria in past year              0.620         0.437      0.014         3,650    -0.022   2,064         0.054    1,586
                                                                                    (0.014)                 (0.021)               (0.016)
Use of contraceptives = {0, 1}                               0.332         0.471     -0.004         3,549     0.005   2,017        -0.009    1,532
                                                                                    (0.019)                 (0.027)               (0.030)
D. Attrition
Attrition (HH not interviewed at Endline) = {0, 1}           0.266         0.442     0.019          3,745    0.051    2,131        -0.048    1,614
                                                                                    (0.023)                 (0.036)               (0.032)

Notes: Observations are at the household level. Sample restrictions are stated in the column headings. Each row states the sample mean and
standard deviation of a variable, as well as the estimates from three separate regressions, where the variable is regressed on an indicator for
NGO entry. All regressions include area fixed effects. In parentheses, we present standard errors clustered at the village level. In Panel B, the
standardized index of wealth is an equally weighted average of z-scores of 5 variables: number of assets owned by a HH (out of a list of 11
essential household assets), food security (1="deficit of food the whole year", 2="occasional deficit", 3="neither deficit nor surplus, 4="surplus"),
high quality wall material, high quality floor material, high quality roof material. In Panel D, attrition is a dummy variable that take value 1 if the
household was interviewed at baseline but not at endline.




                                                                           10
                                                     Table A.4: Attrition
                                                                                     Dependent Variable: Attrition = {0, 1}
Sample of Villages:                                                            All                                    Gov Worker in 2010

                                                          NGO          X*            NGO × X*     Obs.      NGO          X*      NGO × X*   Obs.
                                                           (1)         (2)              (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)      (8)

List of X*:
Household Received Medical Care from [...] in the Past Year (2010) = {0, 1}
Gov health worker                                         0.017       -0.066            0.062     3,727      0.048      -0.058      0.058   2,119
                                                        (0.023)      (0.095)          (0.120)               (0.034)    (0.114)    (0.143)
Traditional healer                                        0.019       -0.046            0.002     3,727      0.054       0.006     -0.088   2,119
                                                        (0.023)      (0.052)          (0.085)               (0.035)    (0.068)    (0.104)
Drug store                                                0.024        0.006           -0.036     3,727      0.052      -0.014     -0.013   2,119
                                                        (0.024)      (0.034)          (0.056)               (0.037)    (0.033)    (0.065)
Government clinic                                         0.011       -0.054            0.030     3,727      0.030      -0.092      0.089   2,119
                                                        (0.023)      (0.022)          (0.042)               (0.036)    (0.030)    (0.050)
Private clinic                                            0.037        0.024           -0.044     3,727      0.054       0.011     -0.006   2,119
                                                        (0.026)      (0.026)          (0.036)               (0.040)    (0.034)    (0.048)
Socio-Economic Background in 2010
# of infants                                              0.007       -0.051            0.044     3,745      0.041      -0.032      0.036   2,131
                                                        (0.026)      (0.019)          (0.029)               (0.039)    (0.026)    (0.043)
Involved in farming as main activity = {0, 1}            -0.018       -0.086            0.068     3,745      0.010      -0.087      0.051   2,131
                                                        (0.026)      (0.031)          (0.039)               (0.053)    (0.046)    (0.059)
Mother's age                                             -0.019       -0.019           -0.005     3,537      0.011      -0.006      0.001   2,004
                                                        (0.055)      (0.055)          (0.001)               (0.078)    (0.001)    (0.002)
Mother completed primary education = {0, 1}               0.028        0.049           -0.024     3,745      0.051       0.025     -0.003   2,131
                                                        (0.029)      (0.025)          (0.035)               (0.042)    (0.034)    (0.051)
# of assets owned (out of 11)                             0.009       -0.002            0.002     3,745      0.028      -0.003      0.005   2,131
                                                        (0.046)      (0.004)          (0.006)               (0.056)    (0.006)    (0.008)
Food security (1 to 4)                                    0.014       -0.010            0.002     3,727      0.029      -0.008      0.011   2,119
                                                        (0.055)      (0.014)          (0.020)               (0.069)    (0.021)    (0.028)
High quality house wall material = {0, 1}                 0.037       -0.000           -0.042     3,745      0.043      -0.031      0.034   2,131
                                                        (0.033)      (0.029)          (0.040)               (0.042)    (0.039)    (0.054)
High quality house floor material = {0, 1}                0.035        0.027           -0.038     3,745      0.046      -0.001      0.018   2,131
                                                        (0.034)      (0.028)          (0.040)               (0.042)    (0.037)    (0.055)
High quality house roof material = {0, 1}                 0.044        0.078           -0.041     3,745      0.064       0.063     -0.031   2,131
                                                        (0.039)      (0.038)          (0.042)               (0.048)    (0.041)    (0.053)
Standardized index of wealth                              0.019        0.010           -0.016     3,745      0.054       0.006      0.011   2,131
                                                        (0.023)      (0.020)          (0.025)               (0.034)    (0.025)    (0.032)
Health Outcomes and Behavior in 2010
Children sleep under bednet = {0, 1}                      0.016       -0.018            0.004     3,745      0.069      -0.009     -0.028   2,131
                                                        (0.032)      (0.018)          (0.031)               (0.047)    (0.025)    (0.039)
Children drink treated water = {0, 1}                     0.042        0.054           -0.032     3,745      0.075       0.052     -0.038   2,131
                                                        (0.044)      (0.039)          (0.045)               (0.050)    (0.047)    (0.055)
Children wash hands before food & after toilet = {0, 1}   0.091        0.087           -0.077     3,745      0.166       0.114     -0.124   2,131
                                                        (0.051)      (0.035)          (0.048)               (0.061)    (0.037)    (0.061)
% Children under-5 who had cough in past year             0.032        0.015           -0.016     3,650      0.071       0.038     -0.023   2,064
                                                        (0.033)      (0.027)          (0.038)               (0.046)    (0.036)    (0.058)
% Children under-5 who had diarrhea in past year          0.014        0.001            0.033     3,650      0.050       0.009      0.030   2,064
                                                        (0.025)      (0.026)          (0.038)               (0.038)    (0.040)    (0.059)
% Children under-5 who had worms in past year             0.019        0.019            0.015     3,650      0.042      -0.013      0.064   2,064
                                                        (0.026)      (0.028)          (0.038)               (0.039)    (0.041)    (0.058)
% Children under-5 who had TB in past year                0.022       -0.083            0.118     3,650      0.059      -0.087      0.027   2,064
                                                        (0.023)      (0.086)          (0.160)               (0.035)    (0.104)    (0.161)
% Children under-5 who had malaria in past year           0.033        0.016           -0.016     3,650      0.059       0.049      0.003   2,064
                                                        (0.027)      (0.025)          (0.035)               (0.040)    (0.034)    (0.055)
Notes: Observations are at the household level. Sample restrictions are stated in the column headings. Each row presents the
estimates from a regression of attrition onto NGO entry, X*, NGO entry × X*, where X* is a household characteristics mesured
at baseline. All regressions include area fixed effects. In parentheses, we present standard errors clustered at the village level.




                                                                       11
                                     Table A.5: Health Services and Mortality ­ More Controls
                                                                                   Dependent Variable
                                                Household Received Medical Care from the
                                                 Following in the Past Year (2012) = {0, 1}                   Infant Mortality (2010-12)
                                                                                   Any (NGO or
                                                 NGO                 Gov              Gov)                1 died = {0, 1} Deaths/1,000 births
                                                  (1)                 (2)               (3)                    (4)               (5)
                                                                                                           HHs with a
     Sample:                                       All                All                All             birth since 2010          All
     Mean Dep.Var.                                0.235              0.313              0.457                 0.073               65.004
     Gov                                          -0.031             0.394              0.387                 -0.054              -63.993
                                                 (0.041)            (0.060)            (0.072)               (0.025)             (26.888)
     NGO [1]                                      0.371              -0.051             0.311                 -0.034              -46.037
                                                 (0.045)            (0.038)            (0.049)               (0.024)             (27.031)




12
     Gov × NGO [2]                                -0.108             -0.201             -0.449                0.062               56.218
                                                 (0.061)            (0.084)            (0.087)               (0.035)             (37.130)

     Constant                                     0.085              0.177              0.201                 0.108              110.227
                                                 (0.030)            (0.034)            (0.043)               (0.019)             (20.115)
     Observations                                 2,747              2,747              2,747                 1,402                127
     R-squared                                    0.216              0.437              0.288                 0.039               0.315
     Gov × NGO + NGO [1] + [2]                     0.264              -0.252            -0.138                0.028             10.181
      p-value                                     <0.001              <0.001             0.010                0.197              0.627
     Notes: The sample comprises of all villages. Observations are at the household level in col. (1)-(4) and at the village level in col. (5).
     In parentheses, we present standard errors clustered at the village level for household-level regressions and robust standard errors
     for village-level regressions. All regressions include area fixed effects. They also include the following controls (measured in 2010)
     and their interactions with NGO entry: access to health providers (government clinic within 10km, private clinic within 10km,
     drug store in the village, traditional healer in the village), village size (number of households in the village, number of infants per
     household), infant mortality (number of infants who died), household characteristics (farming is the main HH occupation,
     completed primary education, standardized index of wealth).
                         Table A.6: NGO Time Allocation Across Tasks (Reichenbach and Shimul, 2011).

                                                                Self-reported Activity for the Past Month
                                                  (1)              (2)            (3)              (4)                (5)
                                               % health                                                        Total time per
                                             workers who       Time                # of        Total time per activity as % of
                                             provided this (minutes) per         activities       activity        total time
                                                activity      activity           provided        = (2) x (3)  = (4)/2920 x 100


     Pregnancy identification                     98%               25               7               175               6%
     Attending delivery and providing
                                                  97%               28               7               196               7%
     newborn care




13
     Referral to hospitals or clinics             88%               21              11               231               8%

     Attending refresher training                 94%              231               2               462              16%

     Selling medicines                            99%               23              46              1058              36%

     Selling health commodities                   97%               21              38               798              27%


     Total per worker across activities                            349              111             2920              100%
     Notes : The sample comprises of 660 NGO community health workers interviewed by the NGO throughout Uganda in 2009.
     Workers were asked (a) which activities they performed as a health worker in the last month, (b) how much time was
     dedicated to each of these activities. Refresher trainings are organized on a monthly basis in the NGO branch office and are
     aimed to "refresh" workers' health knowledge and to allow workers to replenish their stock of health products.
                                   Table A.7: Targeting

                                            Dependent Variable: Household Received
                                            Medical Care from the NGO or Gov Health
                                              Worker in the Past Year (2012) = {0, 1}
                                                    (1)                    (2)
Sample of villages:                               NGO                   No NGO

Mean Dep.Var.                                        0.573                        0.668
Poor household                                       -0.136                       0.152
                                                    (0.055)                      (0.066)
Constant                                             0.615                        0.625
                                                    (0.034)                      (0.028)

Observations                                          694                          779
R-squared                                            0.187                        0.203
NGO = No NGO p-value                                               0.001
Notes: The sample comprises of villages with a gov health worker in 2010.
Additional restrictions are stated in column headings. Observations are at the household level. In
parentheses, we present standard errors clustered at the village level. All regressions include area
fixed effects. "Poor household" is an indicator for whether the household standardized index of
wealth is in the bottom quartile of the within-village distribution. The p-value "NGO=No NGO" is
the p-value of the coefficient Poor × NGO in a regression where the dependent variable is
regressed on NGO, Poor, Poor × NGO, area fixed effects, area fixed effects × NGO and standard
errors clustered at the village level.




                                               14
                   Table A.8: Health Services with Lee Bounds

                           Dependent Variable: Household Received Medical
                           Care from the Following Health Worker in the Past
                                          Year (2012) = {0, 1}
                                 (1)              (2)              (3)
                                                                        Any (NGO or
                                  Gov                  NGO                 Gov)

Mean Dep.Var.                     0.546                 0.238                0.623

NGO - Lower Bound                 -0.261                0.296                 -0.154
                                 (0.028)               (0.024)               (0.037)

NGO - Upper Bound                 -0.172                0.385                 -0.064
                                 (0.034)               (0.031)               (0.029)

Observations                      2,132                 2,132                2,132
Notes: This table presents Lee Bounds (2009). Observations are at the household level. In
parentheses, we present bootstrapped standard errors.




                                            15
                       Table A.9: Natal and Post-Natal Services

                                                      Dependent variable
                                        (1)                  (2)                     (3)

                                                     Delivery assisted by a   Post-natal visit
                                Delivery in a clinic health professional = within two months
                                      = {0, 1}               {0, 1}           of birth = {0, 1}
Sample:                                        HHs with a birth in the past year

Mean Dep.Var.                          0.744                 0.533                  0.265
Gov                                    -0.006                 0.392                 0.379
                                      (0.076)                (0.106)               (0.081)
NGO [1]                                 0.051                 0.201                 0.194
                                      (0.070)                (0.104)               (0.060)
Gov × NGO [2]                          -0.135                 -0.304                -0.410
                                      (0.095)                (0.119)               (0.088)
Constant                               0.783                  0.260                 0.060
                                      (0.072)                (0.096)               (0.059)
Observations                            407                   407                    407
R-squared                              0.164                 0.118                  0.243
Gov × NGO + NGO [1] + [2]              -0.084                -0.104                -0.216
   p-value                              0.200                 0.094                 0.001
[1] p-value (RI)                        0.390                 0.058                 0.000
[2] p-value (RI)                        0.114                 0.018                 0.000
Notes: The sample comprises of all villages. Observations are at the household level. In
parentheses, we present standard errors clustered at the village level. All regressions include
area fixed effects. They also include the following controls (measured in 2010) and their
interactions with NGO entry: presence of a clinic within 10km of the village, number of
households in the village, number of infants who died in the past year. P-values from
randomization inference using 500 random permutations are presented at the bottom of the
table.




                                                16
                                                                      Table A.10: Fertility
                                                                                          Dependent Variable: Birth since 2010 = {0, 1}
                                                   NGO × Gov                                                                                 Gov × NGO Gov × NGO × X*
                                                      × X*             NGO × X*          Gov × NGO              NGO                            + NGO    + NGO × X*
                                                           Std              Std                 Std                  Std
     X* of triple interaction below:               Coef. Err.         Coef. Err.         Coef. Err.         Coef. Err.      Obs.     R-sq.   Coef. p-val Coef.         p-val
                                                                                                            A. Baseline
                                                                                         -0.100 (0.049)     0.057 (0.035)   2,747    0.080   -0.043 0.107

                                                                                               B. Household-Level Characteristics
     Mother's age                                  -0.001   (0.004)   -0.001   (0.003)   -0.043 (0.136)   0.065 (0.099) 2,598 0.118           0.022   0.790   -0.002   0.467
     Mother completed primary education = {0, 1}    0.116   (0.082)   -0.098   (0.056)   -0.151 (0.059)   0.105 (0.046) 2,747 0.081          -0.046   0.124    0.017   0.772
     Standardized index of HH wealth                0.082   (0.070)   -0.085   (0.065)   -0.117 (0.061)   0.083 (0.054) 2,747 0.084          -0.035   0.228   -0.003   0.923
     Standardized index of child health behavior    0.120   (0.083)   -0.045   (0.064)   -0.180 (0.081)   0.087 (0.064) 2,747 0.084          -0.041   0.113    0.075   0.150
     Standardized index of disease incidence for




17
                                                   0.030 (0.089)      -0.072 (0.065)     -0.129 (0.088)     0.116 (0.072)   2,747    0.080   -0.046 0.084 -0.042       0.470
     children under-5
     Use contraceptives = {0, 1}                   0.038 (0.078)      -0.062 (0.056)     -0.112 (0.057)     0.080 (0.043)   2,613    0.087   -0.031 0.299 -0.024       0.658
     Farming as main activity = {0, 1}             0.061 (0.103)       0.047 (0.078)     -0.152 (0.069)     0.042 (0.040)   2,747    0.082   -0.111 0.033 0.108        0.103

                                                                                                  C. Village-Level Characteristics
     Clinic within 10 km = {0, 1}                   0.175 (0.206)     -0.027   (0.197)   -0.253   (0.200)    0.082 (0.193) 2,747     0.081   -0.170   0.005    0.147   0.022
     Traditional healer in the village = {0, 1}     0.079 (0.082)     -0.066   (0.055)   -0.133   (0.064)    0.083 (0.046) 2,747     0.080   -0.050   0.192    0.013   0.816
     Drug store in the village = {0, 1}             0.198 (0.204)     -0.226   (0.206)   -0.273   (0.197)    0.253 (0.199) 2,747     0.081   -0.020   0.639   -0.028   0.604
     # of HHs in the village                       -0.000 (0.000)     -0.000   (0.000)   -0.098   (0.090)    0.121 (0.066) 2,747     0.081    0.023   0.703    0.000   0.308
     # of infants per HH                           -0.473 (0.423)     -0.156   (0.363)    0.021   (0.124)    0.107 (0.115) 2,747     0.082    0.129   0.081   -0.629   0.021
     # of infants who died in the past year per HH 1.992 (0.866)      -2.137   (0.800)   -0.146   (0.054)    0.098 (0.037) 2,747     0.082   -0.048   0.141   -0.145   0.727
     Notes: The sample comprises of all villages. Observations are at the household level and standard errors are clustered at the village level.
     Each row is one regression. X* is defined in the row headings and is measured at baseline. All regressions include all lower order terms
     and area fixed effects. They also include the following controls (measured in 2010) and their interactions with NGO entry: presence of a
     clinic within 10km of the village, number of households in the village, number of infants who died in the past year.
                                                     Table A.11: Prices
                                                         Dependent Variable: Price of Treatment (Medication and Tests)
                                                    (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)
                                                   Malaria    Diarrhea Pneumonia            Malaria    Diarrhea Pneumonia
     Mean Dep.Var.                                  5.643         3.418        3.357           5.643        3.418        3.357
     Gov                                             -1.299       -0.588       -0.877          -1.534       -0.609       -0.924
                                                    (1.173)      (0.976)      (0.857)         (1.210)      (0.984)      (0.871)
     NGO [1]                                         0.332        -0.464       -0.149          -0.411       0.018        0.119
                                                    (1.160)      (1.214)      (0.960)         (1.007)      (1.337)      (0.987)
     Gov × NGO [2]                                   0.561        -0.319       0.092
                                                    (1.530)      (1.304)      (1.106)
     Gov × NGO × NGO hired Gov worker [3]                                                      1.880        -0.272       0.253
                                                                                              (1.596)      (1.398)      (1.118)

     Gov × NGO × NGO hired new worker [4]                                                      1.454        -1.560       -0.579




18
                                                                                              (1.537)      (1.592)      (1.277)
     Constant                                        6.148        4.143        3.822           6.274        4.144         3.84
                                                    (0.884)      (0.714)      (0.646)         (0.899)      (0.729)      (0.653)

     Observations                                   2,236         1,977        1,819           2,236        1,977        1,819
     R-squared                                      0.112         0.091        0.111           0.115        0.093        0.111
     Gov × NGO + NGO [1] + [2]                      0.893        -0.783       -0.057
      p-value                                       0.352         0.161        0.902
     Gov × NGO × Hired Gov + NGO [1] + [3]                                                     1.469         -0.254         0.372
        p-value                                                                                0.172          0.693         0.480
     Gov × NGO × Hired new + NGO [1] + [4]                                                     1.043         -1.542        -0.460
        p-value                                                                                0.359          0.023         0.480
     Notes: The sample comprises of all villages. Observations are at the household level and standard errors are clustered at
     village level. Prices are measured in 1,000 Ugandan Shillings. All regressions include area fixed effects. They also include the
     following controls (measured in 2010) and their interactions with NGO entry: presence of a clinic within 10km of the village,
     number of households in the village, number of infants who died in the past year. Col. (4)-(6) additionally include the
     controls interacted with Gov  NGO.
                                            Table A.12: Average Effect of NGO Entry

                                                                   Dependent Variable

                             Household Received Medical Care from the Following
                                Health Worker in the Past Year (2012) = {0, 1}                Infant Mortality (2010-2012)
                                  (1)               (2)                 (3)                       (4)              (5)
                                                                       Any (NGO or                            Deaths /1,000
                                   NGO                 Gov                Gov)              1 died = {0, 1}      births

     NGO                           0.315               -0.172               0.054               0.001             -6.777




19
                                  (0.027)             (0.040)              (0.037)             (0.014)           (13.797)
     Constant                      0.074               0.401                0.429               0.073             68.526
                                  (0.015)             (0.028)              (0.028)             (0.009)            (9.435)

     Observations                    2,747               2,747              2,747                 1,402              127
     R-squared                       0.185               0.345              0.220                 0.028            0.206
     Notes: The sample comprises of all villages. Observations are at the household level in col. (1)-(4) and at the village
     level in col. (5). In the parentheses, we present standard errors clustered at the village level in household-level
     regressions and standard errors in village-level regressions. All regressions include area fixed effects.
       Table A.13: Logit Estimation for Health Services and Mortality
                                                  Dependent Variable
                                 Household Received Medical Care from
                                the Following Health Worker in the Past        Mortality =
                                           Year (2012) = {0, 1}                  {0, 1}
                                    (1)            (2)          (3)                (4)

                                                             Any (NGO or
                                   NGO            Gov           Gov)              1 died

Mean Dep.Var.                      0.235          0.313           0.457           0.073

Gov                                0.072          2.744           2.187           -0.706
                                  (0.385)        (0.357)         (0.323)         (0.330)

NGO [1]                            2.631          -0.446          1.838           -0.464
                                  (0.359)        (0.369)         (0.269)         (0.337)

Gov × NGO [2]                      -0.859         -0.926          -2.509          0.856
                                  (0.437)        (0.559)         (0.392)         (0.443)

Observations                       2,747          2,747           2,747           2,747
Gov × NGO + NGO [1] + [2]          1.771         -1.372          -0.671           0.393
  p-value                         <0.001         <0.001           0.006           0.160
Notes: This table presents coefficients from a logistical regression. The sample comprises
of all villages. Observations are at the household level. In parentheses, we present
standard errors clustered at the village level. All regressions include area fixed effects.
They also include the following controls (measured in 2010) and their interactions with
NGO entry: presence of a clinic within 10km of the village, number of households in the
village, number of infants who died in the past year.




                                            20
