                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             PUBLIC INFORMATION IS AN INCENTIVE FOR POLITICIANS:
               EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM DELHI ELECTIONS

                                        Abhijit Banerjee
                                       Nils T. Enevoldsen
                                         Rohini Pande
                                        Michael Walton

                                      Working Paper 26925
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26925


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




For fieldwork and research assistance we thank Aditya Balasubramanian, Gaurav Chiplunkar,
Sarika Gupta, Sandra Levy, Patrick Mayne, Cory Smith, Yashas Vaidya, Jeff Weaver, and Ariel
Zucker. We thank Dominic Leggett and seminar participants for comments, and usaid div (AID-
OAA-G-12-00006), National Science Foundation (1063693), 3ie (OW2.099) and International
Growth Center for financial support. aea rct Registry is AEARCTR-0004975. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Abhijit Banerjee, Nils T. Enevoldsen, Rohini Pande, and Michael Walton. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Public Information is an Incentive for Politicians: Experimental Evidence from Delhi Elections
Abhijit Banerjee, Nils T. Enevoldsen, Rohini Pande, and Michael Walton
NBER Working Paper No. 26925
April 2020
JEL No. H4,O1,O12

                                         ABSTRACT

In 2010, we informed a random set of Delhi councilors, some ineligible for re-election in their
current ward, that a newspaper would report on their performance shortly prior to the 2012 city
elections. Using slum dwellers' spending preferences, we created a councilor-specific index of
pro-poor spending. Treated councilors increased pro-poor spending in high-slum wards. Cross-
cutting experiments suggest that the public nature of report cards, not access to information on
public services per se, incentivized councilors. Data on party ticket allocation and electoral
outcomes shows that, in low-information situations, credible public disclosures of politician
achievements matters to both parties and voters.

Abhijit Banerjee                                Rohini Pande
Department of Economics, E52-540                Yale University
MIT                                             Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive                               27 Hillhouse Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02142                             New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER                                        and CEPR
banerjee@mit.edu                                and also NBER
                                                rohini.pande@yale.edu
Nils T. Enevoldsen
nils@wlonk.com                                  Michael Walton
                                                John F. Kennedy School of Government
                                                Mailbox 57
                                                79 JFK Street
                                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                michael_walton@harvard.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at AEARCTR-0004975
         Public Information is an Incentive for Politicians:
             Experimental Evidence from Delhi Elections
        Abhijit Banerjee, Nils Enevoldsen, Rohini Pande and Michael Walton


                                         March 24, 2020



                                             Abstract

       In 2010, we informed a random set of Delhi councilors, some ineligible for re-election
       in their current ward, that a newspaper would report on their performance shortly
       prior to the 2012 city elections. Using slum dwellers' spending preferences, we created
       a councilor-specific index of pro-poor spending. Treated councilors increased pro-poor
       spending in high-slum wards. Cross-cutting experiments suggest that the public na-
       ture of report cards, not access to information on public services per se, incentivized
       councilors. Data on party ticket allocation and electoral outcomes shows that, in low-
       information situations, credible public disclosures of politician achievements matters
       to both parties and voters.


1      Introduction
Can government transparency increase politician accountability and make democracy work
better for citizens? In this paper, we consider a specific aspect of this wider question.
Can independent public validation of politician achievements, identified using freedom of
information data, make politicians more responsive to the development preferences of their
    
    Authors are affiliated with mit (Banerjee), Yale (Pande), Harvard (Walton), and unaffiliated
(Enevoldsen), and are listed in alphabetical order. Emails: banerjee@mit.edu, nils@wlonk.com, ro-
hini.pande@yale.edu, Michael_Walton@hks.harvard.edu. For fieldwork and research assistance we thank
Aditya Balasubramanian, Gaurav Chiplunkar, Sarika Gupta, Sandra Levy, Patrick Mayne, Cory Smith,
Yashas Vaidya, Jeff Weaver, and Ariel Zucker. We thank Dominic Leggett and seminar participants for
comments, and usaid div (AID-OAA-G-12-00006), National Science Foundation (1063693), 3ie (OW2.099)
and International Growth Center for financial support. aea rct Registry is AEARCTR-0004975.


                                                 1
electorates? And does the behavior of political parties and the electorate validate politician
responsiveness?
   We experimentally test the effect of a credible promise of revealing performance in-
formation to voters in the context of Delhi's city government (Municipal Corporation)
elections. We find that politicians' responsiveness to voter preferences increased. It also
altered the pool of politicians: parties weeded out some of those with the weakest records.
Consequently, voters' electoral choices became more responsive to politician performance.
   Delhi is one of the world's most populous cities. It is divided into wards with a single
councilor elected per ward for a five-year term. A gender quota that rotates across wards
in each election cycle renders a fraction of incumbent male councilors ineligible to re-run
from their current wards (henceforth "ineligible councilors"). (A cross-cutting caste quota
is mostly nonrotating.) A ward's gender reservation status is only announced a few months
before the election. A party can allocate an ineligible councilor a party ticket (i.e. the right
to be the party candidate) for a unreserved ward. However, it can be difficult for the party
to convey credible information about candidate quality in a new ward.
   A councilor enjoys multiple policy levers. She receives an annual fund to spend on local
development, typically the improvement of local infrastructure. She sits on committees
which manage distribution of publicly provided private goods and public goods. More
broadly, she is expected to be responsive to constituent demands.
   Our primary field experiment ­ the newspaper report card experiment ­ occurred at
scale covering 240 of Delhi's 272 wards. In 2010, two years prior to city elections, a random
sample of incumbent councilors were informed that, using performance data obtained under
India's Freedom of Information Act, a leading newspaper would report on their performance
a month before the next election. For a random subset of treated councilors, the newspaper
also immediately published midterm report cards, identical in structure to the final report
cards. The additional midterm report card treatment may have enhanced the credibility
of our primary treatment. However, it may have also had a councilor information effect,
increasing the salience of performance indicators (and current performance). (It may also
change citizen behavior and lead them, for instance, to hold a councilor accountable.)
   Within the sub-set of high-slum wards, we therefore implemented a cross-cutting experi-
ment to directly test for a councilor information (or salience) effect absent public disclosure.
Treated councilors received a State of Sanitation Information (ssi) based on audit in three
slums in their ward. This included geolocated information on quality of public toilets and
garbage removal. Two audit reports were provided ­ eight and two months prior to the

                                                                                                   2
election. The information was never made public.
       To evaluate whether disclosures ­ either anticipated public or real-time private ones ­
better align councilor spending with citizen preferences requires knowledge of citizen spend-
ing preferences (which likely vary by neighborhood characteristics). Here, we make use of
a slum survey that we conducted prior to launching the experiments. Using data from
residents in over 100 high-slum wards on their public spending preferences, we construct
preference weights for spending categories. Our focus on slum dwellers had multiple moti-
vations. First, slum infrastructure investments ­ for instance, building and repairing drains
­ are relatively inexpensive high-return investments for councilors, precisely because slum
infrastructure is so bad. Second, unlike other administrative funds that can only be used
in legal settlements, councilor funds can be invested in slums. Finally, our sampling choice
reflected our interest in whether anticipated performance disclosures can make elected gov-
ernments more accountable to poor citizens.
       Figure 1 shows a large divergence between slum dwellers' infrastructure priorities and
councilors' spending choices. Nearly 70% of our respondents describe sanitation (sewage
and drainage) as a concern, but only 16% of councilor funds are spent on it, against 54% on
roads, despite the fact that only 2% of our respondents complain about roads. Why do we
see this disparity? We conjecture that electoral returns to local sanitation improvements
are low as they are less visible. Figure 2 provides corroborative evidence: Over a quarter
of respondents believe that their councilor spends the least on sanitation. In comparison,
only 5% believe their councilor spends the least on parks and greenery, and 2% believe she
spends the least on schools. In reality, councilors spend 16% of their budget on sanitation,
but only 7% on parks and greenery and 3% on schools.
       Newspaper report cards thus provide an opportunity to inform (and advertise) councilor
performance on sanitation. Therefore, at least for high-slum wards, anticipated public
disclosures should incentivize councilors to move spending towards less visible but highly
valued investments (i.e. in a pro-poor direction).1
       Anticipated newspaper report card disclosures led spending allocations of councilors of
high-slum wards to be 0.62 standard deviations more pro-poor. We also observe a 0.37
standard deviation increase in their assembly and committee attendance. The estimated
effects are similar across treatment arms: councilors who only anticipated disclosure in 2012
and those who additionally received a midterm report card in 2010. This argues against
   1
    We define high-slum wards as wards where the fraction of slum area is above the median value computed
across all wards


                                                                                                            3
                  Figure 1: Councilor spending and constituent preferences

                                                                                                            54
                             Roads and lanes              2

                                                                           16
                        Sewage and drainage                                                                                    69

                                 Street lights¹                   8

                                                                  7
                         Parks and greenery           0

                                                          3
                       Education and schools                  5

                                                      1
                            Garbage removal                                                                 54

                         Other spending areas¹                        12

                                       Water²                                                                                       73

                                   Electricity²                                       31

                                     Rations²                                    28

                                       Health²                    8                                  MCD councilor spending

                               Law and order²                 5                                      Slum household faced problem

                                                              5
                                                                                             ¹       Not in household survey
                                     Pension²
                                                                                             ²       Not an MCD responsibility

                                                  0                         20              40                   60                      80
                                                                                           Percent


"MCD councilor spending" is the ward-mean of annual fraction of councilor spending (2007­2012). "Slum
household faced problem" is the ward-mean of slum households who specify each category in response to
  the question, "In which of the following areas have you personally faced problems in the last year?"
     Household responses are weighted within wards. Bold face indicates areas that are included in
                                preference-weighted spending measures.



any additional value from early information associated with the midterm report card.
   In contrast, actionable information via the private ssi treatment did not improve sani-
tation. This is consistent with our conjecture that the public nature of disclosure matters,
especially for less visible investments. For example, many citizens see public health gains
from sanitation improvements during monsoons, because drains don't flood. However, they
recognize these gains only if the monsoon floods are sufficiently severe. Additionally, since
wards have about 50,000 residents each, some investments that are locally visible will lack
visibility to voters farther away. This limits the direct spread of information about politician
investments from affected voters to a broader voting public. Newspaper report cards can
amplify information about such investments. First, because many voters routinely obtain
information via newspapers. And second, because parties use them to advertise candidates
to voters. The advertising effect can cause parties to favor allocating party tickets to can-
didates with a good report card, especially where they are less known, because they are
easier to advertise.



                                                                                                                                              4
             Figure 2: Constituent beliefs and preferences about councilor spending

                                                                      3.7

                        Believe that councilor                                                                              27.3
                              spends least on                              4.4
                                                              2.0


                                                                                                                                       29.4

                        Believe that councilor                              4.9
                              spends most on                   2.5
                                                                                                                     Roads and lanes
                                                               2.4
                                                                                                                     Sewage and drainage
                                                                                                                     Parks and greenery
                                                                           4.4
                                                                                                                     Education and schools
                            Prefer that councilor       0.1
                            would spend less on                                   6.7
                                                        0.1


                                                                          4.3

                            Prefer that councilor                                                                                             32.3
                           would spend more on                      2.9
                                                                          4.1



                                                    0                                   10                      20                 30
                                                                                             Percent of households


Each bar represents ward-mean of slum households who specify each category in response to, "What type
of project do you think your councilor spends most (least) on?" and, "What type of project do you think
   you councilor spends too much (little) money on?" Household responses are weighted within wards.
     Respondents were prompted with project categories. (The figure presents categories included in
preference-weighted spending measures; other prompts were "Water", "Health", and "Community centres."
             Beliefs and preferences about spending on garbage collection were not elicited.)



       To evaluate this hypothesis for why public disclosures influenced councilor behavior,
we turn to party and voter behavior in the 2012 elections. Four months prior to the
April 2012 elections, the government unexpectedly announced an increase in the number of
wards reserved for women from 33% to 50%. They also decided to randomize the reservation
status of wards. One third of incumbents in our sample were rendered ineligible to re-run for
election from their current ward.2 For ineligible councilors, the party faces a much sharper
decision: Should it allocate a ticket to an ineligible councilor for a different (unreserved)
ward where he will be less well-known (and perhaps have less opportunity to engage in
clientelistic politics)?
       The newspaper report card treatment influenced party ticket allocation. Treated incum-
bents were 12 percentage points more likely to run for re-election, with the effect concen-
trated among ineligible councilors. Within this group, ineligible treated incumbents with
a standard deviation more pro-poor spending than their counterparts were 13 percentage
points more likely to get a party ticket for a different ward. We also find suggestive evi-
   2
    While all councilors would have anticipated some likelihood of being ineligible, the increase in quotas
and choice of reserved wards was a surprise. Consistent with this, we show that report card impacts on
spending are unaffected by a councilor's subsequent eligibility status.


                                                                                                                                                     5
dence that the effects were concentrated among ineligible incumbents in high-slum wards,
and that some good performers were moved to other high-slum wards.
   Turning to the group of eligible councilors, roughly half of them received party tickets
to run from their current ward while only 2% received a ticket for a different ward. Report
cards don't benefit better performing councilors when it comes to ticket allocation. Thus,
it appears that the party perceives that electoral benefits from a good newspaper report
card are valuable when a councilor needs to run in a different ward, where he is less known.
   Ticket allocation treatment effects among ineligible councilors translate into electoral
gains. (One has to run to gain votes, but running does not guarantee winning.) Treated
ineligible councilors with a pro-poor spending record that is one standard deviation above
counterparts are 23 percentage points more likely to win. In contrast, and consistent with
the absence of ticket allocation treatment effects for this group, we see no treatment effects
on vote share within the pool of eligible councilors.
   Good newspaper report cards on ineligible councilors provide the party with reputa-
tional benefits. The incumbent party's vote share rises in a report-card treatment ward
where the incumbent performed well but was rendered ineligible. This ward-level treat-
ment effect is absent when a high-performing incumbent candidate remained eligible. The
latter may reflect the fact that across eligible councilors there is a second effect at work:
voter displeasure with the party when eligible good performers do not getting a party ticket.
   Our final result comes from randomization of the mix of four councilors whose report
cards were published in the same newspaper issue. Conditional on absolute performance,
an ineligible councilor who performs better relative to the other councilors featured in the
same newspaper edition is both more likely to get a party ticket and to receive a higher
vote share. This is further evidence that is supportive of a party advertising view ­ it is
easier to pitch a candidate when she is the best on the page ­ but also of an information
view ­ voters benchmark their candidate relative to the others on the page.
   To summarize, anticipated public disclosures led councilors in high-slum wards to move
their spending in a pro-poor direction. The party and electoral impacts of good performance
are concentrated among the group of ineligible councilors. For this group, we posit that
the advertising effect is particularly important since, if they received a ticket, it would be
in a ward where they are less known. Conversely, voters recognize that the party could
not have fielded the candidate in the current ward. The party, therefore, benefits from a
high-performing ineligible councilor's reputation in the current ward as well.



                                                                                                 6
2        Contribution to the Literature
Observational studies of the impact of media, typically, report a positive link between
media presence and quality of policies but have limited ability to disentangle selection
and incentive effects (Besley and Burgess 2002; Strömberg 2004; Snyder Jr and Strömberg
2010). We provide the first at-scale experimental study, conducted in conjunction with a
daily newspaper, that isolates how media can engender incentive effects for politicians.
        Recently, experimental studies on information disclosures have expanded. A first strand
of this literature reports on selection by voters in response to pre-election information
disclosures. These disclosures, especially when publicized by media, are associated with
corrupt incumbents faring worse in subsequent elections (Ferraz and Finan 2008), and
likewise for low-performing incumbents (Banerjee et al. 2011; Kendall et al. 2015). Chong
et al. (2014) highlight that a negative turnout effect can counter this selection effect. The
impacts are also muted or absent when information is delivered through non-media sources
such as pamphlets (Dunning et al. 2019). Finally, the impacts of soft information ­ for
instance, candidate debates ­ are sensitive to what the voters infer from it (Bidwell et al.
2019; Wantchekon 2003; Fujiwara and Wantchekon 2013).
        A second strand examines politician reactions to information disclosure. In the Philip-
pines, areas where beliefs about incumbent mayoral candidates were most adversely affected
by an information campaign saw more vote-buying (Cruz et al. 2016). Relatedly, candi-
dates in Sierra Leone increased campaign expenditures in areas where candidate debates
were screened (Bidwell et al. 2019).
        The final strand, and the one closest to our paper, evaluates longer-term effects of
anticipated disclosures on incumbent behavior. Bobonis et al. (2016) exploits the fixed
schedule of municipality audits in Puerto Rico. Mayors expecting pre-election information
disclosures are honest prior to, but not after, election. In contrast, Avis et al. (2018) observe
durable positive impacts of expected audits in Brazil on corruption among mayors.
        Corruption by politicians is sensitive to the electoral incentives they face, at least in
the short run. However, corruption and other governance failures differ in important ways.
First, while accusations and counter-accusations of corruption are common in electoral poli-
tics, the key is to be credible, and to be credible the auditing authority must be independent
and the evidence must be solid. For this reason such exposures are typically rare, unless
a lot of resources are put behind the anti-corruption authority.3 Put differently, credible
    3
        Avis et al. (2018) emphasize the prestige and credibility of a Brazilian auditor's job.


                                                                                                    7
corruption accusations are expensive to bring about and big news when they happen.
    Second, behind every corruption investigation there is the possibility of prosecution.
Avis et al. (2018) argue that the fear of prosecution can explain the entire effect on corrup-
tion that they find. While Bobonis et al. (2016) does not disentangle judicial and electoral
incentives, if pre-election report cards attract more attention than those published after,
then the impact could partially come from similar prosecution concerns.
    By focusing on councilor performance, captured by information about spending of dis-
cretionary funds, we consider a substantively different, and increasingly important, aspect
of performance. While India and Kenya are among the best-known examples of countries
that provide elected officials with discretionary constituency funds, such funding is on the
rise (International Budget Partnership 2010). The concomitant rise of freedom of infor-
mation acts in lower-income countries makes performance disclosures based on routinely
collected government data increasingly feasible (Mendel 2014). It is possible that councilor
performance in areas valued by voters is less visible and/or the set of voters that have
direct knowledge is relatively small. Both these reasons would suggest that credible and
broad-based transmission of information about councilor fund use can matter.4
    In summary, we evaluate the impact of relatively easy to obtain information, whereas
corruption audit studies consider costlier and more sensitive information. The fact that one
works tells us relatively little about whether the other will work.
    A closely related paper is Grossman and Michelitch (2018), a field experiment in Uganda
where a cso produced annual performance score cards for politicians. They also find
that public disclosure to citizens was critical; however, unlike our study, they rely on cso
intermediation.5
    We trace the full causal chain from the announcement of future report cards, through
politician behavior, all the way to the electoral fortunes of targeted politicians and their
parties. In doing so, we study an important but understudied question: How do information
disclosures influence the competition for party nomination? In related work, Besley et al.
(2017) found that gender quotas increased intra-party competition among Swedish men and
thereby leadership quality.6 As in our paper, they find that binding gender quotas engender
   4
     The impact of corruption information on electoral outcomes as reported in Ferraz and Finan (2008) are
substantially larger than those of performance information, as reported in Banerjee et al. (2011).
   5
     The cso created aggregate politician assessment while in our case, the ngo reported spending data, in
part because, as we will see, low and high income voters have different preferences. In addition, the cso
in Uganda disseminated report cards through public meetings (preceded by community mobilization). Our
experiment, by contrast, relied on the newspaper publishing report cards.
   6
     Our work is also related to papers on gender quotas in Indian politics ­ for instance, Beaman et al.


                                                                                                             8
greater selection among men. We provide causal evidence of such a selection mechanism,
since the party responds differently to ineligible candidates with similar spending records
but who differ in whether a report card was produced.


3     Setting and Experimental Design
3.1     Electoral and administrative structure of Delhi
A. Elections

With a population of over 18 million, Delhi ranks among the world's largest cities. Between
a quarter and a half of Delhi's population lives in slums (Delhi Human Development Report
2006).7 Delhi has a two-tier elected governance structure: a state legislature and a city
government. We focus on the city government, termed the Municipal Corporation of Delhi
(mcd). Plurality rule mcd elections occur every five years; each of the 272 city wards elects
a councilor. The party/coalition with the majority of councilors controls the corporation.
    Our experiments spanned the two years in the run-up to the April 2012 election. Of the
272 incumbents elected in the previous election in 2007, India's two main national parties,
bjp and inc, had the largest share of councilors at 65% and 25% respectively. Party leaders
nominate candidates for each ward; there are no primaries.
    These elections are subject to political affirmative action (quotas), for two groups: sched-
uled castes (SC) and women. Only members of an identified group can stand for election in
a ward reserved for that group. Four months prior to 2012 elections, the Delhi government
announced that gender quotas would increase from 33% to 50% and be stratified by SC
reservation status. Specifically, within each of the categories of SC reserved wards and other
wards, half the wards would be reserved for women.8 Wards in each category were listed by
(ascending) serial number with every odd seat reserved for a woman. Thus, wards reserved
for women were chosen effectively at random.9
(2012) find that quotas increased political entry by women.
   7
     The difference in estimates reflect differences in slum definition: for instance, whether they only include
notified slums (which were legally notified or declared as slum areas under the Slum Areas (Improvement
and Clearance) Act of 1956) or also include non-notified slums (typically illegal encroachment on land)
(DUSIB 2010). Residential status does not affect voting rights.
   8
     SC ward reservation is based on their ward population share, with priority given to wards with higher
SC population.
   9
     One additional level of stratification was used: In 2011 Delhi was split into three separate municipal
corporations, with all wards being assigned to one of the three. The SC reservation was implemented within



                                                                                                                   9
B. Councilor policy powers

Very broadly, councilors have access to four policy levers. First, via legislative activism:
Between 2007 and 2012, the mcd met, on average, 24 times per session. The average
councilor attended 19 times per session.
    Second, councilors are assigned to standing committees which are intended to meet
regularly and be responsive to citizen complaints about various government services.
    Third, councilors receive an annual discretionary fund for development works in their
ward. The annual amount varies and averaged 200,000 usd per year during the 2007­
2012 election cycle.10 Figure 1 shows the fraction spending in different categories for the
pre-treatment period (2007­09). Alongside, we summarize areas of perceived problems, as
reported in a household survey of slum dwellers and by neighborhood associations (these
surveys are described in the data section). Prima facie there is evidence of a mismatch
between reported needs and spending ­ we discuss this further in Section 3.3.
    Fourth, councilors provide and maintain local public goods including public toilets,
garbage removal, and drain cleaning. Toilets and garbage removal are managed on a con-
tractual basis by private or non-government organizations.11 Councilors help choose the
contractor, and can pressure or sanction them for non-delivery, in addition to directly
spending discretionary funds on fixing toilets or improving the garbage collection process.

3.2    Experimental Design
A. Partners

Our experiment on information disclosure was made possible by three partners. First,
Satark Nagrik Sangathan (sns), or Society for Citizens Vigilance Initiatives, which has a
mandate to promote transparency and accountability in government functioning. It was
involved with the passage of the 2005 Right to Information law (rti), which allows citizens
each municipal corporation and then the reservation for women was implemented separately within each
set of SC reserved and unreserved wards, as described.
   10
      The amounts were Rs. 7.1M in 2007­08, Rs. 20M in 2008­09, Rs. 5.0M in 2009­10, Rs. 5.0M in 2010­11,
and Rs. 9.5M in 2011­12.
   11
      The typical toilet contract sets maximum user price, states necessary facilities and requires regular
cleaning. 20­30 year contracts are awarded per facility, with a clause that should "unsatisfactory" condi-
tions fail to be improved within 15 days after notice is given, the contract may be rescinded. Garbage
contracts stipulate that operators provide bins for non-biodegradable and recyclable/biodegradable waste,
and segregate and collect waste daily (IL & FS Ecosmart Limited 2006). The typical garbage contract is
nine years, awarded at the zonal level, and includes a performance evaluation mechanism.



                                                                                                              10
          Figure 3: Example mcd councilor report cards in the Hindustan, 2012




to obtain official information about the functioning of the government. sns has a long
history of creating and then, in partnership with media outlets, disseminating report cards
on incumbent performance and qualifications of leading candidates for state and national
legislatures. Banerjee et al. (2011) evaluated one such experiment during the 2010 Delhi
state elections and found that it increased the vote share of better performing candidates.
   Our second partner was a leading Hindi daily newspaper, Dainik Hindustan which, at
the time of our experiment, was the second largest newspaper in Delhi in terms of market
share. The newspaper published report cards on incumbents (prepared by sns) in 2010
and 2012. Figure 3 is an example of one daily report in 2012: it includes report cards
on four councilors. For each councilor, it includes herphoto, patterns of spending from
her discretionary funds, which committees she served on, and her attendance at those
committees. There is no overall assessment or grade provided; rather, the reader is invited
to make her own mind up based on these relatively objective numbers.
   Our third partner was the jpal South Asia team that conducted toilet, garbage, and
drain audits and disseminated the State of Sanitation Information privately to councilors.




                                                                                              11
B. Newspaper report card experiment

Sample Our sample consists of 240 wards, with treatment assignment stratified on in-
cumbent party and zone.12 We randomly assigned 72 to be control wards, 58 to only receive
pre-election report cards (T1) and 110 to receive both midterm and pre-election report cards
(T2). Figure 4 shows a map of wards in our sample.

                      Figure 4: Map of Delhi wards by treatment status




Informing politicians about report cards Treatment councilors received a letter in
June 2010 from our partner organization sns. Appended to the letter was a copy of the
first set of report cards published by the newspaper on May 27, 2010. Common text in the
letters across treatment arms was:

       sns uses the rti Act to obtain objective information on the functioning of
       elected representatives and disseminates this information in the form of Report
       Cards. We collaborate with the media to disseminate these Report Cards.
  12
    We excluded 32 of Delhi's 272 wards: 5 where sns was doing community work, 10 where by-elections
occurred less than two years ago, and two zones (17 wards) with few or no slums, including rural areas.


                                                                                                          12
     Prior to the Delhi Assembly elections in 2008, sns developed Report Cards to
     disseminate information about the functioning of all 70 mlas in Delhi. Similarly,
     before to the 2009 Lok Sabha elections, they developed Report Cards on the
     performance of about 250 prominent Members of Parliament of the country.
     sns ran joint campaigns with Hindustan, the Times of India, Outlook magazine
     etc to disseminate these report cards.
     sns prepared midterm report cards of mcd councilors to inform people of the
     development work being done by councilors for the welfare of ward residents.
     Due to limited resources, we have not been able to prepare report cards for all
     272 councilors in Delhi. We have randomly selected 110 wards for which report
     cards are being prepared. The party-wise break up of the sample is the same
     as in the mcd. As you might be aware, these report cards are being published
     by the Hindi newspaper Hindustan (please find attached the report cards that
     appeared on May 27, 2010 in Hindustan)

   The T1 letter then went on to state

     Unfortunately, your ward is not in the list of 110 wards for which report cards
     are being prepared this time. However, in 2012, we will again be preparing
     report cards for these and more wards in Delhi. In 2012, we intend to include
     your ward.

   The T2 letter instead stated

     Your ward is one of the 110 wards for which the report card has been prepared.
     In 2012, we will again be preparing report cards for these 110 wards and for
     more wards in Delhi. We hope that dissemination of these report cards based
     on objective information will help people understand the development efforts
     being made by councilors for the welfare and betterment of their wards.

   The councilors in control wards received a letter that they were not selected for report
cards and would not be reported on until at least 2014 (two years after the election). All
treatment councilors received a reminder letter in February 2011.

Report card format Our ngo partner sns used the rti Act to obtain data from the
mcd on councilor spending, meeting attendance, and committee membership.

                                                                                              13
   For midterm report cards, over (roughly) a month starting on May 27th 2010, the
newspaper featured three report cards daily. Each report card included the councilor's
photo, spending patterns for discretionary funds, and committee attendance. The data
reported on covered the period between April 2007 to March 2009, inclusive.
   The 2012 report cards had the same format as those issued in 2010, but were published
in groups of four. They covered the time period between April 2007 to March 2011. As
data is released by fiscal year, we lacked spending data for the last year of the councilor's
term. The report cards were published in March 2012, the month prior to the election.
On a given day the newspaper featured four councilors. Because of publication constraints,
we were unable to publish all 2012 report cards before the 2012 election. We prioritized
publication of report cards for councilors eligible for reelection. Of 168 report cards for itt
councilors, 124 were published, comprising all report cards for eligible councilors and half
of those for ineligible councilors.See Appendix 8.2 for details. Throughout, we report ITT
estimates.
   We use the publication of four report cards on a single newspaper page to evaluate
yardstick competition, i.e. whether parties (and voters) valued a councilor's relative perfor-
mance. Report card placement on a newspaper page occurred in two steps. First, report
cards were categorized into comparable groups (by zone, eligibility, and "slumminess") and
within each group the wards were grouped into pairs. Next, two pairs were randomly chosen
to feature on the same page.

C. Private State of Sanitation Information (ssi) experiment

Can information on public good provision problems in a ward, absent public disclosure, suf-
fice to influence councilor behavior? To evaluate this possibility, the ssi treatment provided
councilors information on the state of toilets and garbage dumps in slums in their wards.
Recall from Figure 1 that sanitation and garbage were the two categories (where councilors
could act) which slum dwellers identified as the most problematic. The information was
privately conveyed and not put in the public domain.

Sample Our audits covered the sample of 108 high-slum wards where we also undertook
baseline surveys. We undertook a two-stage randomization. First, we randomized state
election jurisdictions into treatment and control and then randomized wards within treat-
ment jurisdictions into treatment and control. In each ward we audited, on average, three


                                                                                                  14
slums, giving us a sample of 310 slums across 108 wards. See Data Appendix 8.3 for details.

Information reporting The reports were based on public toilet and garbage dump (dha-
lao) audits in each slum.Three ssi audit rounds were conducted, with reports based on the
first two mailed to councilors (and legislators) in treatment groups. The first round of ssi
was distributed in August 2011, about eight months before the elections for councilors,
and the second round was sent in February 2012, only a couple of months prior to the
elections. The first summarized the baseline ssi audits conducted between April and June
2011 (Round 1), and the second compiled ssi audits conducted between November 2011 and
January 2012 (Round 2). The final round of ssi audits occurred immediately after the mcd
elections, from April through June 2012 (Round 3). Cover letters sent to the legislators
along with the audit result, explained the context behind the ssi audits. A cover letter for
the second round ssi audit read in part:

     As part of a study on urban poor in Delhi, we conducted a survey in 2010,
     which was done with [number of] families of your ward [ward identifier] in slum
     settlements and in low-income areas. Of these families, [percentage] reported
     that public toilets and sanitation are a major problem for their community, and
     [percentage] reported that garbage was a major problem for their community.
     You may recall, in September 2011, we sent you a report card in which we high-
     lighted the condition of the garbage collection points and public toilet facilities
     in your ward's slum settlements and in low-income areas. We have recently
     completed the second round of audits of garbage and toilet facilities in these
     areas, and we are again sharing this information with you. We hope this can be
     useful in your ward-related work. Our auditors have tried to cover all garbage
     points and public toilets in the slum settlements and in low-income areas that
     were audited.
     Information gathered by our auditors in your ward is enclosed with this letter.
     In the first part of the report card there is a summary of the status of audited
     garbage and toilet facilities, and in the latter part, their details. We are also
     enclosing a map of all these facilities where your attention is needed. Each
     facility has been assigned a code which is placed on its location on the map, so
     that you can easily identify it.



                                                                                               15
                                          Figure 5: Experiment timeline
                                                                                                              Parties
                                                                                                            finalized
                                                                       Gov't informed                          rolls
       2007 MCD                                        We informed
                                                        councilors       councilors
        Elections                                      of treatment     of eligibility                      2012 MCD
                                                                                                             Elections

      2007             2008               2009        2010            2011                   2012                 2013


             Councilor spending data

             period reported at midterm

             period reported at pre-election

             full term (never reported)
                                                              Newspaper publication
                                                                 midterm                                pre-election


                                                                             SSI audits
                                                                                     1          2           3

                                                                                  SSI mailings
                                                                                         1          2

                                                         Household surveys
                                                                 1               2




   Information on the state of drains was collected, but not shared with politicians, during
the second and third rounds of ssi audits. Spillover effects on this service could have been
positive, if, for example, the audits made them more aware of the problems in those slums,
or negative if there was a diversion of effort away from drains.
   Figure 5 summarizes the experiment and data collection timeline.

3.3    Data and Descriptive Statistics
Our experiments, and subsequent analysis, draw upon multiple sources of data.

A. Citizen preferences and slum incidence

We use aerial data on slum incidence to define a high-slum ward dummy that equals one if
the fraction of slum area in that ward exceeds the median value across all wards (about 1%).
High-slum wards have a mean of 7% slum area across 3.1 slums. Low-slum wards have a
mean of 0.1% slum area across 0.7 slums. Data Appendix 8.1 describes our ward selection,


                                                                                                                         16
and our sample frame of slums. In April­May 2010 (prior to launching our experiment),
we surveyed 5,481 slum households in 107 wards.13 Survey respondents were typically
long-term migrants: our average respondent had lived in Delhi for seventeen years.
       Figure 1 shows low alignment between (category-wise) councilor spending and problem
areas identified by slum dwellers. Councilors spend a majority of their funds (57%) on
roads, an area with significant corruption in contracting (Lehne et al. 2018). Roads are also
a visible form of infrastructure investment. Arguably, both factors make road investments
valuable to councilors. In contrast, slum dwellers report clean water, sewage management,
and garbage collection as the most problematic issues. Water in Delhi is privately provided
and is beyond the remit of the councilors; however drains and toilets are not. Despite
this, spending on drains and toilets at 17% constitutes a low proportion of councilor funds
(relative to roads). The next two highest expense categories for councilors also do not meet
slum dwellers' interests: provision and repair of lights (8%) and improvement of parks and
provision of gates (7%). In particular, slum dwellers express no interest in spending on
parks and greenery, which are typically located in non-slum neighborhoods.
       Figure 2 reports slum dweller beliefs and preferences over councilor spending. Over
a quarter believe that councilors spend the most on roads and the least on sanitation.
Roughly a third would like the councilor to spend more on sanitation.
       A comparison of actual spending with slum dweller beliefs (Figure 1 and Figure 2)
suggests that more visible infrastructure spending items (roads and parks and greenery)
are more salient to slum dwellers. For instance, respondents strongly believe that councilors
spend less on sewage and drains than on parks and greenery. In reality, councilors spend
twice as much on sanitation as on parks and greenery.
       In 94 of these wards we surveyed 250 office-holders of Resident Welfare Associations
(rwas) which represent households with legal status in the ward (and which are, on average,
richer than slum dwellers).14 Slum dwellers and rwa residents have different preferences:
rwa residents are ten times more likely to name roads as an important problem, put less
(but still substantial) emphasis on sewage, drainage, and garbage disposal and are keen on
parks and street lights, two items that the slum dwellers never name.15
  13
     This was intended to be identical to the audit sample. Due to slum mis-identification and other
surveying errors, the survey sample does not include four audit wards, but includes three other wards.
  14
     rwas are neighborhood associations that can formally interact with state agencies (Government of
National Capital Territory of Delhi 2014). Our rwa sample was drawn from the Delhi government list,
which we matched to wards based on the rwa's stated address. Not all survey wards had registered rwas.
  15
     Detailed results are available from authors on request.



                                                                                                         17
B. Councilor performance data

sns collated councilor performance data for all wards; only treatment ward data was sub-
sequently released as newspaper report cards. The report card included category-wise
spending of discretionary funds by the councilor (see Figure 1).16
       We combine these data with survey data on slum dwellers' preferences for infrastructure
to construct a pro-poor spending index as follows. We use a five category spending classifi-
cation: Roads and lanes, Sewage and drainage, Parks and greenery, Education and schools,
and Garbage removal. We weight each spending category by slum dweller preferences. We
use three measures of slum dweller preference to create three separate indices: the fraction
of slum households in the city reporting (1) that the issue is the biggest problem in their
area, (2) that it is a problem for them, or (3) that it is a problem for the community. For
each weighting criteria, we calculate the sum of the logs of each weighted spending amount
(wherever the value was zero it was bottom-coded to the first percentile of the spending
distribution, prior to taking logs). The mean z -score of these three log-weighted spending
measures serves as our pro-poor spending index. We also report the three log-weighted
spending measures as separate outcomes.
       The report card also reported councilors' assembly and committee attendance which
were, on average, 81% and 66%, respectively. Our second measure of councilor quality
is an attendance index which is the mean z -score of attendance in: (1) mcd's general
assembly and (2) mcd committees of which the councilor is a member. We focus on absolute
committee attendance, without regard to the number of meetings per committee. The pro-
poor spending index and the attendance index are positively correlated with  = 0.10.

C. Audit data from SSI

All audits covered toilets and garbage points (dhalaos) and the second and third audit also
covered drains. In each case, the auditor identified all alternatives. Auditors asked slum
dwellers where they disposed of their trash and which public toilet they used. Any garbage
disposal point or public toilet was audited when at least three residents reported using it.
  16
     The categories were: (i) roads and lanes (construction and repair); (ii) sewage and drainage (including
toilets); (iii) street lights; (iv) parks and greenery; (v) education and schools (improvement of mcd schools);
(vi) garbage removal (supply of material, trucking; construction of garbage dumps; removal of malba (rub-
ble)); and (vii) other. "Other" included: construction of mcd offices; improvements to staff quarters, katras
(high-slum-index tenements), community centers, and health centers; construction of boundary walls; pro-
viding grills on chabuttras (monuments); and street name boards.)



                                                                                                                  18
   During a facility audit the surveyors noted its quality and interviewed two respondents
to obtain data on frequency of cleaning and prices. For usage, the surveyor counted how
many people used the toilet in a randomly chosen 15 minute interval between 3­5 pm.

D. Electoral data

For the April 2012 election we obtained ward-level electoral data: turnout, candidate list
(with party) and candidate-wise vote-share. We also collected data on ward reservation
status. For each incumbent councilor we coded a dummy which is equal to one if the quota
rendered him ineligible for re-contest from his current ward. One third (80 of 240) of our
incumbent councilors were ineligible.
   Consistent with the idea that parties exercise choice in ticket allocation, the fraction of
incumbents who did not re-run exceeds the fraction affected by quotas. Only two fifths (95
of 240) of incumbent councilors contested an election in any ward, including just over half
(87 of 160) of those who were eligible to re-run in the same ward.

3.4   Implementation and Balance Checks
In late May and June 2010, mid-term report cards were published. Actual treatment was
close to itt: 109 of the 110 councilors were reported on, excluding one ward in which the
councilor had died. In June 2010 letters were sent out to treatment councilors.
   In March 2012, the second round of report cards was published. Newspaper space
constraints resulted in actual treatment being significantly lower than itt. 124 report cards
were published: 45 of the 58 T1 wards and 79 of the 110 T2 wards. Across itt councilors,
we randomized the order in which report cards were published, but we prioritized report
cards of councilors eligible for reelection. Data Appendix 8.2 provides details.
   Throughout, we estimate itt effects. Appendix Tables A.I and A.II provide balance
checks. Panels A and B of Appendix Table A.I consider pre-treatment councilor spending
outcomes (for 2007­09) for all wards and for slum-survey wards, respectively. Panel C
considers slum households self-reports on problem areas over the last year. We observe
no differences between treatment and control wards. Appendix Table A.II considers 2007
electoral outcomes as the dependent variable. We observe no differences between treatment
and control wards for number of registered voters, turnout, seat reservation, or number of
candidates, but 5.6% percentage points higher vote share among eligible treated councilors
(significant at 10%).


                                                                                                 19
4     What to expect
Political agency models assume that citizens infer a politician's type (say, how much she
cares about the voter's welfare) from imperfectly observed politician actions. A politician's
inferred type influences whether her party will select her to run again and whether voters
subsequently vote for her. We discuss how, in such a setting disclosures ­ public or private
­ alter politician, party, and voter behavior.

4.1     Impact on councilor behavior
First, consider the newspaper disclosure treatment. Re-election concerns should cause a
councilor to choose policies that result in a report card that appeals to party leaders and/or
voters, assuming that she believes that these groups condition their choices on performance
metrics in report cards. Presumably all voters want total spending of discretionary funds
maximized. Meeting attendance should also be an unambiguous good, unless citizens favor
councilor actions unobserved to us and there is a time budget constraint.
    The effect on spending composition is less clear; slum residents and wealthier residents
have different preferences, and incumbents' spending decisions, on average, favor wealthier
residents and visible infrastructure. Given this, we evaluate a narrower hypothesis: in slum-
dense wards, treated councilors should better align spending decisions with the public good
preferences of low-income voters. Such alignment is favored by the fact that newspaper
report cards make it easier to transmit information about less visible but valued public
goods to a broad population. By contrast, building a new park, a visible public good that
rwa owners want, is expensive in land-scarce Delhi.
    Both report card treatment arms should create incentive effects, though the additional
credibility of T2 (midterm and pre-election report card) may plausibly increase its impact.17
    In addition, the T2 treatment may have a councilor information effect if midterm report
cards raise the salience of certain issues to councilors or provide them new information. For
instance, since total spending in any single category reflects spending on multiple projects
in different locations and years, councilors may not recognize the composition of their own
spending and/or benchmark it correctly against spending by other councilors. On the other
hand, this source of difference between T2 and T1 councilors is unlikely to be large; after
all, T1 councilors could have collated the data to construct their own report cards.
  17
     Avis et al. (2018) highlights the credibility effect by comparing municipalities that differ in whether, in
addition to a pre-election corruption report, the municipality received a corruption report at start of term.


                                                                                                                   20
   Thus, a comparison of T1 and T2 may have limited power to disentangle the incentive
and councilor information effects, especially since activism by citizens informed by the
midterm report cards about councilor performance may strengthen T2 incentive effects.
   In the private ssi experiment, we test the hypothesis that providing information just to
the councilor can improve service delivery. The audit focused on public goods that corre-
spond to slum dwellers' stated priorities (sanitation and garbage) and that lend themselves
to simple improvements by a councilor: she could use discretionary funds to fix the toilets,
monitor contractors who run the toilets, and pressure on municipal employees in charge
of garbage collection. However, these also happen to be public goods where improvements
are either less visible (repairing sewer systems) or require ongoing maintenance (toilets and
garbage). If the councilors believe that a sufficient number of voters may not learn about
their investments, then improving councilor information may not be enough to incentivize
a councilor to improve performance.

4.2   Impact on party and voter behavior when quotas exist
By providing voters new information about their councilor or increasing its salience, news-
paper report cards may change their voting preferences. Better performers should benefit,
because voters will interpret good performance as indicative of a type that will also do more
in the future. The one complication is if, knowing that a councilor was anticipating a report
card, voters discount the signalling aspect of performance. In this case, a treated councilor
with the same performance as a councilor in a control ward may attract less support (unless
voters value the ability or willingness to respond to incentives). However, we have little
reason to believe voters knew that politicians were forewarned.
   Second, based on the incumbent's performance voters may conclude that the party does
(or does not) care about voters like them.
   Third, by informing party leaders about councilor performance, newspaper report cards
could affect parties' rankings of councilors in terms of electability and contribution to
positive party image. This should increase the likelihood that a high performing treated
councilor receives a party ticket for the upcoming election.
   Fourth, even if party leaders don't receive new information on a candidate, they may
recognize that voters prefer high performers. This effect may be most important when
voters do not know the candidate (e.g. because the candidate needs to change wards). A
positive and credible report card is a good way to present a new candidate. We call this


                                                                                                21
effect on the party selection process that happens even when the party learns nothing new,
an advertisement effect.
       In addition, by printing four report cards daily in 2012, the newspaper allowed voters to
benchmark their councilor performance. Our baseline survey shows constituent pessimism
about councilor spending: Of the 81% of slum households who answered a question on their
councilor's relative performance, 71% thought he spent less money than other councilors.
(9% thought more, and 20% thought about the same.) Thus, report cards could improve
perceptions of a councilor, by showing that he was not performing relatively worse than
the others. This should favor all treated councilors (unless voters extended inference to the
untreated councilors). Further, it should encourage voters to benchmark their councilor's
performance against those of others on the same page: controlling for actual performance,
being a better performer among the four featured councilors should attract more votes.18
       Expansion of gender quotas strengthened the party selection effect for incumbents who
were rendered ineligible to run in their ward. The party had to decide whether to give
these councilors a ticket from another ward; information that an ineligible councilor is a
high-performer may sway the party decision.
       Finally, turning to the ssi experiment, better performance based on improved informa-
tion about where to invest in local public goods would benefit a councilor electorally only
if a substantial number of voters and/or the party observe improvements in the quality of
local public goods and attribute these improvements to the councilor. The localized and
less visible nature of the investments highlighted in the audits makes it likely that, absent
public disclosures, such information transmission doesn't occur.

4.3      Summary of likely treatment impacts
If councilors believe that newspaper report cards provide voters with information or make
known information salient, then being treated should incentivize better performance. In
high-slum wards, this should increase pro-poor spending. Informing only councilors (via
audits) will similarly incentivize them only if they believe that a sufficient number of citizens
or the party will learn about subsequent performance improvements.
       New information or greater salience of known information should cause voters to favor
better performers. With newspaper report cards, they should favor the better performers
  18
     There is a potential countervailing effect: poor performance of all councilors may cause citizens to vote
for someone outside of mainstream parties or depress turnout.



                                                                                                                 22
among those published in the same newspaper edition.
     The information and advertisement effects associated with newspaper report cards
should lead parties to favor good performers in treatment wards when allocating party
tickets. The advertisement effect is likely to be important in selecting which councilors to
move to new wards where the voters do not know the candidate.
     A well-performing incumbent's party should benefit from her performance. This is
clear-cut where an incumbent's ineligibility requires the party to field a new candidate: the
candidate will benefit from the party reputation. This is less obvious where the incumbent
is eligible, because as we noted, a substantial fraction of eligible incumbents do not re-run
presumably because parties want someone else. When a well-performing eligible incumbent
gets replaced (say, because of internal party politics) voters may punish the party.
     Finally, as incumbents' eligibility status was only determined four months before the
election, we don't expect the incentive effects of the treatment to be influenced by a coun-
cilor's ultimate eligibility status.


5     Does information influence councilor behavior?
We start with the newspaper report card treatment and examine evidence on an incentive
effect for councilors who anticipate performance disclosures prior to the election.

5.1    Anticipated public disclosures: Newspaper report cards
A. Specification

We consider ancova specifications, which allow for smaller changes in wards with high
baseline investments in that outcome, to estimate newspaper treatment effects in ward w:

                              yw1 = yw0 + T reatw + Xw +      w,                            (1)

            yw1 = yw0 + T reatw + Highw + T reatw × Highw + Xw +              w,            (2)


    yw1 = yw0 + T reatw + Highw + Ineligw + T reatw × Highw + µT reatw × Ineligw
                       + Highw × Ineligw + T reatw × Highw × Ineligw + Xw +            w,   (3)




                                                                                                  23
T reatw is ward treatment status, Highw is a high-slum ward indicator, Ineligw is whether
the councilor is ineligible for reelection in that ward, Xw is a stratum fixed effect ( zone­
party combination), and other variables are described below. The main tables report itt
estimates where we pool the T 1 and T 2 treatment arms.
   Our councilor performance measures yw1 include: log total spending, a pro-poor spend-
ing index, a councilor attendance index, and components of both indices. All outcomes are
measured for post-treatment fiscal years 2010 and 2011. The lagged dependent variable,
yw0 represents the average for pre-treatment fiscal years 2007­2009 of the same variables.
   The equation (1) specification considers average treatment effects for the full sample.
Equation( 2) examines heterogeneous treatment effects across high- and low-slum-density
wards. A final source of random variation comes from quota-induced councilor ineligibility.
Equation (3) examines what happens when we also control for eventual ineligibility.

B. Results

Table I presents our main specifications. Councilors typically spent their entire budget.
Reflecting this, columns (1)­(3) show that anticipation of report cards has no effect on log
total spending, estimated precisely, either on average or in high-slum wards. Councilor
ineligibility for future elections also doesn't affect overall spending.
   Columns (4)­(6) consider our primary incentive outcomes: the pro-poor spending index.
The treatment impact on councilor spending depends on ward type: column (4) shows no
overall treatment impact on spending. However, column (5) shows a large negative (but
noisy) impact on pro-poor spending in low-slum wards, and relative to these treatment
wards, a large positive impact on high-slum treatment wards (higher by 62% of a standard
deviation). Column (6) shows that councilor ineligibility has no impact on nature of spend-
ing, in high- or low-slum wards. As a robustness check, Appendix Table A.VII presents
specifications using an alternative definition for being high-slum: whether the ward was in
our household survey sample. Recall that a survey selection criterion was (verified) slum
density. Unsurprisingly, we see similar results to the main specification.
   Appendix Table A.VI presents specifications where spending outcomes are individual
spending categories. While the impacts are noisily estimated, treated councilors in high-
slum wards spent more on drainage and sewage ­ column (2) ­ and less on schools and
parks ­ columns (4) and (6).
   Columns (7)­(9) of Table I report on the attendance index. Interestingly, the pattern


                                                                                                24
of impacts of report cards is similar to that on the spending index­the treatment effect
on attendance in high-slum wards is significantly higher than that in low-slum wards.19
Ineligibility doesn't influence councilor behavior in high-slum wards. We find weak evidence
that attendance of councilors from low-slum wards is negatively impacted by treatment.
However, this is the only outcome where councilor ineligibility matters ­ given that, we
read the evidence from Table I as consistent with the idea that uncertain future ineligibility
had no impact on councilor behavior prior to elections.
       In Appendix Table A.IV we separate T1 and T2 treatment arms ­ in general, we cannot
reject identical impacts on the spending and attendance indices across the two arms, but
T2 effects are more precisely estimated due to a larger sample.

5.2      Private disclosures: State of Sanitation Information
Councilors' policy response to anticipated newspaper disclosures is consistent with an in-
centive effect. The fact that T1 and T2 yield similar effects suggests that midterm report
cards did not have any additional information or credibility effects. To further explore the
relevance of a councilor information channel, we consider the private ssi experiment.

A. Specification

For comparison with Table I, we first estimate regressions of the same form as equation (2)
where the treatment indicator is whether the councilor received an ssi report and outcome
is pro-poor spending. Our sample is the 103 wards in the survey and audit sample.
       Other than spending, councilors may improve public toilets and garbage piles via direct
pressure on contractors responsible for their provision. We use the three rounds of audits
to estimate slum-level difference-in-differences itt regressions:

                     Servicesw = P ostt × T reatsw + P ostt + Xw +               sw ,                 (4)

where T reatsw is the slum's ward treatment status, P ostt is a midline or endline audit
  19
    Appendix Table A.V columns (3), (4), and (5) consider pro-poor spending index components, and
show that findings are robust to the constituent preference weighting chosen. Columns (8) and (9) consider
attendance index components: while patterns are similar, treatment effects are driven by assembly, rather
than committee, attendance (even though multiple committees ­ including the slum development and ration
committees ­ are relevant to low-income households). The difference in attendance effects across low- and
high-slum neighborhoods is surprising ­ we would expect all citizens to favor more councilor involvement.
It might reflect that the middle classes are more cynical about what politicians do.



                                                                                                             25
indicator, Xw is a ward fixed effect, and Servicesw are public services outcome variables.

B. Results

Table II presents private ssi disclosure results. For (ward-level) pro-poor spending we
observe no significant impact of the ssi (column (1)). In contrast, columns (3) and (4) of
Appendix Table A.VII show that, consistent with Table I results, newspaper report cards
differentially raised pro-poor spending in treated wards for this sub-sample of wards.
         Columns (2)­(9) consider impacts on audited outcomes (that featured in the ssi report
received by councilors). Relative to control wards, slums in treatment wards show an
insignificant decline in total toilets but a significant decline in the number of open usable
toilets (columns (2) and (3)). While toilet prices are unaffected, the number of adult users
declines in treatment wards (columns (4) and (5)). One possible explanation is that the
councilor asked contractors to improve the worst toilets and they chose to close them. A less
favorable view is that the councilor favored closing dirty toilets in order to improve apparent
toilet quality and was less concerned with usage. We observe no impact of ssi treatment on
either informal piles or formal garbage collection points (dhalaos) (columns (6)­(9)). On
both toilets and garbage outcomes, there is no treatment heterogeneity due to councilor
eligibility. Appendix Table A.VIII shows that the treatment also had no impact on total
number of drains or their quality (as measured by the fraction of drains with disposal
facilities and the fraction of drains that are clogged).
         The absence of an impact of ssi treatment and similar impacts across the two newspaper
treatment arms suggests that a direct lack of information did not constrain councilors.


6         Does information influence party and voter behavior?
Since the ssi treatment didn't influence councilor behavior, we focus our analysis of party
and voter behavior on the newspaper treatment.20 This evaluation is of independent in-
terest, and also helps identify whether councilors' response to the information disclosures
could be justified by subsequent voter and party reactions.
    20
         In analysis available from authors, we show that the ssi treatment did not affect party or voter behavior.




                                                                                                                      26
A. Specification

Throughout, we report itt estimates pooled across the two treatment arms.21 For each
electoral outcome, we consider three specifications with increasing saturation. First, the
average effect of report cards. Next, whether impacts differ by councilor eligibility status.
Finally, a more descriptive specification to see whether councilor performance with respect
to pro-poor spending and attendance influences party behavior.

                                 Outcomew,c = T reatw,c + Xw +            w,c ,                           (5)

           Outcomew,c = 1 T reatw,c × Ineligw + 2 T reatw,c + Ineligw + Xw +                      w,c ,   (6)

Outcomew,c = i T reatw,c ×Ineligw ×Yw,c +j T reatw,c ×Yw,c +i Ineligw ×Yw,c +i Yw,c +Xw +                       w,c ,
                                                                                                          (7)
where T reatw,c is the ward/councilor treatment status, Ineligw is whether the ward's coun-
cilor is ineligible for reelection in that ward, Yw,c is a vector of councilor's pro-poor spending
index and attendance index. The identity, Xw is a fixed effect for randomization stratum
(the zone­party combination), and other variables are as described below.
       We start with specifications where the councilor is the relevant unit: that is, treatment,
ineligibility and performance outcomes are councilor-level characteristics that "follow" the
councilor. For Outcomec , we consider (1) whether she runs for re-election in any ward,
(2) whether she runs in a different ward, (3) whether she runs in a different ward where the
[retiring or ineligible] incumbent also belongs to her party, (4) her vote share (set to zero if
she does not run), and (5) whether she wins an election in any ward.
       We also report qualitatively distinct specifications which consider incumbent party elec-
toral outcomes as the ward-level outcome variables, Outcomew . The treatment impact on
the incumbent can entirely reflect a party selection effect: if the party uses report cards
to select who re-runs, we will see an effect on treated incumbents. In other words, even if
support among voters for every single incumbent is unaffected by treatment, a party's use of
the report card to allocate tickets can generate a positive incumbent level treatment effect.
It will not, however, generate a ward level treatment effect. The latter is only possible if
the report card alters preferences of voters targeted by the policy. This is, therefore, the
only way we have to tell whether report cards affected voter preferences, and, if so, how.
       Finally we report specifications that consider councilor performance relative to other
  21
       Impacts across treatment arms are qualitatively similar. Results available from authors.


                                                                                                                        27
councilors who featured in the same newspaper issue, controlling for their actual pro-poor
spending. Do other councilors' report card serve as a yardstick? We estimate tot estimates
for the 124 councilors whose report cards were actually published in newspapers:

Outcomec = 1 Ineligc ×Rankc +2 Datec ×Rankc +3 Rankc +1 Ineligc +2 Datec +Yc +Xc + c ,
                                                                                           (8)
where Rankc is the rank of the councilor's pro-poor spending index across the four councilors
featured in the same newspaper issue, Datec is the publication date of the newspaper issue
containing the councilor's report card, Yc is a vector of the councilor's pro-poor spending
index and the spending index interacted with ineligibility and with publication date, and
other variables are as defined above. Publication date is included as a control because, as
mentioned, the publication of report cards for eligible councilors were prioritized.

B. Results
48% of eligible incumbents in control wards ran for re-election. Column (1) of Table III
shows that treated incumbents were 12 percentage points more likely to receive a party
nomination to contest re-election. In contrast, column (2) shows that the magnitude of the
treatment effect for the ineligible, while more than twice as large as that for the eligible,
is not statistically different from that for the eligible. (The latter estimate a non-trivial
7 percentage points, though not statistically different from zero.) That said, no ineligible
councilor from a control ward ran for re-election. The impact of treatment on ticket allo-
cation for ineligible councilors becomes clear when we consider whether the councilor ran
in a different ward. We observe a treatment effect only among ineligible councilors: col-
umn (4) shows that the treatment-induced increase in contesting elections from a different
ward comes entirely from ineligible councilors who contest elections in new wards. In other
words, eligible incumbent councilors either re-run in their current ward or fail to get a party
ticket. Finally, columns (5) and (6) show that councilors who run in a new ward tend to
displace incumbents from the same party, and this group consists of ineligible councilors.
   Just eight ineligible councilors received a party ticket for another ward. To address
small sample concerns, we also report p-values estimated with randomization inference. The
randomization inference p-value of treated councilors receiving a party nomination remains
significant at 10%, and the key factor driving this ­ the treatment effect on ineligible
councilors contesting from different wards ­ remains significant at 5%. We continue to



                                                                                                  28
observe that this is driven by parties reassigning tickets for wards they already control.
       This points to a selection process where the party uses report cards to select which
ineligible incumbents to give a ticket elsewhere. The party appears less inclined to move
eligible councilors elsewhere; either there is an argument to keep them in their own ward
and should stay there, or, if they are unpopular, they are unlikely to be worth moving,
especially relative the entire pool of ineligible councilors. The latter group are randomly
selected (by assignment of the quotas) and, therefore, contain some of the best performing
incumbents.
       In Table IV we directly examine party selection based on performance on the report
cards. We see these results as an important consistency check on our results, while recog-
nizing that the pro-poor spending index variable is not exogenous. In column (1) we see
that the impact of spending performance on ticket allocation is heterogeneous across eligible
and ineligible councilors. Specifically, a better pro-poor spending record makes ineligible
treated incumbents more likely to receive a ticket: for each standard deviation increase in
their pro-poor spending record ineligible treated incumbents are 23 percentage points more
likely to be given a ticket. There is no similar effect among eligible treated incumbents,
or among eligible councilors in the control group.22 In other words, eligible incumbents
with high pro-poor spending do not benefit from newspaper report cards, possibly because
voters already have enough information about them.
       Consistent with the idea that parties want councilors to be responsive to constituent
needs, columns (2) and (3) provide suggestive evidence that parties favor giving tickets to
ineligible councilors in high-slum wards with high pro-poor spending, but not to those in
low-slum wards with high pro-poor spending. In contrast, we continue to see some evidence
that good attendance benefits ineligible councilors in low-slum wards. We should caveat
these findings by the observation that the impacts are statistically similar across high and
low-slum wards.
       Columns (5) and (6) find that only ineligible councilors with high pro-poor spending
from high-slum wards get to move to a different ward. On the margin, ineligible treated
incumbents from high-slum wards are 29 percentage points more likely to be given a ticket
to run elsewhere, for each standard deviation increase in their pro-poor spending record.
Those with a similarly good spending record from low-slum wards do not get the same
  22
    The pro-poor spending coefficient for the control group is +8 percentage points, p = 0.39, omitted
from the table for space but available from the authors. However, among control councilors from high-slum
wards, this coefficient is +21 percentage points, p = 0.15. Of course this trend is non-experimental.



                                                                                                            29
advantage, though there are too few such councilors to be able to say anything definitive
about this comparison.
       Columns (8) and (9) show that that parties favor moving ineligible councilors with high
pro-poor spending into new party-controlled wards that are high-slum wards, which makes
sense since the evidence that they have to advertise relates to performing well in high-slum
wards. On the margin, ineligible treated incumbents are 21 percentage points more likely
to be given a ticket to run in another high-slum ward controlled by their party for each
standard deviation increase in their pro-poor spending record.
       To summarize, parties retain ineligible councilors who had a good performance record in
serving their own low-income ward and field them in other slum-dense wards. These benefits
do not accrue to untreated ineligible councilors, even if they have high pro-poor spending,
suggesting either that parties only have access to the spending information through the
media, or that parties value the credibility associated with publication in a newspaper.
       Taken together, these results suggest that councilors were correct to respond to the
electoral incentives provided by report cards since, conditional on being rendered ineligible,
a good report card helped them get a party ticket. Those who get to run should also get more
votes and should be more likely to win. Table V confirms this, and documents a sizeable
advantage for high pro-poor spenders in treated high-slum wards. Column (1) shows a 5
percentage point rise in the vote share of councilors who received a report card. Column (2)
shows that this impact might be slightly larger for ineligible councilors. Column (3) suggests
that treated ineligible councilors (who necessarily run elsewhere if they run at all) gain more
in vote share if their pro-poor spending is higher. Once again this is not true of treated
eligible councilors relative to eligible councilors in the control group, or among eligible
councilors in the control group.23 On the margin, ineligible treated incumbents earn 10
percentage points higher vote share for each standard deviation increase in their pro-poor
spending record. This suggests that a positive report card is beneficial for councilors to
earn votes from less familiar voters.
       Columns (4)­(5) show that the effect is concentrated among councilors who came from
high-slum wards, so that their pro-poor spending would have been aligned with the pref-
erences of their former constituents. On the margin, ineligible treated incumbents from
high-slum wards earn 21 percentage points higher vote share for each standard deviation
  23
    The pro-poor spending coefficient for the control group is +4 percentage points, p = 0.25, omitted
from the table for space but available from the authors. However, among control councilors from high-slum
wards, this coefficient is +10 percentage points, p = 0.09. Once again, this trend is non-experimental.



                                                                                                            30
increase in their pro-poor spending record. Columns (6)­(10) show a similar pattern for
winning elections, but the binary outcome results in noisier estimates. In particular, on the
margin, ineligible treated incumbents from high-slum wards are 49 percentage points more
likely to win an election for each standard deviation increase in their pro-poor spending
record. Appendix Table A.XI shows that the treatment didn't affect voter registration or
turnout.
   Table VI presents ward-level results for electoral outcomes ­ that is, electoral rewards
that might accrue to a party even if their incumbent councilor departs. As we mentioned
earlier, this is direct evidence on whether the treatment altered voter preferences. Col-
umn (1) and (2) show that there is no residual vote share benefit for the party from simply
having had a report card published, but column (3) shows that in wards where the in-
cumbent can't re-run, there is a benefit for having had a report card published showing
high pro-poor spending, and columns (4)­(5) confirm that this effect is driven by high-slum
wards. On the margin, a party earns 10 percentage points higher vote share for each stan-
dard deviation increase in the pro-poor spending record of a treated, ineligible incumbent.
As in Table V, columns (6)­(10) show a similar pattern for winning election, but the binary
outcome results in noisier estimates. High levels of pro-poor spending in high-slum wards,
when reported in the newspaper, increases support among voters for the incumbent's party
in wards where the incumbent can't re-run. Once again this suggests that voters have a
different relation with eligible incumbents; perhaps they already know what they like (and
dislike) about them (which may or may not be reflected in the report card). Moreover,
when eligible incumbents did not get a ticket (which was quite common), the voters might
have held it against the party, especially if the incumbent had a good report card. This
could explain what we see in column (4) in Table VI: that in high-slum wards with eligible
treated incumbents, getting a good report card reduces the party's vote share, though it
could also be something accidental.
   Table VII presents councilor-level results for the "yardstick" results ­ whether it helps
councilors who performed well relative to others featured in the same newspaper issue.
Columns (1), (2), and (4) show a yardstick effect on the party decision to run an ineligible
councilor in a different ward. For each rank (out of four) that an ineligible councilor drops
with respect to pro-poor spending, the party is 32 percentage points less likely to give that
councilor a ticket to run. Column (4) shows that for each drop in rank, the vote share of
an ineligible councilor from a high-slum ward goes down by 15 percentage points.



                                                                                                31
7    Conclusion
This paper provides evidence on the impact of public and private information disclosures
on choices made by councilors, political parties, and voters.
    Anticipation of public disclosures motivated councilors representing high-slum wards to
better align spending priorities with their constituents. In a setting where a significant
fraction of them would be ineligible to run from their current ward, they were right to do
so. Parties are more likely to give tickets to treated councilors from high-slum wards, who,
according to their report cards, had served slum dwellers well. Among such high-performing
incumbents, those who were rendered ineligible to run from their current ward because of
gender quotas benefited, and got to run and win from other wards. These effects are large;
ineligible treated incumbents from high-slum wards are 29 percentage points more likely
to receive a ticket to run elsewhere, for each standard deviation increase in their pro-poor
spending record. Finally, voters in high-slum wards also reward the party associated with
high-performing incumbents who got a report card.
    On the other hand, disclosing information privately to politicians has no discernible
positive effects on their spending priorities or provision of public infrastructure in slums.
We posit that, absent a dissemination mechanism like newspapers, councilors failed to
anticipate electoral benefits from investments in valued but less visible local public goods.
    Quota-induced ineligibility mimics, in many ways, term limits for politicians, which
are common in middle- and lower-income countries. Furthermore, it is common for term-
limited politicians to seek other political offices. Our findings suggest that public disclosures
could be valuable for this group, especially since they do not face electoral accountability
pressures in their current seat.
    In the absence of credible public disclosures, politicians and even parties may lack incen-
tives to act in the interests of voters. Conversely, in a time of increasing financial pressure,
credible print or online media may lack financial incentives to publish this information.
We argue that to support a better functioning democracy, there is a need to explore how
independent institutions that could perform this role can be formed and funded. Put differ-
ently, this suggests an important direction for future research: Is there some way to provide
the public with credible performance information on a routine basis, and get them to pay
attention to it, without actually printing report cards in the newspaper before the election?




                                                                                                    32
References
Avis, E., C. Ferraz, and F. Finan (2018). Do government audits reduce corruption? Esti-
  mating the impacts of exposing corrupt politicians. Journal of Political Economy 126 (5),
  1912­1964.

Banerjee, A., S. Kumar, R. Pande, and F. Su (2011). Do informed voters make better
  choices? Experimental evidence from urban India. Unpublished.

Beaman, L., R. Pande, and A. Cirone (2012). Politics as a Male Domain and Empowerment
  in India, Chapter 13, pp. 208­226. Oxford University Press.

Besley, T. and R. Burgess (2002). The political economy of government responsiveness:
  Theory and evidence from India. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (4), 1415­
  1451.

Besley, T., O. Folke, T. Persson, and J. Rickne (2017). Gender quotas and the crisis of the
  mediocre man: Theory and evidence from Sweden. American Economic Review 107 (8),
  2204­42.

Bidwell, K., K. Casey, and R. Glennerster (2019). Debates: oting and expenditure responses
  to political communication. Journal of Political Economy . Forthcoming.

Bobonis, G. J., L. R. Cámara Fuertes, and R. Schwabe (2016, August). Monitoring cor-
  ruptible politicians. American Economic Review 106 (8), 2371­2405.

Chong, A., A. L. De La O, D. Karlan, and L. Wantchekon (2014). Does corruption informa-
  tion inspire the fight or quash the hope? A field experiment in Mexico on voter turnout,
  choice, and party identification. The Journal of Politics 77 (1), 55­71.

Cruz, C., P. Keefer, and J. Labonne (2016). Incumbent advantage, voter information and
  vote buying. Technical report, IDB Working Paper Series.

Delhi Human Development Report (2006). Oxford University Press, New Delhi.

Dunning, T., G. Grossman, M. Humphreys, S. D. Hyde, C. McIntosh, G. Nellis, C. L. Adida,
  E. Arias, C. Bicalho, T. C. Boas, M. T. Buntaine, S. Chauchard, A. Chowdhury, J. Got-
  tlieb, F. D. Hidalgo, M. Holmlund, R. S. Jablonski, E. Kramon, H. Larreguy, M. Lierl,
  J. Marshall, G. McClendon, M. A. Melo, D. L. Nielson, P. M. Pickering, M. Platas,

                                                                                              33
  P. Querubin, and N. Sircar (2019). Voter information campaigns and political account-
  ability: Cumulative findings from a preregistered meta-analysis of coordinated trials.
  Science Advances 5 (7).

DUSIB (2010).        The Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board act.                  http://
  delhishelterboard.in/main/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/DUSIB-ACT-2010.pdf.

Ferraz, C. and F. Finan (2008). Exposing corrupt politicians: The effects of Brazil's publicly
  released audits on electoral outcomes. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (2), 703­
  745.

Fujiwara, T. and L. Wantchekon (2013). Can informed public deliberation overcome clien-
  telism? Experimental evidence from Benin. American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
  nomics 5 (4), 241­55.

Government     of   National   Capital   Territory   of   Delhi   (2014,   Mar).       Bhagi-
  dari.       http://delhi.gov.in/wps/wcm/connect/doit_shahdara/Shahdara/Home/
  RWAandBhagidari/Bhagidari.

Grossman, G. and K. Michelitch (2018). Information dissemination, competitive pressure,
  and politician performance between elections: A field experiment in Uganda. American
  Political Science Review 112 (2), 280­301.

IL & FS Ecosmart Limited (2006). City development plan: Delhi. Ministry of Urban Devel-
  opment, Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi. Submitted under JNNURM.

International Budget Partnership (2010, Jan). Constituency development funds: Scoping
  paper. Technical report.

Kendall, C., T. Nannicini, and F. Trebbi (2015, January). How do voters respond to in-
  formation? Evidence from a randomized campaign. American Economic Review 105 (1),
  322­53.

Lehne, J., J. N. Shapiro, and O. Vanden Eynde (2018). Building connections: Political
  corruption and road construction in india. Journal of Development Economics 131, 62­
  78.

Mendel, T. D. (2014). Right to information: Recent spread of RTI legislation. Technical
  report, World Bank Group.

                                                                                                 34
Snyder Jr, J. M. and D. Strömberg (2010). Press coverage and political accountability.
    Journal of Political Economy 118 (2), 355­408.

Strömberg, D. (2004). Mass media competition, political competition, and public policy.
    The Review of Economic Studies 71 (1), 265­284.

Wantchekon, L. (2003). Clientelism and voting behavior: Evidence from a field experiment
    in Benin. World Politics 55 (3), 399­422.



8         Data Appendix
8.1        Slum Identification
We identify slums following a methodology based on the un-habitat and Indian census def-
inition of slums.24 A list of nine common criteria closely correlated to the census definition
of slums was drawn up and included high density of housing, poor quality housing structure
and material, lack of internal household infrastructure, poor road infrastructure, access to
water and water infrastructure, uncovered and unimproved drains, low coverage of private
toilet facilities, high incidence of trash piles and frequent cohabitation with animals.25
         We used a two-stage process: first, we compiled a list of potential areas from inspection
of the visual appearance from aerial photographs of Delhi using satellite imagery, based
on housing density and appearance, complemented by Delhi government listings. This was
    24
      The 2011 Indian census defines a slum as a "compact housing cluster or settlement of at least 20 house-
holds with a collection of poorly built tenements which are, mostly temporary in nature with inadequate
sanitary, drinking water facilities and unhygienic conditions will be termed as slums."; un-habitat defines a
slum household as "a group of individuals living under the same roof that lacks any one of meet the following
conditions: insecure residential status, inadequate access to safe water, inadequate access to sanitation and
other infrastructure, poor structural quality of housing and overcrowding." The main difference between
the two is un-habitat's inclusion of insecure residential status; this is an issue that will be explored within
the survey work, but since this is the case to some degree in most Delhi slums, we safely omit it.
   25
      Housing: Whether the space separating households was sufficiently wide for vehicles larger than motor-
cycles; housing materials: Whether the majority of houses are made of unimproved brick or lower quality
material, including metal and plastic sheeting; internal household infrastructure: Whether household chores
(e.g. washing, cooking) were frequently done outside of the house as a proxy for the quality of households'
internal infrastructure, since households who conduct these activities outside tend to lack household water
supply/drainage or ventilation for cooking smoke; road infrastructure: Whether the majority of roads in the
area were unpaved, badly maintained, and of poor quality; water: Whether households receive water from
hand pumps, tanker trucks, or lower-grade options; animal cohabitation: Whether non-domestic animals
(buffalo, goats, pigs, donkeys) resided in the same tenements as people.




                                                                                                                  35
then verified by field visits; locations that prominently featured at least five of these nine
characteristics were marked as more slummy and others as less slummy.
       Between 9 and 126 households were surveyed in each ward26 , with the exact number
in a slum dependent on the number of potential slums identified by satellite image in each
ward and the physical size of the slum. To the extent that population density is similar
across different slums, this approximates a Probability Proportional to Size (pps) sampling
procedure. To select households within slums we also used a spatial method: an overall map
of each slum was created, and then surveyors were stationed at randomly selected points
within the slums. Surveyors then followed the "right hand rule," where each surveyor moves
from their start point along the right hand side of the wall, interviewing every X households
(where X is determined by the population of the slum).
       Overall, we had just over 3,400 households in high-slum areas and 2,000 households in
8 low-slum neighborhoods (fewer than five slum characteristics).27

8.2      2012 Newspaper Report Card Publication Sequence Randomization
All 2010 report cards were published as intended, but subject to space constraints in each
newspaper and time constraints, we were unable to publish all 2012 report cards before the
2012 election. We did not publish any report cards after election day. Of 168 report cards
for itt councilors, 124 were published. Six wards were dropped because the councilor was
suspended for corruption or died; seven were dropped because they were never sampled (in
two of these cases another ward was sampled instead); one was dropped because there were
no slums in the ward; and the last thirty were dropped because they could not be published
by election day. Out of the 58 T1 wards, 45 were treated, and of the 110 T2 wards, 79 were
treated.
       First, report cards were categorized according to zone (of which there were ten), to
whether the councilor was eligible for reelection, and to whether the ward had above- or
below-median slum fraction by area. Then, within these forty categories, each of which had
  26
     In ten wards, it was found that surveys had been conducted in the wrong areas. In these cases, surveyors
were sent back out, and the surveys were redone in the proper areas. In some cases, the incorrect surveys
were still conducted in slum areas, so have been included in the data; thus ten wards have sixty or more
surveys. In other cases, the wrongly done surveys were dropped.
  27
     The survey was typically carried out with the household head (in 51% of the cases) or, in the case where
the household head was unavailable or away on two consecutive visits made to the household, with his or
her spouse (49% of the cases) or other household member. If a household proved unwilling or unavailable
after multiple visits, another was selected using the same method.



                                                                                                                36
about four report cards, we randomly assigned report cards to pairs. We then assigned a
stratum to each pair according to treatment status (T1/T1, T1/T2, or T2/T2) and political
party affiliation (no bjp councilor, or at least one bjp councilor). We randomly assigned
publication sequence to each pair of report cards for eligible councilors, distributing the
above six strata evenly across the publication sequence. Then we repeated the process for
half (i.e. as many as possible) of the report cards for ineligible councilors, and these were
placed after the eligible councilors in the publication sequence. Report cards for ineligible
councilors were published after the deadline for parties to assign candidate tickets. Two
pairs of report cards were published in each daily issue of the newspaper.

8.3    State of Sanitation Information Randomization
Our audits covered the sample of 108 high-slum wards that entered our baseline survey.
These wards, in turn, were situated in 55 state assembly constituencies (acs). All acs were
randomized into treatment and control, followed by a balanced randomization of the wards
within an ac. In the event that a ward was split across two acs, it was put in the AC with
an unbalanced number of wards. We then separately randomized report card distribution
across the two levels of government: 51 wards were randomly assigned to have the mcd
councilor receive a ward report card and, out of the 55 acs, 27 were randomly assigned to
receive a ac report cards.28 In each ward we audited, on average, three slums giving us a
sample of 310 slums across 108 wards.




  28
     Because Wards and acs are not perfectly aligned, this made for a total of 118 Ward­ac combinations:
30 control, 30 where only the mla received a report card, 32 where only the mcd councilor received a report
card, and 26 were both the mla and mcd councilor received report cards.


                                                                                                              37
38
     9      Tables

          Table I: Effect of any newspaper report card treatment on MCD councilor spending according to slum preferences and attendance
                                                           Log      total    spending             Pro-poor spending in-                Attendance            index
                                                           (2010­12)                              dex (2010­2012)                      (2010­12)
                                                           (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)            (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)

      Treatment × High slum                                           ­0.049      ­0.097                  0.617**       0.752**                   0.372*        0.128
                                                                      (0.074)     (0.100)                (0.288)       (0.373)                   (0.196)       (0.225)

      Treatment                                            0.005       0.050       0.051      ­0.010     ­0.309        ­0.384          0.030     ­0.227         0.006
                                                          (0.040)     (0.057)     (0.081)     (0.133)    (0.201)       (0.278)        (0.100)    (0.138)       (0.147)

      Ineligible × Treatment × High slum                                           0.115                               ­0.479                                   0.694
                                                                                  (0.160)                              (0.618)                                 (0.497)

      Ineligible × Treatment                                                       0.035                                0.255                                 ­0.668*
                                                                                  (0.119)                              (0.425)                                 (0.368)

      Remaining interactions                               No          Yes         Yes         No          Yes           Yes           No          Yes          Yes

      Pre-treat outcome control                            Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes

      Strata (zone­party) FE                               Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes

      Pre-treat control mean                               5.709       5.721       5.721      ­0.000      0.019         0.019          0.000     ­0.004       ­0.004
      Pre-treat control s.d.                               0.157       0.109       0.109       1.000      0.923         0.923          0.893      0.912         0.912
      p -value: T × High + T + High = 0                                0.994                              0.722                                   0.453
      p -value: T × High + T + High = T                                0.254                              0.012                                   0.248
      p -value: T × High + T + High = High                             0.977                              0.123                                   0.301
      Observations                                      240          227        227         240         227          227            240         227          227

     Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.

     Ward-level OLS regression. Pro-poor spending index components are each log spending on issues, with each issue weighted by the fraction of slum households in the
     city reporting that (1) it is the most problematic in the area, (2) it is a problem for them, and (3) it is a problem for the community. Attendance index components
     are councilor attendance at (1) the general assembly and (2) councilor committee meetings. "Treatment" indicates observations of a ward in which a report card
     on the performance of the MCD councilor was published in a newspaper during the 2012 pre-election period (T1 or T2, ITT). Spending is categorized by lexical
     heuristic.
39
                                                      Table II: Effect of State of Sanitation Information on public services

                                            (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)              (6)              (7)                 (8)                (9)
                                         Pro-poor                                                   Adult                            Dhalaos                             Informal piles
                                         spending         Total          Open          Toilet       toilet          Total           regularly            Total              recently
                                           index          toilets        toilets       price      users (#)        dhalaos        collected (%)      informal piles      collected (%)

      SSI treatment                         ­0.049
                                            (0.190)

      Post × SSI treatment                               ­0.125         ­0.204**         0.065      ­1.931*       ­0.087               ­0.004             1.310             ­0.038
                                                         (0.133)        (0.090)         (0.108)     (0.996)        (0.058)             (0.089)           (2.209)            (0.044)

      Post                                                0.280**        0.206**         0.047        1.389         0.196***           ­0.054            ­3.236**             0.416***
                                                         (0.112)        (0.081)         (0.061)     (0.847)        (0.049)             (0.065)           (1.365)            (0.026)

      Ward FE                                No            Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes              Yes              Yes                Yes                   Yes

      Strata (zone­party) FE                 Yes             No              No          No           No               No               No                   No                  No

      Pre-treat outcome control              Yes             No              No          No           No               No               No                   No                  No

      Baseline control mean                  0.102        2.718          1.859           0.973        9.994         0.436               0.304            19.207               0.253
      Observations                        103          932             932            430          932           932                 328               867                 867

     Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.

     Slum-level OLS regression. "SSI treatment" indicates observations in a slum of which the MCD councilor received State of Sanitation Information (ITT). "Post" indicates obser-
     vations that took place in the second or third round of audits. "Total informal piles" is the number of informal garbage piles in the slum. "Informal piles not recently collected" is
     the fraction of informal garbage piles in the slum not collected in the past week. "Total dhalaos" is the number of dhalaos (formal garbage collection points) in the slum. "Dha-
     laos regularly collected" is the fraction of dhalaos in the slum regularly collected, relative to the number of dhalaos at the baseline. 529 of 932 slums have a public toilet. "Closed
     toilets" is the number of closed toilets in the slum. "Toilet price" is the average price of toilets in the slum. "Adult users (#)" is the number of adult toilet users in the slum.
40
          Table III: Effect of newspaper report card publication on councilor-level electoral outcomes
                                                                                                   Councilor runs
                                           Councilor runs               Councilor runs              in other ward
                                            in any ward                 in other ward            controlled by party
                                        (1)             (2)           (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)

      Treatment × Ineligible                         0.091                        0.156***                       0.116**
                                                    (0.114)                      (0.056)                        (0.050)
                                                    [0.454]                       [0.050]                        [0.103]
      Treatment                         0.120*       0.071           0.039*      ­0.012              0.044**     0.007
                                       (0.067)      (0.086)         (0.022)      (0.019)         (0.018)        (0.014)
                                       [0.100]      [0.404]         [0.186]       [0.630]            [0.101]     [0.891]
      Ineligible                                    ­0.473***                    ­0.028                         ­0.009
                                                    (0.079)                      (0.022)                        (0.016)
                                                    [0.247]                       [0.784]                        [0.935]
      Strata (zone­party) FE            Yes             Yes          Yes              Yes             Yes         Yes

      Ineligible control mean           0.000        0.000           0.000        0.000              0.000       0.000
      Eligible control mean             0.478        0.478           0.022        0.022              0.000       0.000
      Observations                   240          240             240           240             240            240

     Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.

     Councilor-level cross section estimated with OLS and with randomization inference (10,000 repetitions). Robust stan-
     dard errors in parentheses. Randomization inference p-values in brackets. Randomization strata are fixed.
41
              Table IV: Effect of newspaper report card publication, attendance, and spending on councilor-level electoral outcomes, by ward slumminess
                                                                                                                                                             Councilor runs
                                                            Councilor runs                                      Councilor runs                                in other ward
                                                             in any ward                                        in other ward                              controlled by party
                                                 (1)                (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)        (7)              (8)              (9)
                                                           . . . from high-   . . . from low-                  . . . from high-   . . . from low-              . . . to high-   . . . to low-
                                                              slum ward         slum ward                         slum ward         slum ward                  slum ward        slum ward

      Treatment × Ineligible × . . .            0.229*          0.414*            0.136              0.125**       0.291**             0.084         0.074         0.207*          ­0.002
         . . . Pro-poor Spending Index         (0.118)         (0.213)           (0.155)             (0.058)      (0.136)             (0.068)        (0.051)      (0.108)          (0.086)

      Treatment × Ineligible × . . .            0.792           0.670             2.037**        ­0.017            0.771              ­0.225         0.012         0.614           ­0.668
         . . . Attendance Index                (0.603)         (0.757)           (1.015)             (0.355)      (0.467)             (0.554)        (0.322)      (0.415)          (0.605)

      Treatment × . . .                        ­0.067          ­0.216             0.009          ­0.048           ­0.149              ­0.012        ­0.005       ­0.037             0.030
         . . . Pro-poor Spending Index         (0.096)         (0.173)           (0.131)             (0.034)      (0.095)             (0.031)        (0.014)      (0.040)          (0.042)

      Treatment × . . .                        ­0.198           0.014            ­0.704          ­0.078           ­0.424               0.051        ­0.026       ­0.173            ­0.098
         . . . Attendance Index                (0.433)         (0.566)           (0.626)             (0.117)      (0.283)             (0.200)        (0.080)      (0.148)          (0.173)

      Treatment × Ineligible                   ­0.424          ­0.322            ­1.627**            0.172        ­0.415               0.261         0.112       ­0.324             0.620
                                               (0.420)         (0.483)           (0.695)             (0.245)      (0.303)             (0.394)        (0.218)      (0.246)          (0.448)

      Treatment                                 0.206           0.092             0.712*             0.037         0.345              ­0.045         0.020         0.159            0.049
                                               (0.302)         (0.375)           (0.425)             (0.080)      (0.216)             (0.122)        (0.060)      (0.124)          (0.126)

      Nontreatment Interactions                 Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes           Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes

      Strata (zone­party) FE                    Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes           Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes

      Ineligible control mean                   0.000           0.000             0.000              0.000         0.000               0.000         0.000         0.000            0.000
      Eligible control mean                     0.478           0.577             0.294              0.022         0.038               0.000          0.000        0.000            0.000
      Observations                           240              116               112             240              116                 112            240         115              114

     Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.

     Councilor-level cross section estimated with OLS. "Attendance Index" is overall councilor attendance at MCD committees of which they are a member, 2007­10. "Pro-poor Spending
     Index" is the mean z-score of three log preference-weighted spending amounts (2007­11), analogous to the dependent variable in Table I, column 3, for the pre-publication period.
42
                               Table V: Effect of newspaper report card publication, attendance, and spending on councilor-level electoral outcomes

                                                           Councilor's vote share (0 if didn't run)                                          Councilor wins in any ward
                                                 (1)         (2)           (3)                (4)               (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)                (9)               (10)
                                                                                     . . . from high-   . . . from low-                                      . . . from high-   . . . from low-
                                                                                        slum ward         slum ward                                             slum ward         slum ward

      Treatment × Ineligible × . . .                                     0.096**          0.213**          0.032                                  0.230**         0.494***          0.046
         . . . Pro-poor Spending Index                                  (0.047)          (0.085)          (0.065)                                (0.117)         (0.181)           (0.131)

      Treatment × Ineligible × . . .                                     0.314            0.223            1.096***                               0.583           0.340             1.620**
         . . . Attendance Index                                         (0.233)          (0.305)          (0.306)                                (0.595)         (0.877)           (0.706)

      Treatment × . . .                                                 ­0.046           ­0.115*           0.013                                 ­0.131         ­0.296*            ­0.027
         . . . Pro-poor Spending Index                                  (0.038)          (0.069)          (0.058)                                (0.104)         (0.160)           (0.115)

      Treatment × . . .                                                 ­0.022            0.160           ­0.402*                                 0.021           0.290            ­0.384
         . . . Attendance Index                                         (0.165)          (0.255)          (0.203)                                (0.479)         (0.777)           (0.505)

      Treatment × Ineligible                                 0.024      ­0.176           ­0.098           ­0.875***                   0.093      ­0.266         ­0.074             ­1.226**
                                                            (0.047)     (0.170)          (0.209)          (0.206)                     (0.098)    (0.414)         (0.609)           (0.483)

      Treatment                                 0.047*       0.032       0.048           ­0.066            0.364**         0.029     ­0.014      ­0.033         ­0.195              0.347
                                               (0.027)      (0.035)     (0.121)          (0.180)          (0.138)          (0.057)    (0.080)    (0.336)         (0.557)           (0.340)

      Nontreatment Interactions                  No          Yes          Yes              Yes                 Yes          No        Yes          Yes               Yes             Yes

      Strata (zone­party) FE                    Yes          Yes          Yes              Yes                 Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes               Yes             Yes

      Ineligible control mean                   0.000        0.000       0.000            0.000            0.000           0.000       0.000      0.000           0.000             0.000
      Eligible control mean                     0.171        0.171       0.171            0.204            0.114            0.304      0.304      0.304           0.346             0.176
      Observations                           240           240         240              116              112              240        240        240            116               112

     Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.

     Councilor-level cross section estimated with OLS. "Attendance Index" is overall councilor attendance at MCD committees of which they are a member, 2007­10. "Pro-poor Spending Index" is
     the mean z-score of three log preference-weighted spending amounts (2007­11), analogous to the dependent variable in Table I, column 3, for the pre-publication period.
43
                      Table VI: Effect of newspaper report card publication, attendance, and spending on ward-level party electoral outcomes

                                                      Incumbent's party's vote share in same ward                               Incumbent's party wins in same ward
                                                (1)         (2)            (3)              (4)              (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)              (9)             (10)
                                                                                     . . . in high-   . . . in low-                                     . . . in high-   . . . in low-
                                                                                     slum ward        slum ward                                         slum ward        slum ward

      Treatment × Ineligible × . . .                                    0.095***         0.096**          0.087                               0.165       0.294             0.025
         . . . Pro-poor Spending Index                                 (0.035)          (0.045)          (0.070)                              (0.163)    (0.237)           (0.212)

      Treatment × Ineligible × . . .                                    0.303            0.242            0.519                               0.305      ­0.401             2.229
         . . . Attendance Index                                        (0.221)          (0.211)          (0.479)                              (0.833)    (1.239)           (1.344)

      Treatment × . . .                                                ­0.017          ­0.070*            0.038                              ­0.144      ­0.435***          0.102
         . . . Pro-poor Spending Index                                 (0.024)          (0.036)          (0.052)                              (0.096)    (0.158)           (0.151)

      Treatment × . . .                                                 0.063            0.134           ­0.106                              ­0.293       0.010           ­0.988
         . . . Attendance Index                                        (0.112)          (0.163)          (0.218)                              (0.510)    (0.834)           (0.804)

      Treatment × Ineligible                               ­0.000      ­0.181          ­0.141            ­0.415                   ­0.033     ­0.248       0.261           ­1.914**
                                                           (0.041)     (0.152)          (0.147)          (0.336)                   (0.149)    (0.562)    (0.833)           (0.939)

      Treatment                                ­0.002      ­0.001      ­0.047          ­0.096             0.085       ­0.026      ­0.012      0.178      ­0.007             0.739
                                               (0.018)     (0.022)     (0.080)          (0.120)          (0.153)       (0.069)     (0.088)    (0.344)    (0.594)           (0.528)

      Nontreatment Interactions                 No          Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes           No         Yes        Yes             Yes            Yes

      Strata (zone­party) FE                    Yes         Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes             Yes            Yes

      Ineligible control mean                   0.408       0.408       0.408            0.381            0.449         0.615      0.615       0.615      0.500             0.769
      Eligible control mean                     0.347       0.347       0.347            0.371            0.331         0.500      0.500       0.500      0.577             0.353
      Observations                           240         240         240              116              112            240        240         240        116              112

     Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.

     Ward-level cross section estimated with OLS. "Attendance Index" is overall attendance at MCD committees of which they are a member, 2007­10. "Pro-poor Spending Index"
     is the mean z-score of three log preference-weighted spending amounts (2007­11), analogous to the dependent variable in Table I, column 3, for the pre-publication period.
44
         Table VII: Effect of newspaper report card spending yardstick on councilor-level electoral outcomes among treated
                                                            councilors
                                                                                     Councilor runs            Councilor's
                                          Councilor runs       Councilor runs         in other ward             vote share         Councilor wins
                                           in any ward         in other ward       controlled by party       (0 if didn't run)      in any ward
                                                 (1)                  (2)                    (3)                     (4)                  (5)

      Ineligible × Rank                        ­0.319*              ­0.146*                 ­0.074                ­0.145**               ­0.173
                                               (0.163)              (0.079)                 (0.057)                (0.056)               (0.119)

      Publication Date × Rank                   0.154                0.053                   0.064                  0.165                 0.276
                                               (0.249)              (0.082)                 (0.079)                (0.105)               (0.218)

      Rank                                     ­0.011               ­0.015                  ­0.013                ­0.029                 ­0.084
                                               (0.112)              (0.024)                 (0.024)                (0.051)               (0.100)

      Pro-Poor Spending controls                 Yes                 Yes                     Yes                     Yes                  Yes

      Ineligible FE                              Yes                 Yes                     Yes                     Yes                  Yes

      Pub Date control                           Yes                 Yes                     Yes                     Yes                  Yes

      Strata (zone­party) FE                     Yes                 Yes                     Yes                     Yes                  Yes

      Ineligible treated mean                   0.115                0.115                   0.077                  0.022                 0.038
      Eligible treated mean                     0.592                0.010                   0.010                  0.222                 0.337
      Observations                            124                 124                     124                    124                    124

     Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.

     Councilor-level cross section estimated with OLS. "Rank" is the rank of the councilor's mean z-score of three log preference-weighted spending
     amounts among the four councilors whose report cards appeared in the same newspaper. (Highest = 0; lowest = 3.) `Publication Date' is scaled
     between 0 (first issue published) and 1 (last issue published). `Pro-Poor Spending controls' are `Pro-Poor Spending Index', `Ineligible × Pro-Poor
     Spending Index', and `Publication Date × Pro-Poor Spending Index'.
45
46
     10   Appendix: Tables and Figures

                    Table A.I: Baseline check of newspaper report card treatment with councilor spending and constituent preferences

                                                        (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)
                                                                      Sewage                       Education
                                                    Roads and           and         Parks and          and        Garbage          Other
                                                       lanes         drainage        greenery        schools       removal          areas          Total

                Panel: Spending (all wards)

                Treatment                              ­0.004          ­0.005           0.007           0.004        0.001          ­0.003          0.000
                                                       (0.022)         (0.016)         (0.008)         (0.007)      (0.002)         (0.013)         ­

                Strata (zone­party) FE                  Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes

                Control mean                            0.552           0.178           0.060           0.024        0.008           0.178          1.000
                Control s.d.                            0.183           0.130           0.067           0.034        0.013           0.114          0.000
                Observations                          240            240             240             240           240            240            240

                Panel: Spending (slum survey wards)

                Treatment                              ­0.017           0.018          ­0.003           0.001       ­0.001           0.002          0.000
                                                       (0.037)         (0.028)         (0.015)         (0.005)      (0.003)         (0.019)         ­

                Strata (zone­party) FE                  Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes

                Control mean                            0.542           0.187           0.073           0.019        0.008           0.171          1.000
                Control s.d.                            0.194           0.142           0.070           0.023        0.012           0.094          0.000
                Observations                          106            106             106             106           106            106            106

                Panel: Slum HH preference

                Report card                             0.005          ­0.014           0.001         ­0.006         0.026          ­0.079         ­0.067
                                                       (0.011)         (0.040)         (0.003)         (0.016)      (0.045)         (0.073)        (0.099)

                Strata (zone­party) FE                  Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes

                Control mean                            0.020           0.688           0.002           0.046        0.513           1.581          2.851
                Control s.d.                            0.043           0.180           0.007           0.063        0.195           0.389          0.411
                Observations                          106            106             106             106           106            106            106

               Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.

               Ward-level OLS regression. "Spending (all wards)" is the fraction of total MCD councilor spending (calculated over pre-treatment period) booked
               for each area. "Spending (slum survey wards)" is an equivalent measure restricted to wards in which we surveyed slum households. Spending is
               categorized by lexical heuristic. "Slum HH preference" is the ward-mean of households in slum areas who specify each area in response to the
               question, "In which of the following areas have you personally faced problems in the last year?" (The total is the mean number of areas named
47




               by households.) Household responses are weighted within wards to correct for differential coverage of surveys between slums.
               Table A.II: Baseline check of newspaper report card treatment with councilor electoral outcomes

                                                                          2007 Election                                2012 Election
                                                  (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)          (5)             (6)
                                              Log regis-        Log       Seat reserved      Number of     Winner's       Eligible
                                             tered voters     turnout     for minority       candidates   vote share   for reelection

      Treatment × Ineligible (2012)              ­0.051        ­0.009         0.072             ­0.214     ­0.032
                                                 (0.047)       (0.057)       (0.128)            (1.162)     (0.041)

      Treatment                                  ­0.004        ­0.022        ­0.060              0.113       0.056*         0.040
                                                 (0.032)       (0.038)       (0.086)            (0.767)     (0.034)        (0.067)

      Ineligible (2012)                           0.002        ­0.017        ­0.438***           0.405       0.013
                                                 (0.038)       (0.044)       (0.106)            (0.948)     (0.022)

      Control mean                               10.500         9.643         0.472              9.472       0.395          0.639
      Control s.d.                                0.168         0.198         0.503              4.121       0.097          0.484
      Observations                             240            240          240                240         240            240

     Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
48
         Table A.III: Characteristics of wards in 2012 MCD elections by slum fraction


                                                                  (1)             (2)          t-test
                                                              Low slum        High slum       p-value
     Variable                                                 Mean/SE         Mean/SE          (1)-(2)

     Incumbent eligible                                           .65             .68           .64
                                                                (.045)          (.043)
     Incumbent's pro-poor spending index                         ­.21            ­.016          .20
                                                                 (.12)          (.089)
     Incumbent's attendance index                                 .65             .68           .24
                                                                (.017)          (.017)
     Incumbent runs in any ward                                   .37             .42           .39
                                                                (.046)          (.046)
     Incumbent runs in other ward                                .027             .052          .33
                                                                (.015)          (.021)
     Incumbent wins in same ward if eligible                      .21             .19           .77
                                                                (.038)          (.037)
     Incumbent's vote share in same ward                          .13             .13           .88
                                                                (.019)          (.018)
     Incumbent's party wins in same ward                          .50             .54           .52
                                                                (.047)          (.046)
     Incumbent's party's vote share in same ward                  .37             .37           .86
                                                                (.016)          (.012)
     Voter turnout                                                .54             .54           .59
                                                                (.0062)         (.0049)
     Voter registration                                         41806            41115          .61
                                                                (1058)           (830)
     N                                                            112            116

     Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
49
          Table A.IV: Effect of any newspaper report card treatment on MCD councilor spending according to slum preferences
                                                                Log      total     spending     Pro-poor spending in-           Attendance                 index
                                                                (2010­12)                       dex (2010­2012)                 (2010­12)
                                                                   (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)               (6)

      T1: 2012 report (ITT) × High slum                                           ­0.085                         0.493                           0.091
                                                                                  (0.102)                       (0.369)                         (0.234)

      T2: 2010/12 reports (ITT) × High slum                                      ­0.023                          0.684**                         0.521**
                                                                                  (0.082)                       (0.300)                         (0.221)

      T1: 2012 report (ITT)                                        0.072           0.131*          0.018        ­0.227             0.037        ­0.094
                                                                  (0.054)         (0.077)         (0.162)       (0.246)           (0.115)       (0.148)

      T2: 2010/12 reports (ITT)                                  ­0.031            0.004         ­0.024         ­0.356*            0.026        ­0.304*
                                                                  (0.042)         (0.062)         (0.143)       (0.208)           (0.112)       (0.168)

      High slum                                                                   ­0.004                        ­0.234                          ­0.246
                                                                                  (0.066)                       (0.251)                         (0.168)

      Pre-treat outcome control                                   Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes

      Strata (zone­party) FE                                      Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes

      p -value: T 1 × High + T 1 = T 2 × High + T 2                                0.330                         0.794                           0.141
      p -value: T 1 = T 2                                          0.042           0.097           0.772         0.510             0.923         0.226
      Observations                                              240              227            240            227              240            227

     Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.

     Ward-level OLS regression. Pro-poor spending index components are each log spending on issues, with each issue weighted by the fraction of slum
     households in the city reporting that (1) it is the most problematic in the area, (2) it is a problem for them, and (3) it is a problem for the community.
     Attendance index components are councilor attendance at (1) the general assembly and (2) councilor committee meetings. Spending is categorized by
     lexical heuristic.
50
                                        Table A.V: Effect of any newspaper report card treatment on spending and attendance index components
                                                        Pro-poor spending in-                                                           Attendance             index   Attendance index com-
                                                        dex (2010­2012)                         Spending index components               (2010­12)                      ponents
                                                           (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)            (7)              (8)            (9)
                                                                                        Biggest        Problem for     Problem for
                                                                                        problem        individual      community                                       Assembly     Committees

      Treatment × High slum                                               0.617**           1.425**       1.263**          1.287**                       0.372*          0.069**         0.044
                                                                        (0.288)            (0.631)       (0.607)          (0.617)                       (0.196)         (0.033)         (0.040)

      Treatment                                           ­0.010        ­0.309             ­0.686        ­0.650          ­0.657           0.030        ­0.227          ­0.045**         ­0.019
                                                          (0.133)       (0.201)            (0.438)       (0.426)          (0.433)        (0.100)        (0.138)         (0.023)         (0.030)

      High slum                                                         ­0.230             ­0.531        ­0.474          ­0.478                        ­0.238          ­0.043           ­0.023
                                                                        (0.250)            (0.548)       (0.528)          (0.536)                       (0.166)         (0.028)         (0.033)

      Pre-treat outcome control                            Yes             Yes               Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes

      Strata (zone­party) FE                               Yes             Yes               Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes

      Pre-treat control mean                              ­0.000          0.019             3.196         6.480            6.403          0.000        ­0.004            0.816           0.651
      Pre-treat control s.d.                               1.000          0.923             2.034         1.941            1.973          0.893          0.912           0.127           0.190
      p -value: T × High + T + High = 0                                   0.722             0.661         0.762            0.745                         0.453           0.350           0.919
      p -value: T × High + T + High = T                                   0.012             0.009         0.015            0.015                         0.248           0.183           0.395
      p -value: T × High + T + High = High                                0.123             0.091         0.144            0.140                         0.301           0.324           0.357
      Observations                                      240            227               227            227             227             240           227              224             227

     Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.

     Ward-level OLS regression. Pro-poor spending index components are each log spending on issues, with each issue weighted by the fraction of slum households in the city reporting that (1) it is
     the most problematic in the area, (2) it is a problem for them, and (3) it is a problem for the community. Attendance index components are councilor attendance at (1) the general assembly and
     (2) councilor committee meetings. "Treatment" indicates observations of a ward in which a report card on the performance of the MCD councilor was published in a newspaper during the 2012
     pre-election period (T1 or T2, ITT).
51
              Table A.VI: Effect of any newspaper report card treatment on MCD councilor spending on selected spending categories

                                                                                                     Log spending. . .
                                                           (1)             (2)                   (3)                     (4)             (5)              (6)
                                                        . . . total   . . . on drains   . . . on garbage/malba   . . . on schools   . . . on roads   . . . on parks

      Treatment × High slum                               ­0.049           0.683                 0.129               ­0.556            ­0.016           ­0.131
                                                          (0.074)         (0.439)               (0.151)                  (0.404)        (0.146)           (0.460)

      Treatment                                            0.050          ­0.325                ­0.158                   0.115         ­0.015             0.516
                                                          (0.057)         (0.311)               (0.105)                  (0.291)        (0.106)           (0.348)

      High slum                                           ­0.002          ­0.117                ­0.034                   0.386         ­0.045             0.123
                                                          (0.065)         (0.380)               (0.129)                  (0.343)        (0.126)           (0.398)

      Pre-treat spending control                           Yes             Yes                   Yes                     Yes            Yes               Yes

      Strata (zone­party) FE                               Yes             Yes                   Yes                     Yes            Yes               Yes

      Control mean                                         4.555           1.847                ­0.179               ­0.418              3.865            0.710
      Control s.d.                                         0.248           1.539                 0.567                   1.410           0.500            1.655
      p -value: T × High + T + High = 0                    0.994           0.462                 0.531                   0.850           0.488            0.150
      p -value: T × High + T + High = T                    0.254           0.018                 0.216                   0.468           0.488            0.975
      p -value: T × High + T + High = High                 0.977           0.235                 0.774                   0.108           0.755            0.207
      Observations                                       227            227                    227                  227               227              227

     Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.

     Ward-level OLS regression. "Treatment" indicates observations of a ward in which a report card on the performance of the MCD councilor was published in a
     newspaper during the 2012 pre-election period (T1 or T2, ITT). Amount of spending is in lakh rupees. Spending is categorized by lexical heuristic.
52
          Table A.VII: Effect of any newspaper report card treatment on MCD councilor spending according to slum
                                                         preferences
                                                    Log      total    spending      Pro-poor spending in-          Attendance               index
                                                    (2010­12)                       dex (2010­2012)                (2010­12)
                                                       (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)            (5)             (6)


      Treatment × Survey ward                                        ­0.006                           0.529*                          0.025
                                                                      (0.080)                         (0.281)                        (0.211)

      Treatment                                        0.005          0.006          ­0.010          ­0.234           0.030           0.025
                                                     (0.040)          (0.063)        (0.133)          (0.194)        (0.100)         (0.144)

      Survey ward                                                    ­0.008                          ­0.084                           0.039
                                                                      (0.068)                         (0.240)                        (0.170)

      Pre-treat outcome control                       Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes

      Strata (zone­party) FE                          Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes

      Post-treat control mean                          4.552          4.552          ­1.854          ­1.854          ­0.394          ­0.394
      Post-treat control s.d.                          0.243          0.243           1.053            1.053          1.162           1.162
      p -value: T × Svy + T + Svy = 0                                 0.904                           0.311                           0.557
      p -value: T × Svy + T + Svy = T                                 0.742                           0.003                           0.587
      p -value: T × Svy + T + Svy = Svy                               0.999                           0.130                           0.734
      Observations                                  240              240            240              240           240             240

     Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.

     Ward-level OLS regression. Pro-poor spending index components are each log spending on issues, with each issue weighted by the fraction
     of slum households in the city reporting that (1) it is the most problematic in the area, (2) it is a problem for them, and (3) it is a prob-
     lem for the community. Attendance index components are councilor attendance at (1) the general assembly and (2) councilor committee
     meetings. "Treatment" indicates observations of a ward in which a report card on the performance of the MCD councilor was published in
     a newspaper during the 2012 pre-election period (T1 or T2, ITT). Spending is categorized by lexical heuristic.
53
      Table A.VIII: Effect of State of Sanitation Information
                    on drainage management

                                 (1)           (2)            (3)
                                          Drains with
                            Total            proper         Drains
                            drains       disposing (%)   clogged (%)

      SSI treatment         ­0.006           ­0.087          ­0.048
                            (0.089)          (0.052)         (0.133)

      Control mean               1.200        0.136           0.500
      Observations         132             132             132

     Standard errors clustered by ward in parentheses.        * p < .10,
     ** p < .05, *** p < .01.

     Slum-level OLS regression. "SSI treatment" indicates observations
     in a slum of which the MCD councilor received State of Sanitation
     Information (ITT). "Total drains" is the number of drains in the
     slum. "Drains with proper disposing (%)" is the fraction of drains
     from which extracted garbage was taken to a dhalao or a landfill,
     rather than left by the drain or burned. "Drains clogged (%)" is the
     fraction of drains which are so clogged with trash at any point that
     the water is not visible.
54
                   Table A.IX: Effect of newspaper report card publication by treatment arm on councilor-level electoral outcomes
                                                                                                   Councilor runs        Councilor's
                                                         Councilor runs     Councilor runs          in other ward         vote share       Councilor wins
                                                          in any ward       in other ward        controlled by party   (0 if didn't run)    in any ward
                                                                (1)                (2)                   (3)                   (4)                (5)

      T1: 2012 report (ITT) × Ineligible                     0.186                0.144*               0.097                0.008              0.030
                                                            (0.151)              (0.086)               (0.073)             (0.059)            (0.128)

      T2: 2010/12 reports (ITT) × Ineligible                 0.043                0.166**              0.129**              0.032              0.121
                                                            (0.128)              (0.070)               (0.064)             (0.055)            (0.111)

      T1: 2012 report (ITT)                                  0.013               ­0.017                0.003                0.042              0.046
                                                            (0.112)              (0.019)               (0.013)             (0.048)            (0.104)

      T2: 2010/12 reports (ITT)                              0.096               ­0.009                0.009                0.028            ­0.040
                                                            (0.091)              (0.021)               (0.016)             (0.037)            (0.085)

      Ineligible                                           ­0.473***             ­0.027               ­0.009              ­0.175***          ­0.308***
                                                            (0.080)              (0.022)               (0.016)             (0.033)            (0.076)

      Strata (zone­party) FE                                    Yes                Yes                  Yes                    Yes                Yes

      Ineligible control mean                                0.000                0.000                0.000                0.000              0.000
      Eligible control mean                                  0.478                0.022                0.000                0.171              0.304
      Observations                                        240                  240                   240                 240                240

     Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.

     Councilor-level cross section estimated with OLS.
55
             Table A.X: Effect of newspaper report card publication, attendance, and spending by treatment arm on councilor-level electoral outcomes
                                                                                                                                                           Councilor runs
                                                                          Councilor runs                         Councilor runs                             in other ward
                                                                           in any ward                           in other ward                           controlled by party
                                                                   (1)         (2)             (3)      (4)             (5)           (6)         (7)               (8)        (9)

      T1: 2012 report (ITT) × Ineligible × . . .                                           0.325**                                 0.159**                                     0.111*
         . . . Pro-poor Spending Index                                                    (0.127)                                 (0.065)                                    (0.059)

      T1: 2012 report (ITT) × Ineligible × . . .                                           1.615**                                 1.106                                       1.087*
         . . . Attendance Index                                                           (0.807)                                 (0.679)                                    (0.629)

      T2: 2010/12 reports (ITT) × Ineligible × . . .                                       0.172                                   0.108                                       0.049
         . . . Pro-poor Spending Index                                                    (0.138)                                 (0.073)                                    (0.066)

      T2: 2010/12 reports (ITT) × Ineligible × . . .                                       0.458                                  ­0.406                                    ­0.336
         . . . Attendance Index                                                           (0.659)                                 (0.332)                                    (0.292)

      T1: 2012 report (ITT) × . . .                                                       ­0.104                                  ­0.040                                       0.002
         . . . Pro-poor Spending Index                                                    (0.106)                                 (0.033)                                    (0.017)

      T1: 2012 report (ITT) × . . .                                                       ­0.315                                  ­0.124                                    ­0.059
         . . . Attendance Index                                                           (0.560)                                 (0.117)                                    (0.087)

      T2: 2010/12 reports (ITT) × . . .                                                   ­0.059                                  ­0.050                                    ­0.007
         . . . Pro-poor Spending Index                                                    (0.101)                                 (0.033)                                    (0.017)

      T2: 2010/12 reports (ITT) × . . .                                                   ­0.097                                  ­0.052                                    ­0.004
         . . . Attendance Index                                                           (0.481)                                 (0.133)                                    (0.100)

      T1: 2012 report (ITT) × Ineligible                                       0.186      ­0.876                    0.144*        ­0.617                        0.097       ­0.657*
                                                                              (0.151)     (0.564)                  (0.086)        (0.447)                      (0.073)       (0.392)

      T2: 2010/12 reports (ITT) × Ineligible                                   0.043      ­0.255                    0.166**        0.423                        0.129**        0.345
                                                                              (0.128)     (0.476)                  (0.070)        (0.258)                      (0.064)       (0.229)

      T1: 2012 report (ITT)                                       0.076        0.013       0.217        0.035      ­0.017          0.062         0.039          0.003          0.039
                                                                 (0.083)      (0.112)     (0.395)      (0.032)     (0.019)        (0.079)       (0.027)        (0.013)       (0.063)

      T2: 2010/12 reports (ITT)                                   0.143*       0.096       0.162        0.041      ­0.009          0.023         0.047**        0.009          0.009
                                                                 (0.074)      (0.091)     (0.335)      (0.025)     (0.021)        (0.093)       (0.021)        (0.016)       (0.075)

      Nontreatment Interactions                                    No          Yes          Yes         No           Yes            Yes             No           Yes           Yes

      Strata (zone­party) FE                                      Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes

      Ineligible control mean                                     0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000          0.000         0.000          0.000          0.000
      Eligible control mean                                       0.478        0.478       0.478        0.022       0.022          0.022         0.000          0.000          0.000
      Observations                                             240           240         240          240         240           240           240             240          240

     Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.

     Councilor-level cross section estimated with OLS. "Attendance Index" is overall councilor attendance at MCD committees of which they are a member, 2007­10. "Pro-poor Spending
     Index" is the mean z-score of three log preference-weighted spending amounts (2007­11), analogous to the dependent variable in Table I, column 3, for the pre-publication period.
56
        Table A.XI: Effect of newspaper report card publication, attendance, and spending on ward-level
                                              electoral outcomes

                                                        Voter turnout                         Voter registration
                                                (1)         (2)            (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)

      Treatment × Ineligible × . . .                                   ­0.003                                    ­1464.691
         . . . Pro-poor Spending Index                                 (0.017)                                    (3481.315)

      Treatment × Ineligible × . . .                                   ­0.135                                     5555.580
         . . . Attendance Index                                        (0.093)                                   (20582.760)

      Treatment × . . .                                                ­0.009                                     1765.208
         . . . Pro-poor Spending Index                                 (0.013)                                    (2774.616)

      Treatment × . . .                                                 0.097*                                   ­5912.027
         . . . Attendance Index                                        (0.054)                                   (16480.880)

      Treatment × Ineligible                               ­0.001       0.089                         ­460.830   ­4065.476
                                                           (0.015)     (0.063)                       (2519.533) (14371.841)

      Treatment                                ­0.008      ­0.008      ­0.074**      ­744.579         ­702.669    3343.741
                                               (0.007)     (0.009)     (0.035)      (1420.318) (1941.576) (11956.598)

      Nontreatment Interactions                 No          Yes          Yes            No             Yes          Yes

      Strata (zone­party) FE                    Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes

      Ineligible control mean                   0.534       0.534       0.534       40226.269        40226.269   40226.269
      Eligible control mean                     0.554       0.554       0.554       43269.239        43269.239   43269.239
      Observations                           240         240         240               240             240          240

     Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.

     Ward-level cross section estimated with OLS. "Attendance Index" is overall councilor attendance at MCD committees
     of which they are a member, 2007­10. "Pro-poor Spending Index" is the mean z-score of three log preference-weighted
     spending amounts (2007­11), analogous to the dependent variable in Table I, column 3, for the pre-publication period.
57
