                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




CHANGES IN ASSORTATIVE MATCHING AND INEQUALITY IN INCOME: EVIDENCE
                           FOR THE UK

                                     Pierre-André Chiappori
                                       Monica Costa Dias
                                         Sam Crossman
                                          Costas Meghir

                                      Working Paper 26933
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26933


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            April 2020, Revised April 2020




The authors are grateful to Bernard Salanié, the Editor Jim Ziliak, two anonymous referees and
participants in seminars and conferences at Stony Brook, University of Pennsylvania, University
of Oxford, University of Essex and University of Bristol for insightful comments and discussions.
Financial support from the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC Centre for the
Microeconomic Analysis of Public Policy at IFS and grants numbers ES/K00624X/1 and ES/
N015304/1) is gratefully acknowledged. Costas Meghir also thanks the Cowles Foundation and
the ISPS at Yale for financial support. All errors are the authors' own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Pierre-André Chiappori, Monica Costa Dias, Sam Crossman, and Costas Meghir. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Changes in Assortative Matching and Inequality in Income: Evidence for the UK
Pierre-André Chiappori, Monica Costa Dias, Sam Crossman, and Costas Meghir
NBER Working Paper No. 26933
April 2020, Revised April 2020
JEL No. H31,I24,I3,J1,J11,J12

                                          ABSTRACT

The extent to which like-with like marry is important for inequality as well as for the outcomes of
children that result from the union. In this paper we present evidence on changes in assortative
mating and its implications for household inequality in the UK. Our approach contrasts with
others in the literature in that it is consistent with an underlying model of the marriage market.
We argue that a key advantage of this approach is that it creates a direct connection between
changes in assortativeness in marriage and changes in the value of marriage for the various
possible matches by education group. Our empirical results do not show a clear direction in the
change in assortativeness in the UK, between the birth cohorts of 1945-54 and 1965-74. We find
that changes in assortativeness pushed income inequality up slightly, but that the strong changes
in education attainment across the two cohorts contributed to scale down inequality.


Pierre-André Chiappori                           Sam Crossman
Department of Economics                          Institute for Fiscal Studies
Columbia University                              7 Ridgmount Street
1009A International Affairs Building             London WC1E 7AE
420 West 118th St.                               United Kingdom
New York, NY 10027                               sam_c@ifs.org.uk
pc2167@columbia.edu
                                                 Costas Meghir
Monica Costa Dias                                Department of Economics
Institute For Fiscal Studies                     Yale University
7, Ridgmount Street                              37 Hillhouse Avenue
London WC1E 7AE, UK                              New Haven, CT 06511
monica_d@ifs.org.uk                              and IZA
                                                 and also NBER
                                                 c.meghir@yale.edu
1   Introduction

Over the past 40 years inequality has been rising in the US, the UK and other developed countries.

Understanding the causes of such changes can help uncover the underlying social trends and even

shape policy responses. One of the important factors driving inequality is sorting in the marriage

market. Sorting refers to the extent to which like marries like in certain dimensions, such as

education. Sorting itself is likely driven by the potential social and economic benefits of marrying

someone similar or alternatively very different from oneself.

    Becker (1981) had noted that if partners specialize in different activities such as housework and

labor market work there will be a tendency toward negative sorting, where one partner is better

educated and works in the paid labor market while the other has a lower skill level as required by

housework. On the other hand if two better educated spouses can together produce children of

higher skills and ability then there will be strong incentives to sort positively, where like marries

like. Within this insight lies both the increased social tendency to marry within education groups

and the consequence of such a tendency, namely increased inequality in intergenerational outcomes:

at a time where the returns to education and human capital have increased, making the returns to

investing in children ever higher, the push towards a social equilibrium with more and more positive

sorting becomes ever more powerful and consequential. Other factors that can have large impacts

on sorting include household technology, relative labor market opportunities for men and women

and divorce laws (Reynoso, 2019). Thus just understanding the direction of sorting is important in

itself as argued by Eika et al. (2019).

    Detecting sorting, and particularly positive assortative matching, is not particularly complicated;

however, quantifying the degree of (and measuring changes in) sorting is challenging. Indeed,

the literature includes different measures that do not necessarily provide the same answers. As

discussed in Chiappori et al. (2019) changes in sorting relate to underlying changes in the relative

benefit of marrying the same type of person (say in educational attainment and/or ability) to

marrying different types - e.g., how much more beneficial is it now for college graduates to marry

each other relative to marrying across education groups. When all we observe are the frequencies

with which individuals marry within and across groups, we need to find a way to convert changes

in these frequencies to changes in values. The problem is relatively easy when the proportions


                                                   2
of people obtaining each level of education do not vary over the time period we are making the

comparison. When these proportions change, however, things become particularly hard, because

one must disentangle the mechanical effects of these changes from possible structural variations in

the underlying values and benefits. A model-free approach to answering this question is generally

not available.

    In this paper, we analyse changes in sorting in the marriage market in the UK. For this purpose,

we use an index derived by Chiappori et al. (2019), which in turn is based on the model of Choo and

Siow (2006) to study changes in sorting in the UK and the roles of marital matching and education

attainment in driving changes in earnings inequality.


2       Assortative matching

We will consider sorting in the marriage market by education, asking whether it is the case that

like tends to marry like and whether such tendency has changed over time. While ascertaining

whether a set of matches is assortative in education on not is simple and very intuitive, establishing

whether one set of matches is more assortative than another generates unexpected difficulties when

the proportion of men and women attaining various education levels is different across the groups or

time periods being compared. These difficulties are far from innocuous and it is fair to say that there

is (still) some ambiguity on the exact meaning of a claim like "assortative matching has increased

over a given period". Chiappori et al. (2019) discuss the issues that arise with the measurement of

changes in assortative matching. The key point is that ambiguity arises unless we provide a direct

link between changes in assortative matching and the changes in the value of marriage. In this

paper we develop a structural method for assessing changes in assortativeness, and we show how to

implement it empirically based on the framework of Choo and Siow (2006).1

    To define assortativeness, it is convenient to start with the simple example of an economy in

which men and women can only belong to two education categories, college graduate (C) and less

than college, which we label as high-school (HS). Conditional on marriage, the matching patterns

for this population can be fully summarized by Table 1.

    In Table 1, n and m are the proportion of college graduate men and women respectively and

    1
    In Chiappori et al. (2019) we discuss various alternatives to measuring changes in assortative matching including
amongst others that by Fernández and Rogerson (2001), Greenwood et al. (2003, 2014a) and Shen (2019).


                                                         3
                         Table 1: Matching patterns in a marriage market
                            with two types, conditionally on marriage

                                            Men
                                 Women \           C           HS

                                        C          r         m-r

                                       HS         n-r      1-n-m+r


r is the proportion of couples where spouses are both college graduates. The example may seem

excessively simple, if only because it only considers two education classes. However it turns out that

the measures of sorting will always have to be local rather than considering all education categories

together. So for example we will be able to answer the question on sorting and changes thereof in

the group of college graduates and high school graduates, or high school graduates and high school

drop-outs. The overall picture can then be pieced together from these local comparisons. Indeed, it

is easy to provide examples where assortative matching is positive (or increasing) at one end of the

distribution while negative (or decreasing) at the other end. This implies that most measures will

have to be local, in the sense that they consider a (series of) 2 × 2 case(s) similar to Table 1. If all

possible such cases imply positive sorting then we can say that matching are globally assortative.

Only very simple models will imply perfect sorting and they typically neglect a number of important

features of reality such as preferences for alternative matches beyond the economic benefits.


Defining Positive Assortative Matching             Positive assortativeness is defined in relation to ran-

dom matching. For the same population of college and non-college educated as above, random

matching holds if the proportion of couples where both spouses are college educated equals mn. In

such case, the sorting patters are summarised in Table 2.


                         Table 2: Random Matching in a marriage market
                            with two types, conditionally on marriage

                                        Men
                              Women \             C              HS

                                   C              mn         m (1 - n)

                                  HS          n (1 - m)    (1 - n) (1 - m)


   We then say that the matching patterns in Table 1 exhibits positive assortativeness when the


                                                       4
proportion of couples with equal education (the `diagonal' of the Table) is larger than what would

obtain under random matching (the `diagonal' of Table 2). Hence, we have positive assortative

matching if and only if

                                              r  mn

which also implies that the frequency of couples where both spouses have less than college education

(HS) exceeds what one would expect from random matching:


                                 1 - n - m + r  (1 - n) (1 - m) .


In other words, positive assortativeness arises where extra forces generate more matches between

equally educated people than would happen for random reasons.

    Much more challenging is the comparison of assortative matching across two different tables, each

representing an alternative society or different time periods. The typical approach in the literature

is to use an index to quantify and comapre assortativeness. A few alternative such indices have

been proposed, but it remains unclear how to best assert that one matching table `displays more

assortative matching' than the other. Chiappori et al. (2019) provide a comprehensive discussion

of the issues. Here we use one of the criteria derived in that paper, namely the Separable Extreme

Value Index (SEV) that we discuss below.


3   Measuring assortative matching

We propose a measure of assortativeness that relies on a structural interpretation of sorting by

relating the observed sorting patterns to their underlying determinants, namely the surplus of the

match, which defines and quantifies the extent to which two people gain by matching together

relative to remaining single or matching with others. In this section we start by deriving our

structural measure of assortativeness and then develop its empirical counterpart within the Choo

and Siow (2006) framework.




                                                  5
3.1     A structural index of assortativeness

We consider a population of men and women, indexed by i and j respectively, who meet in the

marriage market. In our framework, people match on a trait that produces value in marriage, such

as education, ability or skills. We denote by Xi and Yj the relevant trait of man i and woman j ,

respectively.

      In a Transferable Utility framework, the economic value produced by the match (i, j ) can be

defined as a function Z (Xi , Yj ). Z is measured in relation to the outside option of not getting

married, and hence quantifies the economic surplus from marriage. It is precisely the structure of

Z that determines sorting in marriage. Specifically, if the value of increasing a male characteristic

(such as education) is itself increasing when the corresponding female characteristic increases (her

education) it generates an incentive to sort positively on education: more educated individuals gain

more than their less educated peers from matching with more educated spouses. In this case, we

call the surplus Z supermodular.

      The concept of supermodularity is the basis for our index of assortativeness. Without loss of

generality, we discuss it in the context of the College and High-School marriage market example

presented above, where X and Y stand for the education of the spouses and assume values C and

HS . The corresponding structural surplus matrix is represented in Table 3, where the superscripts

I, J (for I, J = C, HS ) denote the education of the husband and wife, respectively.

                                    Table 3: Surplus matrix in a
                                   marriage market with two types

                                              Men
                                    Women \              C     HS

                                        C           Z C,C    Z C,HS

                                        HS          Z HS,C   Z HS,HS


      We now say that the surplus function Z is supermodular if this structural surplus matrix has a

positive supermodular core, SM , which is simply defined as:


                             SM = Z HS,HS + Z C,C - Z C,HS - Z HS,C .                             (1)




                                                     6
The condition SM > 0 can be rearranged to yield


                                Z C,C - Z C,HS Z HS,C - Z HS,HS ,


which precisely expresses the fact that the incremental value of marrying a more educated wife

increases with the education of the husband. Many factors may lead to such complementarity in

the traits of spouses. For example a father with a college degree may be more valuable in bringing

up children when his partner is equally educated, compared to being less educated, if there are

complementarities in the education of parents for raising children.

      SM is the structural index of assortativeness we propose to use. It plays a crucial role in

the analysis of assortativeness. Indeed, a standard theoretical result of the matching literature is

that assortative matching is related to supermodularity of the surplus function (Chiappori (2017)).

Specifically, a strictly positive core, SM > 0, reflects a tendency for positive assortativeness, and the

more positive the core the stronger is such tendency. However, SM is impractical since preferences

are not observed. We will now show how to use the framework of Choo and Siow (2006) to derive

an empirical counterpart of our index.


3.2     The Separable Extreme Value index of assortativeness

The seminal contribution of Choo and Siow (2006) explicitly relates the economic forces for sorting

under transferable utility, namely the marital surplus, with the observed sorting patterns. In this

framework people match on both observed and unobserved characteristics in a frictionless marriage

market. The resulting matches, together with the allocation of the value produced by each match,

are the outcome of a stable equilibrium in which no matched individual would be better off by

remaining single, and no two individuals would be better off by matching to each other rather than

staying with their current match (or remaining single).

      Our Separable Extreme Value (SEV) model draws from Choo and Siow (2006). We assume that

the marriage market is populated by a large number of men and women who are classified into a

small number N of observed classes, such as education groups. Let I and J denote the class of man

i and woman j respectively, with I, J = 1 . . . , N .

      A central assumption in this model is that the surplus generated by matching Mr. i in class I


                                                    7
with Mrs. j in class J , sij , is the sum of two terms


                                                sij = Z IJ + ij


where Z is the systematic influence of the observed traits on matching patters, and ij is a random

term reflecting unobserved heterogeneity. ij represents the preference that the individuals have for

each otherbeyond the value of the match that is driven by observed characteristics. Moreover, the

random term ij is assumed to be separable in the following sense:


                                                 ij = J   I
                                                      i + j



where    J   I
         i , j       are idiosyncratic random variables that only depend on the class of the spouse.

Intuitively, J
             i can be interpreted as the specific preference of man i for marrying a woman in class

J or, conversely, as the common preferences of women in class J for man i.

    What matters to the individual deciding whether and who to marry is the share of the surplus

they will obtain as a result of marriage.2 In equilibrium, these shares are endogenously determined

to clear the marriage market. In a transferable utility framework they add up to the total surplus

s. We denote by ui and vj the values of marriage for man i and woman j . If they marry together

in a stable match, it must be that sij = ui + vj .

    The key insight of the SEV approach is that only the sharing rule over the economic part of the

surplus matters for assortativeness in marriage (see Choo and Siow (2006), Chiappori et al. (2017)

and Chiappori et al. (2018)). Specifically, it can be shown that there exists a collection of values U IJ

and V IJ that add up to the economic surplus Z IJ for all possible matching combinations, and such

that the individual utilities of man i and woman j married to each other in the stable equilibrium

are, respectively,

                                  ui = U IJ + J
                                              i and vi = V IJ + j
                                                                I
                                                                  .

In the above, U IJ is the part of the deterministic surplus obtained by a man of type I marrying

a woman of type J , and V IJ is the the part of the surplus that goes to her. For completeness,


   2
     One may wonder where attraction and love fits in this framework. This clearly plays a role in determining which
specific persons will come together, but we assume this occurs after matching by class has been determined.


                                                         8
the spouse's class is set to zero among singles, so the economic values of remaining single are U I 0

and V 0J for men and women, respectively. Consistently with our definition of marital surplus in

relation to the outside option of not marrying, these are set to zero. Below we explain that one

such normalisation is needed for identification.

   Given the structure of the individual problem, we can now establish that for a man i of type I

to marry a woman of type J , it must be that


                              U IJ + J
                                     i U
                                         IS
                                            + S
                                              i         for all S = 0, . . . , N.


   In the SEV model, the random preference components (,  ) are assumed to be extreme value

distributed, which implies that the probability of man of type I marrying a woman of type J ,

conditional on his type, is
                                                   exp U IJ
                                      P IJ =       N
                                                                                                   (2)
                                                              IS
                                                   S =0 exp {U }

Equivalently we can define the conditional probabilities of women of type J marrying men of type

I as QIJ . Thus for example the proportion of total marriages where both are college graduates, r

in the notation of Table 1, is given by


                                     r = n × P C,C = m × QC,C .


   Using these probabilities we can recover the utilities of both men and women (U IJ and V IJ )

and hence the surplus. The probabilities P IJ , QIJ           are observed from the matching patterns

in the data. For example, in our simple example with two types of men and women take the

case of college graduate men. We observe three probabilities including the one for being single,

 P C,0 , P C,HS , P C,C ; these add up to one. There are three related values, including the one for

being single U C,0 , U C,HS , U C,C . These make a system of three equations similar to equation (2)

and three unknowns, which are the three values. But since only two of the equations are independent

as the three conditional probabilities add up to one, we can only identify the values of marrying

differnet spouses for each partner relative to the one being single, which we normalize to zero without

loss of generality. Thus, just like in McFadden (1981), the choice probabilities reveal the values of

the marital options relative to the baseline of remaining single, which is what is needed to establish


                                                    9
changes in sorting. Adding up these provides us with the surplus, whose structure determines the

extent of sorting.

   Once the surplus of the match is identified, we can use our structural index in equation 1 to

quantify assortativeness . In the context of our example, the link between the observed frequencies

and the supermodular core of the surplus matrix is

                                                                     r (1 + r - m - n)
             SM = Z HS,HS + Z C,C - Z HS,C - Z C,HS = 2 ln
                                                                      (n - r) (m - r)

where the r, m, n are defined in Table 1. We therefore define the SEV index assortativeness below.

The point now is that whenever SEV increases sorting also increases.

Definition (Chiappori et al., 2019): The SEV assortativeness index SEV corresponding to match-

      ing Table 1 is defined by:

                                                        r (1 + r - m - n)
                               SEV (m, n, r) = ln                           .                      (3)
                                                         (n - r) (m - r)


   It is worth highlighting that our structural approach deals explicitly with changes in the propor-

tion of singles across groups or cohorts as it relates the unconditional (on marriage) probabilities of

marrying different types of spouses to the underlying value of these marriages relative to the value

of remaining single. Hence, changes in marital surplus will reflect both changes in the probability

of marriage and changes in marital sorting conditional on marriage. The extreme value assumption

underlying our index, however, allows us to quantify assortativeness using only marital patterns

conditional on marriage. This is a reflection of the Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives property

of the multinomial logit model, and would not hold under alternative distributional assumptions on

the random terms (,  ). In our context, it implies that changes in the proportion of singles that

do not show in the sorting patterns conditional on marriage must mean that the systematic value

of marrying a spouse of one type relative to another type remains unaltered.

   Beyond the direct link with the underlying causes of sorting (namely the structure of the gains

from marriage) this index satisfies two intuitive properties: (i ) Whenever the proportions obtaining

a college degree (m, n) remain the same but the proportion r of college to college marriages increases

the index grows; and (ii ) The index can never be larger for any matching pattern than when everyone


                                                  10
is married to a person of their own type, in which case matching is perfectly assortative. In the case

of SEV, the value of the index under perfectly assortative matching is +. It turns out that these

properties are key for any index of assortativeness to satisfy if it is to avoid inconsistencies, such as

declaring a matching table with non zero off-diagonal elements as more assortative than one with

no off-diagonal matches (Chiappori et al., 2019).


4       The Data

We use data from the UK Labour Force Survey (ONS (2019)) to bring evidence on the changes in

assortativeness in marriage by education and of its role in explaining changes in earnings inequality

over time. The LFS is the largest representative household survey in the UK, collecting quarterly

data on a rotating panel of households since 1992. Each household is interviewed for up to five

quarters before being dropped and replaced by a new household. In each quarter, the survey records

detailed demographic and socio-economic information for all adult household members, including

date of birth, gender, education, employment status. Crucially, the LFS contains family identifiers

and reports the relationship between all members of the household, which allows us to link couples.

Employment earnings information has also been collected since 1993, but only on quarterly waves

1 and 5. Our sample period therefore runs from 1993 till the first quarter of 2019.

    In this paper we use the unrestricted version of the LFS, which does not support the longitudinal

linkage of individuals or families. To avoid having repeated observations on some but not all families,

which we cannot link because a time consistent family identifier is missing from our data, we keep

only one observation per family. We select the observation for the wave 5 interview, one of the two

that measure earnings.3 Furthermore, we drop all observations of individuals who are not the head

of the household or his/her spouse. We also drop same sex couples, which constitute a small subset

of our sample (less than 1% of the families).

    Ideally, we would like to observe the long lasting marital circumstances and permanent income of

each individual in our sample as these are closer reflections of their economic wellbeing. In practice,

however, we see a single snapshot of the life of each respondent. To capture the time changes in the

persistent family circumstances, our focus is on adults in the middle of their working life, between

    3
     We prefer wave 5 to wave 1 because it is less afflicted by non-responses in the earnings variable. Our results are
not affected by this choice.


                                                          11
the ages of 40 and 49. The following considerations drive this choice. First, marital rates have a

strong positive age gradient during early adult years before they flatten out as individual marital

status settles. This means that while young adults may be observed as singles, many will move on

to marry in the future. Using information on their marital status would produce downward biased

estimates of marital rates. Second, earned income grows and is more volatile at the start of working

life, as individuals move up their careers while also facing more precarious working conditions. This

implies that the earnings of younger adults are a noisier measure of their permanent income than

those observed further down the line. And third, observations in later stages of life are more likely to

reflect the decline in earnings that accompany retirement choices or the onset of health problems. In

contrast, most marital choices are complete by the time one completes 40 years of age and earnings

plateau over the following decade of life.

      Overall, our sample has over 300,000 individuals, more women than men. For studying changes

in assortativeness by education and its role in changing inequality in earnings, we will focus on two

cohorts born about 20 years apart, in 1945-54 and 1965-74. Sample sizes for each of these groups

are shown in Table 4.
               Table 4: Sample sizes ­ individuals aged 40 to 49 by cohort and gender

                                                   Men      Women        All



                         Entire sample           142,359    154,906   297,265

                         Birth cohort 1945-54     45,337    47,538     92,875

                         Birth cohort 1965-74     39,627    44,307     83,934




5     Definition of the main variables and descriptive statistics

5.1     Education

We look at sorting patterns by education using a 4-category measure. Individuals are assigned to

one of the following groups, according to the highest completed qualification they acquired: No

Qualifications, for those leaving school prior to completing Secondary school qualifications (known


                                                  12
as GCSEs in the UK); Secondary education, for those leaving school by the age of 16 with GCSE

qualifications, High School qualifications or equivalent, generally completed at age 18 (A-levels in

the UK), and College degree (3 years or more).

   Figure 1 shows how education attainment changed over time for men and women in the 40-

49 age range. It displays some quite dramatic shifts from the bottom education group to the

top, particularly for women. It also demonstrates that the distribution of education is much more

balanced across genders today than it used to be in the past, as women caught up with men over

the years. For the two cohorts we are comparing, the proportion of college educated women almost

tripled, from 11% in the earlier cohort to 30% in the later one, while the proportion of those leaving

school without qualifications shrank from 43% to 15% of the cohort size. For men over the same

period, college graduation rates increased from 19% to 30% while the proportion of individuals

without formal qualifications dropped from 28% to 17%.

                             Figure 1: Distribution of education, 40 to 49 years old by gender


                                                       Men                                                              Women
                          .5




                                                                                             .5
                                    .4




                                                                                                       .4
               education attainment




                                                                                  education attainment
                         .3




                                                                                            .3
                          .2




                                                                                             .2
                          .1




                                                                                             .1




                                         1990   2000          2010       2020                               1990     2000          2010   2020
                                                       year                                                                 year


                                                              No qualifications                                    Secondary
                                                              High school                                          College




   These changes imply that direct comparisons of sorting patterns across cohorts do not reveal

                                                                            13
the direction of change in assortativeness in marriage. Indeed, in a purely mechanical sense, we

expect to see more homogamous couples when the distributions of education on the two sides of the

market become more similar, even if assortativeness in education does not increase.


5.2     Marriage

One practical issue is how to define marriage. The LFS does not collect historical demographic

information, so we study marital status at the time of the interview. Given the increasing prevalence

of cohabitation, we study both legal unions and all unions. In the former case, cohabiting spouses

are considered as separate single individuals. In both cases, divorced and widowed individuals are

counted as singles. Figure 2 shows the proportions of married individuals by year, education and

gender. There is a steep decline in marital rates over time, particularly for legal marriages and

for those with lower levels of formal education. Hence, it is not only the case that the individuals

are getting more educated over time, but also that marriage is becoming relatively less common

among those with lower levels of education. We will able to account for changes in the composition

of married and single families, as well as for changes in sorting patterns conditionally on marriage

when assessing the role of marriage in driving changes in inequality.

      It is also clear from the lines in Figure 2 that men are more likely to be found in marriage

then women. Census data for the same period reveals that women and men of this age group are

nearly equally populous. In our sample, however, the number of women exceeds the number of men

by over 8 percentage points (see figures in Table 4). The entirety of this difference is loaded on

the population of singles since both spouses are observed in couples. We attribute this difference

to some uneven success in sampling single men and women, on the ground. To make up for it,

we re-weight our sample to ensure that both genders are equally represented in each cohort when

studying sorting patterns.

      When counting families instead of individuals, we consider all couples with at least one spouse

from the relevant birth cohort and observed aged 40 to 49. In all cases, single individuals are

only included in the sample if belonging to the relevant age range and birth cohort. Based on this

definition, the proportion of cohabiting couples increased from 7% of all couples for birth cohort

1945-54 to 17% for birth cohort 1965-74.



                                                  14
               Figure 2: Marital rates, 40 to 49 years old by gender and education

                                                                   (a) Men

                                            No qualifications                                       Secondary education




                           .9




                                                                                   .9
                      .6 .7 .8




                                                                              .6 .7 .8
                      marital rate




                                                                              marital rate
                           .5




                                                                                   .5
                                     1990    2000          2010        2020                  1990      2000          2010   2020
                                                    year                                                      year


                                              High school                                                 College
                           .9




                                                                                   .9
                      .6 .7 .8




                                                                              .6 .7 .8
                      marital rate




                                                                              marital rate
                           .5




                                                                                   .5
                                     1990    2000          2010        2020                  1990      2000          2010   2020
                                                    year                                                      year


                                                     legally married                           married & cohabiting




                                                                  (b) Women

                                            No qualifications                                       Secondary education
                           .9




                                                                                   .9
                      .6 .7 .8




                                                                              .6 .7 .8
                      marital rate




                                                                              marital rate
                           .5




                                                                                   .5




                                     1990    2000          2010        2020                  1990      2000          2010   2020
                                                    year                                                      year


                                              High school                                                 College
                           .9




                                                                                   .9
                      .6 .7 .8




                                                                              .6 .7 .8
                      marital rate




                                                                              marital rate
                           .5




                                                                                   .5




                                     1990    2000          2010        2020                  1990      2000          2010   2020
                                                    year                                                      year


                                                     legally married                           married & cohabiting




5.3   Earned income

The LFS collects gross weekly earnings for all employees, but it does not include income information

for the self-employed. We keep the self-employed in our sample for studying sorting patterns, but do



                                                                          15
not consider families with self-employed individuals when studying income inequality. Our measure

of family income is the pooled weekly earnings of both spouses divided by 2 for couples, or the

weekly earnings of the individual for singles. Earnings of non-working individuals are set to zero.

We deflate income using the CPI and trim the top 0.1% of its distribution.

    Figure 3 shows that the average weekly earnings of men and women increased modestly over

this period. The gains are more noticeable for women, as men lost earlier gains in the years since

the recession. Figure 4 splits the groups by education. It shows no gains in real earnings for any of

the education groups. Quite on the contrary, the Figure shows a generalised decline earnings that

is more pronounced for educated men. All aggregate gains in earnings can, therefore, be attributed

to the gradual increase in education attainment of this age group.

                Figure 3: Average real weekly earnings, 40-49 years old by gender
                                                            600
                      average weekly earnings (2011 prices)
                           300        400 200    500




                                                                  1990   2000                2010    2020
                                                                                      year

                                                                                Men          Women




6   Education and marital sorting

Table 5 shows the sorting patterns conditionally on marriage for the two cohorts we are considering.

Here we use the broader definition of couples that includes those in legal unions and cohabiting.

Figures for the case where cohabiting spouses are treated as single individuals can be found in the


                                                                                 16
         Figure 4: Average real weekly earnings, 40-49 years old by education and gender

                                                                        Men                                                                          Women




                                    1000




                                                                                                                   1000
                  average weekly earnings (2011 prices)




                                                                                                 average weekly earnings (2011 prices)
                                                 800




                                                                                                                                800
                                       600




                                                                                                                      600
                            400




                                                                                                           400
                   200




                                                                                                  200
                                    0




                                                                                                                   0
                                                          1990   2000          2010     2020                                             1990     2000          2010   2020
                                                                        year                                                                             year


                                                                        No qualifications                                                   Secondary education
                                                                        High school                                                         College




Appendix and show similar patterns.

   The Table shows signs of positive assortative matching for both cohorts, with a disproportionate

share of unions happening along the main diagonal. For instance, under random matching we would

expect about 11.9% of the unions in the earlier cohort to be between men and women with no

formal qualifications (the product of the proportion of married women with no qualifications by the

proportion of married men without qualifications in Panel A), while the data reveals that the size

of this cell is in fact almost 18.5% of the population of couples. The Table also reveals a sharp

increase in the proportion of marriages between equally educated individuals at the top half of

the education distribution, from the earlier to the later cohort, with a compensating drop in the

proportion of homogamous low educated couples. This, of course, is partly the result of the shift

in the distribution of education across cohorts, particularly among women, towards higher levels of

education.

   What we do now is to assess whether these changes in sorting patterns across cohorts can be

reliably attributed to changes in assortative behaviour. We proceed by applying the SEV approach


                                                                                            17
Table 5: Sorting matrices conditional on marriage (married and cohabiting couples, percentage
points)

               Education of                          Education of the wife

               the husband              No qual.    Secondary   High school      College



                                                 Panel A: birth cohort 1945-54



               No qualifications         18.46          6.64        3.07          0.72

               Secondary education       14.07          10.51       5.44          1.28

               High school                6.59          6.97        6.23          2.11

               College degree             2.23          3.31        5.81          6.57



                                                 Pabel B: birth cohort 1965-74



               No qualifications          6.30          5.20        3.70          2.04

               Secondary education        3.85          10.65       8.09          4.42

               High school                2.44          7.61        9.06          7.31

               College degree             1.41          3.43        6.22         18.25




developed in Section 3.2 to bring new evidence on the nature of changes in assortativeness in the

UK.

   To keep our results concise while bringing evidence to bear on the most relevant sorting patterns,

we focus on sorting along the main diagonal only. Given the patterns of positive assortative matching

revealed in Table 5, the main diagonal is the key part of the sorting matrix where most of the mass

of unions concentrate. In practice, this means that we will study the full subset of 2 × 2 sub-matrices

that keep homogamous matches in the main diagonal. To be precise, for the following sorting matrix




                                                   18
over 4 levels of education (1 to 4)


                                                 h
                                           w\        1          2   3     4

                                             1       s11    s12     s13   s14

                                             2       s21    s22     s23   s24

                                             3       s31    s32     s33   s34

                                             4       s41    s42     s43   s44


we would study changes in assortativeness for each of the submatrices:

                           h
                     w\         i     j
          Sij   =      i       sii   sij   for (i, j ) = (1, 2), (2, 3), (3, 4), (1, 3), (2, 4), (1, 4).

                       j       sji   sjj


The study of these submatrices brings evidence on changes in the proportion of homogamous couples

relative to each of the alternative matches.

   Table 6 reports the differences across the two most distant cohorts in the supermodular core of all

submatrices that keep homogamous unions in the main diagonal ­ there are 6 of these submatrices for

the 4 education groups that we are considering. The Table also reports the bootstrapped standard

error of the difference, based on 1000 repetitions, and the p -value for the two-sided significance test,

corrected for multiple testing using the stepdown method (Romano et al. (2008); Romano and Wolf

(2005, 2016)). Panel A in the Table looks at all unions while Panel B studies legal marriages only.

   The Table shows a mixed picture, with very similar patterns for the two types of unions con-

sidered in the top and bottom panels. The first three columns detail estimates for the submatrices

where the alternative to marrying your equal is to marry someone close (1 level difference) in terms

of education. These are the submatrices for which the off-diagonal options have an important

weight. For these submatrices, our estimates show an increase in assortativeness except among the

two middle educated groups, for whom the change is not statistically significant at conventional

levels. For the other comparisons, the evidence is mixed. It shows more assortativeness towards

the bottom of the distribution of education (column 4), less towards the top (column 5) and for the

most unequal matches (column 6). All these three cases show a high degree of assortativess in both


                                                           19
Table 6: Difference in the SEV index between the 1965-74 and 1945-54 cohorts, married and co-
habiting couples

                                                                 Submatrix
                            S12             S23               S34               S13              S24           S14
                        No qual.        Secondary        High-School         No qual.        Secondary      No qual.
                       Secondary       High-School          College        High-School        College        College


                                              Panel A: Married and cohabiting couples
         difference       0.484            -0.106            0.123             0.120           -0.288         -0.708
         st. error        0.048            0.047             0.057             0.061            0.066         0.085
         p -value         0.000            0.067             0.059             0.051            0.000         0.000


                                                    Panel A: Legally married couples
         difference       0.579            -0.076            0.150             0.171           -0.269         -0.717
         st. error        0.054            0.051             0.059             0.065            0.069         0.094
         p -value         0.000            0.135             0.019             0.025            0.000         0.000
 Labels in the top row identify the education levels in the respective submatrix. Figures in the first row show estimates
 of the difference in the SEV criterion between the earliest and latest cohorts. The next two rows show the bootstrapped
 standard errors based on 1000 repetitions and the p -values for 2-sided significance testing adjusted for multiple hypothesis.



cohorts, with infrequent off-diagonal marriages. Columns 5 and 6 show, however, that marriages

between college graduates and those with no or basic qualifications have become relatively more

common. A closer inspection of the sorting patterns for cohabiting and legal marriages in Table

5 shows that it is the high educated women with 3 or more years of college education who are

increasingly marrying down and driving the drop in assortativeness at these margins. Table 9 in

the Appendix reveals a similar pattern legal marriages only.

    Although Table 6 does not provide unequivocal evidence of increased marital sorting in edu-

cation, it does show marital sorting has increased in the submatrices that represent the largest

shares of the market.4 This evidence is based on the SEV criterion, which uses the way the gains

from sorting have changed over time, as well as assumptions on how preferences are distributed.

In further analysis Chiappori et al. (2019) show that unambiguous statements about changes in

   4
    Blundell et al. (2018) and Chiappori et al. (2019) find stronger evidence of increase in assortativeness in the US
than in Britain.


                                                              20
sorting, i.e. those that do not depend on auxiliary assumptions such as the distribution of prefer-

ences, are uncommon. There, we exploit different criteria to bring further evidence on the changes

assortativeness in marriage.

      We now turn to the implications of the changes in sorting that we identified on inequality

across households. This is important for many reasons and particularly so for the intergenerational

transmission of inequality: if resources are allocated across households in more unequal ways in-

vestments in children may become more unequal, implying larger inequality in human capital in the

next generation.


7     Changes in Education Attainment, Marital Sorting and Income Inequality

In this section we quantify the contribution of changes in education attainment and assortativeness

in marriage to inequality in family earned income. To do so, we need to calculate the counterfactual

marriage rates and sorting patterns under different assumptions about assortativeness and education

attainment. We explain how this can be done before discussing the results.


7.1     Counterfactual sorting distributions in the SEV framework

One key feature of the SEV approach is that it explicitly relates the sorting patterns that can be

observed in the data with the underlying forces that determine that exact outcome in the marriage

market, given the distribution of classes ­ education in our case ­ on each side of the market. Under

the SEV assumptions, the deterministic component of the marital surplus and how it is shared

between spouses can be determined from the equilibrium sorting patterns. These quantities reveal

preferences towards marriage and for different classes of spouses. In turn, they can be used together

with the distribution of classes to determine the equilibrium marital sorting patterns in a market.

      We say that two marriage markets are equally assortative if their equilibrium sorting patterns are

generated by the same structural matrix of marital surplus. This does not mean that the sorting

matrices look identical across the two markets, and indeed they won't be if the distribution of

classes are different. But it implies that, for any two cohorts with different distributions of classes,

we can use the SEV framework to determine the counterfactual sorting matrix that emulates the

assortativeness of cohort 1 under the marginal distributions of cohort 2, or vice-versa. This is what



                                                   21
we will do to separate the roles of changes in assortativeness in marriage and education attainment

for inequality in family earnings.

   To illustrate how it can be done, suppose we want to calculate the marriage rates and marital

sorting in a market for which we know the structural surplus matrix Z and the marginal distributions

of N classes of men and women (m, M ). Under the SEV assumptions, the deterministic part of the

marital surplus of a union of a man of type I with a woman of type J (Z IJ ) is simply (see Choo

and Siow (2006)):

                                                               µIJ
                                        Z IJ    = 2 ln      
                                                               µI 0 µ0J

where (µIJ , µI 0 , µ0J ) are, respectively, the masses of men in (I, J ) matches (which equals the mass

of women in (I, J ) matches when men and women are equally populous as in our case), men who

are single and of type I , and women who are single and of type J . We can rearrange this expression

as follows:

                                                       Z IJ            
                                      µIJ     = exp                µI 0 µ0J                         (4)
                                                        2

We notice that the marginal distributions (m, M ) of men and women are

                                                                    N
                                                mI    = µI 0 +            µIJ
                                                                   J =1
                                                                     N
                                       and     MJ     = µ0J +             µIJ
                                                                   I =1


Replacing µIJ in these expressions yields the following system of 2N equations
              
                           N           Z IJ        
               µI 0 +
                           J =1 exp            µI 0 µ0J - mI = 0 for I = 1, . . . N
              
                                        2
                           N           Z IJ     
               µ0J +
                           I =1 exp            µI 0 µ0J - MJ = 0 for J = 1, . . . N
              
                                        2


The solution to the system of quadratic equations is the set of singlehood rates µI 0 and µ0J for

I, J = 1, . . . N ). Once these are determined, we can replace them in equation (4) to determine the

new marital sorting patterns. It is worth mentioning that, since the SEV approach links sorting

patterns to the value of marriage relative to staying single, it does allow us to calculate both the

                                                       22
counterfactual sorting patterns conditional on marriage and the counterfactual marriage rates.


7.2     Inequality in family earnings

Table 7 shows the gini coefficents for family earned income, within each of the groups defined by

cohort, marital status and education. In this Table, couples can be legally married or cohabiting;

similar results for legally married couples only can be found in the Appendix Table 10. Inequality is

higher for singles and in couples of lower educated individuals. This points to the role of marriage

and education in protecting earnings. It is also clear that within-group inequality increased across

the cohorts for almost all groups, and the change is larger where inequality was already high in the

earlier cohort.

      Interestingly, we also see an increase in inequality for the entire population, but only a modest

one. This suggests that a shift in the composition of families or a decline in between-group inequality,

or both, have counteracted the rise in within-group inequality. The empirical patterns we have

identified so far reveal forces working in opposite directions. On the one hand, individuals in the

later cohort are more likely to be singles, which further pushes inequality up. The comparison of

marital sorting patterns across the two cohorts did not reveal a clear direction of change, indicating

an increase in assortativeness at some margins and a drop in other margins, and hence the effects

of these changes on inequality are ambiguous a priori. On the other hand, the later cohort is more

educated than the earlier one, and education clearly reduces inequality in earnings. Finally, our

description of the earnings of men and women by education suggests that the college premium may

not have increased over the period, and indeed may have dropped for men. This too can contribute

to counterbalance the rise in inequality within groups.

      We now investigate how marital sorting and education attainment contributed to change in-

equality in family earnings across the two cohorts.


7.3     Education, Marital Sorting and Income Inequality

We use the procedure described in section 7.1 to calculate two counterfactual sorting matrices, for

the later birth cohort of 1965-74.5 The first is based on the marginal distributions of education of the

   5
    For structural approaches to measuring the effects of changes in sorting see Fernández (2002); Fernández et al.
(2005) amongst others.


                                                        23
Table 7: Gini coefficients for family earned income, by marital status (all unions), education and
cohort

             Education of                           Education of the woman                            Single
             the man                    No qual.     Secondary      High school      College          men


                                                        Panel A: birth cohort 1945-54


             No qualifications            0.481         0.339           0.330         0.326           0.648
             Secondary education          0.367         0.307           0.284         0.271           0.540
             High school                  0.324         0.278           0.268         0.284           0.445
             College degree               0.333         0.278           0.258         0.236           0.383


             Single women                 0.686         0.518           0.430         0.344


             All families                                               0.437




                                                        Pabel B: birth cohort 1965-74


             No qualifications            0.611         0.421           0.397         0.321           0.734
             Secondary education          0.450         0.337           0.291         0.270           0.550
             High school                  0.381         0.296           0.278         0.266           0.443
             College degree               0.465         0.293           0.279         0.281           0.418


             Single women                 0.777         0.584           0.512         0.411


             All families                                               0.446


       Couples are those legally married and cohabiting. Family income is divided by 2 for couples.



later cohort but superimposes the sorting patterns of the earlier one, born in 1945-54. It will reveal

how marital sorting would look like under the marginals of the later cohort had assortativeness

remained unchanged. The second does the reverse by keeping the sorting patterns of the later



                                                          24
cohort while imposing the marginal distribution of the earlier one. It will reveal how marital sorting

would look like under the preferences of the later cohort with the distributions of education as

for the earlier cohort. We then re-weight our sample of the later cohort using the counterfactual

distribution of education and marital patterns and calculate the the corresponding Gini coefficients.

   The results of this exercise are shown in Table 8. What is clear from the figures in the Table is

that changes in the probability of marriage and in sorting patterns contributed to push inequality

upwards, but only modestly. Indeed counterfactual 1 shows that inequality would have been lower

had the surplus from marrying different types of spouses remained unaltered at the levels of cohort

1945-55, but not by very much: the Gini coefficient would have been 2 percentage points lower

when considering all unions, and 3.5 percentage points lower when considering legal marriages only.

This result is mainly driven by the relative increase in value of remaining single, which contributes

to keep more individuals single than would have happened otherwise. Since inequality is higher

among singles, particularly those with lower levels of education, such change contributes to push

up inequality in family income.

                                   Table 8: Counterfactual simulations

                                 cohort                             Cohort 1965-74
                                 1945-54        original        counterfactual 1   counterfactual 2


                all unions         .437           .446               .425               .528
                legal unions       .445           .460               .425               .535


             Counterfactual 1 uses the distribution of education of the 1965-74 cohort and the assorta-
             tiveness of the 1945-54 cohort. Counterfactual 2 uses the distribution of education of the
             1945-54 cohort and the assortativeness of the 1965-74 cohort.


   In contrast, the change in education attainment contributed strongly to prevent inequality from

increasing across the two cohorts, as shown in counterfactual 2. Inequality is lower for the more

educated, and marital rates dropped by less for this group as well, which explains why the higher

levels of education of the later cohort acted to counteract the generalised increase in within-group

inequality reported in Table 7. These results are closely aligned with what (Eika et al., 2019) found

using a different measure of assortativeness in marriage.


                                                           25
8     Conclusion and Discussion

Existing evidence on the direction of change in assortativeness in marriage over the recent past

is inconclusive. Most studies use US data, and some find evidence of increase in assortativeness

by education and earnings capacity (Chiappori et al., 2017; Greenwood et al., 2014b) while others

find that assortativeness changed differentially across the distribution of education and declined

at the top (Eika et al., 2019). The comparison across cohorts is complicated by large changes

in the distribution of education that we document above. We have argued that changes in the

composition of the marriage market limit our ability to assess changes in assortativeness without

relying on specific assumptions about the structure of the matching model. In this paper we develop

the Separable Extreme Value approach to bring new evidence on changes in assortativeness in the

UK.

    More generally, the question of the structure of the marriage market is central to our under-

standing of inequality, child development and the intergenerational transmission of skills and wealth.

Beyond love and companionship, marriage provides public goods, risk sharing and the environment

in which children grow up. Thus, the evolving structure of the family can have momentous impacts

on how society evolves and how we deal with and understand social inequalities. Studying assorta-

tiveness and how it changes is just one step in understanding how families are structured and how

economic and social forces shape the family.




                                                 26
References

Becker, G. S. (1981). A Treatise on the Family. Harvard University Press.

Blundell, R., R. Joyce, A. Norris-Keiller, and J. Ziliak (2018). Income inequality and the labour
  market in britain and the us. Journal of Public Economics 162, 48­62.

Chiappori, P. A. (2017). Matching with transfers: The economics of love and marriage. Princeton
  University Press.

Chiappori, P. A., M. Costa-Dias, and C. Meghir (2019). Changes in assortative matching: Theory
  and measurement in the us and the uk. mimeo, University of Columbia .

Chiappori, P.-A., M. C. Dias, and C. Meghir (2018). The marriage market, labor supply, and
  education choice. Journal of Political Economy 126 (S1), S26­S72.

Chiappori, P. A., B. Salanié, and Y. Weiss (2017). Partner choice, investment in children, and the
  marital college premium. American Economic Review 107, 175­201.

Choo, E. and A. Siow (2006). Who marries whom and why. Journal of Political Economy 114,
  175­201.

Eika, L., M. Mogstad, and B. Zafar (2019). Educational assortative mating and household income
  inequality. Journal of Political Economy 127.

Fernández, R. (2002). Education, segregation and marital sorting: theory and an application to the
  uk. European Economic Review 46 (6), 993 ­ 1022. ISOM.

Fernández, R., N. Guner, and J. Knowles (2005). Love and Money: A Theoretical and Empirical
  Analysis of Household Sorting and Inequality*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (1),
  273­344.

Fernández, R. and R. Rogerson (2001). Sorting and long-run inequality. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 116 (4), 1305­1341.

Greenwood, J., N. Guner, and J. Knowles (2003). More on marriage, fertility, and the distribution
  of income. International Economic Review 44, 827­862.

Greenwood, J., N. Guner, G. Kocharkov, and C. Santos (2014a). Marry your like: Assortative
  mating and income inequality. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 104, 348­
  353.

Greenwood, J., N. Guner, G. Kocharkov, and C. Santos (2014b). Marry your like: Assortative
  mating and income inequality. American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings) 104, 348­
  353.

McFadden, D. (1981). Econometric models of probabilistic choice. In C. Manski and D. McFad-
 den (Eds.), Structural Analysis of Discrete Data and Econometric Applications, pp. 198­272.
 Cambridge: MIT Press.

ONS (2019). Quarterly labour force survey, 1992-2019. Office for National Statistics, Social Survey
 Division, Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency, Central Survey Unit .



                                                27
Reynoso, A. (2019). The impact of divorce laws on the equilibrium in the marriage market. mimeo,
  University of Michigan .

Romano, J., A. Shaikh, and M. Wolf (2008). Formalized data snooping based on generalized error
  rates. Econometric Theory 24, 404­447.

Romano, J. and M. Wolf (2005). Stepwise multiple testing as formalized data snooping. Economet-
  rica 73, 1237?1282.

Romano, J. and M. Wolf (2016). Efficient computation of adjusted p-values for resampling-based
  stepdown multiple testing. Statistics and Probability Letters 113, 38­40.

Shen, J. (2019). (non-)marital assortative mating and the closing of the gender gap in education.
  mimeo, Princeton University .




                                               28
9   Appendix


         Table 9: Sorting matrices conditional on marriage, legally married couples

               Education of                Education of the wife
               the husband           Secondary High-School College

                                          Birth cohort: 1945-54

               No qualifications       18.52         6.58         3.02    0.69
               Secondary education     14.09        10.44         5.40    1.23
               High school              6.63         7.03         6.27    2.03
               College degree          2.27         3.34          5.93    6.53

                                          Pabel B: birth cohort 1965-74

               No qualifications       6.19          4.89         3.54    2.05
               Secondary education     3.61         10.35         7.81     4.31
               High school             2.37          7.59         9.17     7.19
               College degree          1.44         3.54          6.56    19.41




                                               29
                                                                                                         30




Table 10: Gini coefficients for family earned income, by legal marital status, education and cohort

             Education of                            Education of the woman                     Single
             the man                    No qual.     Secondary High school            College    men

                                                        Panel A: birth cohort 1945-54

             No qualifications            0.477         0.336           0.330          0.316    0.612
             Secondary education          0.364         0.302           0.285          0.264    0.505
             High school                  0.315         0.276           0.261          0.280    0.439
             College degree               0.332         0.277           0.259          0.236    0.372

             Single women                 0.662         0.507           0.432          0.353

             All families                                               0.445


                                                        Pabel B: birth cohort 1965-74

             No qualifications            0.604         0.399           0.388          0.314    0.674
             Secondary education          0.431         0.329           0.283          0.272    0.496
             High school                  0.360         0.287           0.277          0.278    0.418
             College degree               0.424         0.295           0.277          0.283    0.387

             Single women                 0.759         0.565           0.492          0.408

             All families                                               0.460

       Couples are those legally married only. Family income is divided by 2 for couples.
