                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




HOW POLITICAL INSIDERS LOSE OUT WHEN INTERNATIONAL AID UNDERPERFORMS:
   EVIDENCE FROM A PARTICIPATORY DEVELOPMENT EXPERIMENT IN GHANA

                                         Kate Baldwin
                                         Dean Karlan
                                      Christopher R. Udry
                                        Ernest Appiah

                                      Working Paper 26930
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26930


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




 We thank The Hunger Project for their collaboration throughout this long-term project, and the
 Robertson Foundation for funding. IRB approval was received from Yale University Protocol #
 1301011377 and from Innovations for Poverty Action Protocol #13July-002. We thank the field
 and data team at Innovations for Poverty Action: Alexis Devonish, Hana Freymiller, Sana Khan,
 Joe Long, Elana Safran, Sneha Stephens and Bram Thuysbaert, as well as Humphrey K. Dickson
 and Onallia E. Osei, who helped collect qualitative data. We are grateful for comments and
 suggestions from Eric Kramon, Horacio Larreguy, Matthew Winters and participants in seminars
 at the African Studies Association, Duke University, EGAP, Harvard University, McGill
 University and Yale University's Leitner Political Economy Seminar. All errors and opinions are
 our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
 views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
 peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
 official NBER publications.

 © 2020 by Kate Baldwin, Dean Karlan, Christopher R. Udry, and Ernest Appiah. All rights
 reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
 permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Political Insiders Lose Out When International Aid Underperforms: Evidence from a
Participatory Development Experiment in Ghana
Kate Baldwin, Dean Karlan, Christopher R. Udry, and Ernest Appiah
NBER Working Paper No. 26930
April 2020
JEL No. H4,H7,O12,O17,O19

                                         ABSTRACT

Participatory development is designed to mitigate problems of political bias in pre-existing local
government but also interacts with it in complex ways. Using a five-year randomized controlled
study in 97 clusters of villages (194 villages) in Ghana, we analyze the effects of a major
participatory development program on participation in, leadership of and investment by
preexisting political institutions, and on households' overall socioeconomic well-being. Applying
theoretical insights on political participation and redistributive politics, we consider the
possibility of both cross-institutional mobilization and displacement, and heterogeneous effects
by partisanship. We find the government and its political supporters acted with high expectations
for the participatory approach: treatment led to increased participation in local governance and
reallocation of resources. But the results did not meet expectations, resulting in a worsening of
socioeconomic wellbeing in treatment versus control villages for government supporters. This
demonstrates international aid's complex distributional consequences.

Kate Baldwin                                    Christopher R. Udry
Yale University                                 Northwestern University
115 Prospect Street                             Department of Economics
New Haven, CT 06520                             Weinberg College of Arts and Sciences
United States                                   2211 Campus Drive #3247
Katharine.Baldwin@yale.edu                      Evanston, IL 60208
                                                and NBER
Dean Karlan                                     christopher.udry@northwestern.edu
Kellogg Global Hub
Northwestern University                         Ernest Appiah
2211 Campus Drive                               Faculty of Health and Allied Sciences
Evanston, IL 60208                              Pentecost University College
and CEPR                                        Post office Box KN1739
and also NBER                                   Kaneshie, Accra
dean.karlan@gmail.com                           Ghana
                                                enappiah@yahoo.com




Online appendices are available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26930
I.     Introduction


The received wisdom is that government supporters benefit most from traditional donor aid to

governments (Briggs 2012; 2014; Hodler and Raschky 2014; Jablonski 2014). The phenomenon of

international aid to non-governmental organizations (NGOs), especially participatory

development aid, is in part a response to the problem of misdirected aid (Dietrich 2013; Mansuri

and Rao 2013). Participatory development approaches aim to build new local institutional

structures to administer aid, with the goal of achieving more effective projects and equitable

outcomes. The expectation is that the new institutions developed through these approaches

should be able to deliver aid neutrally, achieving benefits for citizens across the political

spectrum.


We study the expansion of a participatory development program in Ghana, and find that it

interacts with pre-existing political institutions in complex ways. For a complete understanding

of the distributional outcomes of international aid, scholars must consider both the direct effects

of aid itself and its indirect effects on how local households and governments allocate resources

they control. Incorporating insights from both the literature on comparative democratic

participation (Verba et al. 1978; Berman 1997) and the literature on distributive politics (Franck

and Rainer 2012; Golden and Min 2013), we examine differential crowding in and crowding out

effects along political lines. We demonstrate that, when considering the full effects of

international aid on distributive outcomes, there may be biases along political lines due to

differential response of pre-existing institutions, even if the international aid itself is neutrally

administered.


                                                 2
In analyzing the effects of international aid on distributional outcomes, we highlight the

possibility that donor-funded NGOs may disappoint local citizens and governments, providing

less benefit than expected. Aid via NGOs, and participatory development projects in particular,

has rarely transformed socioeconomic outcomes (Casey et al. 2018; White, Menon, and

Waddington 2018). Under these circumstances, we describe how co-partisans of the government

who receive aid may become distributive losers.


We conducted a five-year randomized controlled study of a participatory development program

in Ghana, and use this to study the complex interactions between participatory development aid

and pre-existing political institutions and their combined effect on citizens' material well -being.

Approximately half of 97 clusters of villages in Ghana's Eastern Region, each containing two

villages, were assigned to partake in a multi-sectoral participatory development program run by

The Hunger Project (THP), an international NGO with experience implementing similar programs

in eight countries for more than a dozen years prior to the study. We tracked governance and

socioeconomic outcomes using two waves of household, community and leadership surveys in

these 194 villages. We collected long-term follow-up data (five years after baseline), as well as a

breadth of information at the household, community and institution level. This allowed us to

analyze how participatory development councils compared with and affected local traditional

institutions and local governments, and how THP's participatory development program affected

resource flows from other governance structures.


We contribute to two debates on the relationship between international aid and domestic

politics in receiving countries. First, our study shows how participatory development institutions



                                                 3
can crowd out activities of pre-existing institutions. Existing studies have rarely explicitly focused

on how new participatory institutions impact existing traditional institutions and local

governments.6 Second, we highlight the complexity of international aid's distributional

consequences. Debate typically has centered on how to avert biases toward government

supporters, with empirical studies focusing on the distribution of aid inputs versus the

distribution of socioeconomic outcomes (Brass 2012; Briggs 2012; 2014; 2017; Jablonski 2014).

Bringing in theoretical insights from the literatures on comparative political participation and

redistributive politics, we show how government-aligned citizens shifted resources into the

participatory approach, and then ended up worse off because the new institutions performed

poorly compared to pre-existing ones. By analyzing the broad socioeconomic effects of aid across

sectors, as is considered best practice in the literature on distributional politics (Kramon and

Posner 2013), we make an empirical advance in the study of international aid's distributional

consequences.



II.   Theorizing Participatory Development Aid's Cross-Institutional
Effects and Distributional Consequences

Traditional government-to-government aid is subject to numerous problems, including elite

capture and diversion for political purposes (de Mesquita and Smith 2009). Existing research has

shown that donor-supported projects are frequently targeted at incumbent parties' core

constituencies. In Kenya, Briggs (2014) shows that donor funds given to the government for




6
 For important exceptions, see Beath, Christia, and Enikolopov (2013) and Deserranno,
Nansamba, and Qian (2019)
                                                  4
specific projects were skewed to the incumbent president's base between 1989 and 1995;

Jablonski (2014) demonstrates a similar pattern for government projects funded by the African

Development Bank and the World Bank between 1992 and 2010. In Ghana, Briggs (2012) shows

that a World Bank-funded electrification project was diverted to the incumbent's political base

in the run-up to the 2000 elections. More generally, Hodler and Raschky (2014) shows that

foreign aid is associated with higher levels of regional favoritism in countries with weak political

institutions.


Donor support to NGOs, which has blossomed in the past two decades, is partly a response to

these problems (Dietrich 2013). International aid to NGOs has been shown to be both less

politically motivated than donor aid to governments (Büthe, Major, and Souza 2012; Faye and

Niehaus 2012), and more neutrally allocated within countries; for example, Brass (2012) finds

that support for the incumbent does not influence the location of NGO projects in Kenya.


Participatory development, or community development, approaches can be considered an

extreme example of donor responses to government misallocation of aid. Participatory

development aid is defined by its investment in new institutions that mobilize community

members to participate in decision-making and project management (Mansuri and Rao 2013, 16).

The exact form this investment takes varies, but it usually involves constituting new decision-

making bodies and providing leadership training to community members with the goal of

enhancing participation of previously excluded groups and individuals. The justification of this

investment is based on the implicit assumption that aid will be misallocated without it, either

due to intentional diversion by leaders of pre-existing government institutions or due to



                                                 5
inefficiencies in top-down approaches (Oates 1972; Ostrom 1996; Bardhan and Mookherjee

2000).


How do the new institutions created through participatory development interact with pre-

existing institutions? In addition to any direct effect of participatory development programs on

community decision-making and resource availability, they could have indirect effects on the

inclusivity, accountability and resource allocation of pre-existing government. We note that the

communities in which participatory development approaches are implemented virtually always

have some pre-existing governance structures. They may have elected representatives in a

legislature that oversees the formal state apparatus. Even in settings with weak formal

government structures, there are typically pre-existing community-level institutions, often with

customary legitimacy, that organize some types of local public goods (Murtazashvili 2016;

Ostrom 1990).


We start from the assumption that communities have both of these types of pre-existing political

institutions and that individuals' well-being is a function of how responsive these institutions are

to their needs. First, we consider the existence of informal community institutions that organize

public goods and services using non-state resources. These include village traditional institutions,

local business associations and sectarian organizations (Baldwin 2013; Cammett 2014; MacLean

2010), which may or may not have formal recognition from the government. The types of public

goods organized by these institutions varies, but they typically depend on local voluntary

contributions from citizens, often referred to as informal taxes, to finance the public goods they

organize in the community (Lust and Rakner 2018; Olken and Singhal 2011). Second, we consider



                                                 6
the formal government, which can provide public goods and services in the community using

state resources.7 In electoral democracies, citizens are typically represented in the formal

government through an elected representative, who is responsible for advocating on their behalf.


In this set up, a citizen's well-being is affected by NGO, household and government investment

in public goods and services. Local households and governments must decide how much of their

budgets to allocate to the NGO project, other projects in the NGO sector and other projects in

the non-NGO sector within their community. The government may also decide to allocate

resources to other communities. This system of institutions and investment decisions is depicted

graphically in both panels of Figure 1, with each panel illustrating distinct types of effects

participatory development aid might have on pre-existing political institutions.




7
 We distinguish here between citizens' resources and state resources, given th at an extremely
small portion of state resources come from taxes on individuals in aid-receiving communities.
                                                7
Figure 1. Cross-Institutional Effects of Participatory Development
                      (a) Mobilization Effects




                    (b) Displacement Effects




                                8
When models of participatory development have considered the potential interactions between

participatory development institutions and pre-existing political institutions, they have tended to

focus on the potentially positive mobilization effects. Specifically, they have emphasized that

citizens gain participatory skills and coordination capacity that translates into their interactions

with both informal community leaders and government representatives, thereby improving the

responsiveness of these institutions and their investment in the community.8 For example, Casey,

Glennerster and Miguel (2012) models community-driven development as providing

participatory skills for new groups (through learning-by-doing and demonstration effects) and

creating institutions such as community councils that reduce future coordination costs (in

addition to subsidizing the cost of infrastructure materials). Avdeenko and Gilligan (2015) depicts

participatory development as expanding social networks and thereby prosocial norms. Fearon,

Humphreys and Weinstein (2015) emphasizes that these programs develop local leaders'

coordination and mobilization skills. Implicit in these models is the assumption that there is

significant slack in the performance of pre-existing political institutions, and so informal

community institutions and governments could mobilize greater resources toward local public

goods absent coordination or accountability failures. This model of interactions is depicted in

Figure 1, panel A.


However, in cases in which there is not significant slack in the performance of pre-existing

political institutions, participatory development projects may result in negative displacement

effects in which citizens and governments reduce the amount of time and resources they channel



8Even NGOs that do not devote significant resources to building new governance institutions
have been argued to have these effects. See Boulding (2010; 2014).
                                                 9
through pre-existing institutions. Existing models of participatory development have paid

insufficient attention to the possibility of these displacement effects. Citizens who are part of

participatory development committees may not have the time or motivation to engage with

community meetings or their formal government (Edwards and Hulme 1996; Nelson-Nuñez

2019). If skilled political leaders are scarce and participatory development projects are relatively

ineffective at developing new leaders, participatory development projects could even lessen the

quality of leadership in existing institutions through poaching effects (Moyo 2009; Deserranno,

Nansamba, and Qian 2019).


Because household and government spending is fungible, citizens and governments may also

reduce budget contributions they make to other projects in response to participatory

development projects. Citizens contributing in cash or in kind to participatory development

projects may pay less informal taxes to pre-existing community governing institutions (Lust and

Rakner 2018; Olken and Singhal 2011).9 Governments with limited budgets may substitute

resources away from sectors and communities served by participatory development programs

(Khilji and Zampelli 1994; Torpey-Saboe 2015). These types of displacement effects could result

in a reduction of public goods and service provision by traditional institutions and local

governments, as depicted in Figure 1, panel B, potentially eliminating any distributional

advantage of being an aid recipient.




9 Informal taxes differ from formal taxes in that they are not administered by the state or
enforced by the formal legal system and therefore the amount paid is typically more elastic. In
the extreme case of voluntary contributions, neutrality arguments suggest that the offset will be
complete (Bergstrom, Blume, and Varian 1986).
                                                10
Critically, both cross-institutional mobilization and displacement effects could plausibly differ

along partisan lines. As a result, even if participatory development programs are provided equally

to both supporters and opponents of the incumbent government, there may be partisan

distributional consequences of participatory development. We draw on the existing literature on

political mobilization and distributive politics to explain why this might be in the subsequent

paragraphs, spelling out the distributional consequences of participatory development aid under

various assumptions in Table 1.


Table 1. Distributional Consequences of Participatory Development Aid in Different Contexts

 Type of effects of aid on                          (2)                                            (3)
 pre-existing institutions                    If aid works                                If aid disappoints

 1. Homogenous               Copartisans: recipients >> non-recipients       No distributional effects.
 mobilization effects        Non-copartisans: recipients >> non-recipients
 2. Mobilization effects     Copartisans: recipients > non-recipients        No distributional effects.
 for non-copartisans of      Non-copartisans: recipients >> non-recipients
 government
 3. Mobilization effects     Copartisans: recipients >> non-recipients       No distributional effects.
 for co-partisans of         Non-copartisans: recipients > non-recipients
 government
 4. Homogenous               No distributional effects.                      Copartisans: recipients < non-recipients
 displacement effects                                                        Non-copartisans: recipients < non-recipients

 5. Displacement effects     Copartisans: recipients = non-recipients        Copartisans: recipients < non-recipients
 with co-partisan            Non-copartisans: recipients > non-recipients    Non-copartisans: recipients = non-recipients
 government spending




In the first column of Table 1, we outline the distributional consequences of participatory

development aid, assuming that aid generates benefits for at least some sub-groups in the

population. In the first row, we consider how cross-institutional mobilization effects alter the

effects of participatory development. The expectation is that mobilization effects ratchet up the



                                                      11
benefits of participatory development for aid recipients, as they result in increased investment

in public goods and services from pre-existing governance institutions as well as the NGO.


In the second and third rows, we consider the possibility of partisan bias in the size of mobilization

effects. In theorizing the direction of partisan effects, we start from the observation that

individuals affiliated with the national incumbent party typically believe their governments are

more democratic and more responsive to them (Anderson and Tverdova 2003; Norris 2011).

However, the existing literature provides two competing predictions about whether this should

cause greater mobilization effects for incumbent co-partisans or other citizens, depending on

whether scholars view civil society interventions as having the ability to substitute for party

organizations that connect citizens to government or as necessarily being complemented by

partisan mobilization.


One strand of the literature emphasizes the importance of citizens' civic skills, attitudes and

associational memberships in explaining democratic political participation (Almond and Verba

1963; Putnam, Leonardi, and Nanetti 1993). From this theoretical perspective, the training and

coordination of citizens who are unaligned with the incumbent would be expected to generate

particularly large effects on their engagement with pre-existing governance institutions, given

their lower baseline levels of political efficacy. In this case, we would expect especially large

benefits to being an aid recipient for individuals who are not co-partisans of the incumbent

government, as outlined in row 2.


In contrast, a second strand of the literature on political participation emphasizes the unique role

of political parties in mobilizing democratic engagement (Verba et al. 1978; Berman 1997). From


                                                 12
this perspective, increases in individuals' civic skills, attitudes and organizational capacity are only

likely to increase democratic political participation if they are also connected to political parties

that allow their opinions to be articulated in the centers of government power. Insofar as

opposition political parties have weak abilities to do this in new democracies, this theoretical

perspective leads to a competing prediction: we would expect citizens who are aligned with the

incumbent party to experience the largest mobilization effects. In this case, we would expect

especially large benefits to being an aid recipient for individuals who are co-partisans of the

incumbent government, as outlined in row 3.


In the bottom two rows of the table, we consider the distributional consequences of

displacement effects. Displacement effects could result in a reduction of public goods and service

provision by community-level institutions and local governments, potentially eliminating any

distributional advantage of being an aid recipient, as indicated in row 4. However, this may also

be subject to partisan biases. Specifically, we are interested in whether co-partisans of the

government are likely to be subject to larger or smaller displacements of government spending

as a result of participatory development projects.


Here, the existing literature provides clear expectations. Individuals who are co-partisans of the

government are typically favored in their access government-financed local public goods and

services (Burgess et al. 2015; Franck and Rainer 2012; Golden and Min 2013; Kramon and Posner

2016).10 As a result, on average, the absolute value of state resources displaced as a result of



10 In empirical studies of sub-Saharan Africa, core support is often measured through co-ethnicity

instead of co-partisanship, given the strong correlation between the two in some countries. We
have measures of both co-ethnicity and co-partisanship but we prefer to focus on the latter given
                                                  13
participatory development programming should be higher for government co-partisans. In this

context, we would expect the receipt of aid to make a larger difference to the well-being of

individuals who are not government co-partisans. In the extreme case in which the government

only invests resources to benefit co-partisans (and the government has at least as many

resources as the NGO), aid recipients are only better off than non-aid recipients if they are not

copartisans, as in row 5.


In our discussion of the distributional consequences of participatory development aid so far,

summarized in the first column of Table 1, we have described aid as having a positive impact.

However, many international aid projects, including participatory development ones, have

limited impacts (Casey et al. 2018; King and Samii 2014; White, Menon, and Waddington 2018;

Wright and Winters 2010), which might not be understood by government policymakers and

households in making their own resource allocation decisions. Casey, Glennerster, Miguel and

Voors (2018) surveys the expectations of academics, international policymakers and domestic

policymakers on the long-term effects of a community-driven development project they had

implemented in Sierra Leone between 2005 and 2009; despite the fact that they had

demonstrated no medium-term institutional effects of the program in Sierra Leone in a published

paper (Casey, Glennerster, and Miguel 2012), policymakers in the country expected large positive

effects. More generally, public opinion data from sub-Saharan Africa suggests that many citizens

have extremely high expectations for NGOs. According to data from Afrobarometer survey (4th

round), 43 percent of Africans (across all sampled countries) believe that international donors



that partisanship is a stable identity in Ghana and multiple ethnic groups consistently support
each of the two major parties.
                                               14
and NGOs help their country a lot; an additional 33 percent say they help somewhat and only 5

percent say that they do not help at all.


As a result, in the third column of Table 1, we consider the distributional consequences of aid

that has a disappointing impact. In contexts without displacement effects (rows 1-3), there are

limited distributional consequences of participatory development aid projects that have limited

effects. However, once we introduce the possibility of displacement effects, aid that fails to meet

citizens and governments' expectations has distributional consequences. Aid recipients may

reallocate too much effort to aid projects, given their inflated expectations regarding their

benefits. Similarly, governments may displace too many resources from aid recipients. If there is

no slack in citizens' and governments' budget constraints and aid ultimately has disappointing

effects, aid recipients are expected to be worse off than non-aid recipients in the short to

medium-term, as indicated in row 4.


An additional wrinkle is introduced if the government is biased in favor of its copartisans in its

displacement of resources from aid projects that ultimately underperform. Row 5 considers the

extreme case in which the government only spends state resources on its copartisans, showing

that copartisan recipients of aid will be worse off than copartisans who do not receive aid in this

context, while there will be no difference in well-being among non-copartisans. In a world in

which aid disappoints and the government is biased in favor of its copartisans, copartisan aid

recipients can become distributive losers.




                                                15
Thus, our ambition is twofold. We analyze whether participatory development aid has

mobilization and/or displacement effects on pre-existing political institutions, as depicted in

Figure 1. We also analyze whether these effects differ along partisan lines, as described in Table

1.



III.   Local Governance in Ghana's Eastern Region


We study participatory development's effects on preexisting governance structures in the

context of Ghana's Eastern Region. Community-driven development projects are common across

low and middle income countries (Mansuri and Rao 2013; White, Menon, and Waddington 2018).

However, most existing experimental research on the effects of community-driven development

has focused on post-conflict settings and "failed states" (Avdeenko and Gilligan 2015; Casey,

Glennerster, and Miguel 2012; Fearon, Humphreys, and Weinstein 2015; Humphreys, Sierra, and

Windt 2014). We study the impact of participatory approaches in a poor but peaceful setting with

strong pre-existing political institutions. The effects of participatory development programs on

preexisting institutions are arguably particularly important in settings with strong existing

governance structures. Our study took place in villages across Ghana's Eastern Region.11 These

communities are governed by traditional chieftaincy institutions, in addition to elected local

governments and national governments.




11Only four of the 17 districts in existence in 2006 were excluded ­ one because it was urban;
two because the program had previously been rolled out in these districts; and one because we
were not able to successfully collect baseline data in this district.
                                               16
The chieftaincy structure is broadly similar across our study communities.12 At the top of the

traditional hierarchy is the chief (omahene), with divisional chiefs (ohene) and village chiefs

(odikro) below them. For most rural citizens, the most relevant of these leaders are village chiefs,

who are selected from within the village's ruling family and typically rule for life. They normally

govern their villages with the assistance of a council, which includes other family heads

(abusuapanyin) and elders (panyin) (Arhin 1985). Village chiefs play critical roles in local dispute

resolution, land allocation, meeting organization and community mobilization. However, they do

this without salaries, budgets, or formal support from the government.13 Instead, they depend

on informal norms to underpin their power and voluntary contributions from community

members to accomplish projects ("self-help projects").


In parallel to the chieftaincy structure, communities in Eastern Ghana are also governed by

district governments. Much of the power lies with the District Chief Executive, who is appointed

by the president and combines executive and administrative functions. As a result, the party

winning the national presidency has significant control over the allocation of resources within

districts. Each district also has a district assembly; two thirds of its members are popularly elected

from single-member electoral districts composed of groups of villages/neighborhoods (with total

populations of around 10,000 each) and the other third is appointed. District elections are held

every four years, with one set held during our study (in late 2010/early 2011). Officially, these




12 This is despite the fact that the region is made up of multiple (Akan and Krobo) ethnic groups,
reflecting the historical influence of Akan practices on their neighbors and colonial-era
standardization. See Wilson (1987).
13 Higher level traditional leaders, such as chiefs, do have official roles and receive some

resources from the Ghanaian government.
                                                 17
elections are non-partisan, although the political affiliations of candidates are often well-known

locally, and the position of assemblymember is a part-time volunteer position. The district

assembly is responsible for approving the district budget and providing oversight of the district

administration. District assemblymembers are expected to lobby for resources from the district

budget to support local projects, especially in the areas of basic education, primary health care,

local roads, environmental protection, water and sanitation (Crook et al. 1998). In all of our study

areas, the vast majority of the district budget comes from transfers from the national

government using a formula-based fund.


Citizens also participate in national elections to determine control of the parliament and

presidency. National politicians are inaccessible to most rural Ghanians but these elections

structure partisan identities, and are deeply competitive between two major parties, the National

Democratic Congress (NDC) and the New Patriotic Party (NPP). The two parties have strong

regional and ethnic bases of support, and many Ghanaians have stable partisan preferences. For

example, Lindberg and Morrison (2005) finds that 82 percent of parliamentary voters in the 2000

election had voted for the same party in 1996, and Weghorst and Lindberg (2013) finds that only

22 percent of voters split their presidential and parliamentary vote between different parties in

any of the three elections covered by their study (1996, 2000 and 2004). The NDC was the

national incumbent party for almost all of the period of our study, taking over the presidency

after the December 2008 election, and winning re-election in December 2012.


Ghana's Eastern Region is uniquely divided between NDC and NPP supporters, largely due to the

fact it includes both Ewe and Krobo ethnic groups (traditionally support the NDC) as well as Akan



                                                18
groups (Akyem and Akuapem, traditionally support the NPP).14 Importantly, NPP and NDC

supporters are intermingled within districts and even villages in our study, with 95 percent of

villages containing households that supported different parties at baseline. Figure 2 displays the

distribution of NDC support across the region at baseline, indicating the proportion of NDC-

aligned households within our study villages in each district in the image on the left and the

proportion of NDC-aligned villages (defined as villages in which at least 30 % of households are

NDC aligned) in the image on the right. Copartisanship with the national government is extremely

important for distributive outcomes in Ghana, influencing the distribution of funds from both the

national government and district governments, given the role of the president in appointing the

District Chief Executive (Asunka 2017; Nathan 2019).


Thus, prior to the expansion of participatory development institutions in the region, the study

villages already had hereditary chiefs who governed them at the village level, and elected leaders

who represented them within District Assemblies. Participatory development aid could plausibly

have positive mobilization spillovers and/or negative displacement effects on the responsiveness

of each of these institutions to citizens. Furthermore, given the strength of partisan affiliations

and the history of redistribution along partisan lines in Ghana, these effects could plausibly differ

depending on whether citizens are co-partisans of the national government.




14In a regression model predicting NDC affiliation at the household level in our sample, only
ethnic variables and the percentage of women in the household are statistically significant at
conventional confidence levels. See Appendix A.
                                                 19
Figure 2. NDC Co-Partisanship Across Study Districts




IV.    Intervention and Experimental Research Design

Our analysis of the distributional consequences of participatory aid is built around a randomized

controlled trial of The Hunger Project's (THP's) activities in Eastern Ghana. THP is a major

international NGO whose approach seeks to empower men and women to take control of their

futures by mobilizing them to act collectively within their local communities. In particular, THP

seeks to cultivate stronger leadership within communities both by organizing workshops that

train participants in leadership skills and by creating new inclusive governance structures.


The broad components of THP's approach (described in Appendix B) exemplify the participatory

development approach that has become prevalent in the aid industry. Community members are


                                                20
involved in project oversight in part to help align projects with community needs, but also to

provide on-the-ground monitoring and reduce dependence on outside resources in the context

of project implementation. In the THP model, as in many recent community-driven development

programs, a great deal of focus is building the capacity of communities to work together to

overcome socioeconomic challenges outside the narrow context of administering program funds.

Community members are expected to devote significant resources in cash or in kind to

supplement the donor funds provided for programming activities, and the goal is to have the

local government provide support for many of the programs subsequently run out of the center.


The THP approach is also explicitly multi-sectoral. The THP provides financial support for a variety

of programming activities, which are run out of community centers it helps local communities to

construct. These centers contain meeting halls, clinics, rural banks, foodbanks, toilets, a

demonstration farm, and either a preschool or library, and THP also supports agricultural training

programs, adult literacy classes and microfinance programs.


Our study took place in 194 villages, divided into 97 two-village groupings, across 13 districts in

Eastern Region. The village groupings were randomly assigned to treatment (57) and control (46)

through district-level lotteries, as described in Appendix C. Not all of the village groupings invited

to take part in THP's programming accepted the invitation. Following these workshops, just over

half of the villages (in 28 of 51 treatment groupings) actually began the THP process. All but three

of these groupings successfully completed construction of a community center, and four

groupings built two community centers. In Appendix D, we show that randomization yielded

statistically similar groups (i.e., we fail to reject the null that treatment assignment is orthogonal



                                                 21
to the baseline attributes of our study communities), as well as the differences between the

communities within the treatment group that took-up as compared to those that did not.


THP approximated the ideals of the participatory development approach in important ways. First,

it successfully created new participatory development institutions with more diverse leaders

than existing hereditary and elected institutions, as we show in Appendix E. Second, it was

successful in exposing a large proportion of adult community members to its activities, and

exposure was not biased along partisan lines, also demonstrated in Appendix E. As a result of

these successes in implementation, the program arguably represents a best case for considering

whether participatory development can have positive cross-institutional effects on engagement

with preexisting political institutions.


We are able to assess the effects of participatory development approaches on participation in,

leadership of and investment through various governance institutions by bringing together four

types of data, collected at multiple points in time. The timing of the distinct data collection efforts

relative to programing activities are displayed in Figure 3 and described below:


Household surveys. In each of the 97 village groupings in the study, two villages were randomly

selected for surveying. A baseline survey was conducted in 2008, at which point none of the study

villages had built the community center that is the centerpiece of THP's programming. Twenty

households were randomly selected for interviewing in each village in the sample, except in the

handful of cases where the village contained fewer than 20 households. A follow-up survey was

conducted with the same households in 2013. At this point, all of the treatment villages had been

introduced to THP's programming at least two years earlier, and some had been introduced to it


                                                  22
five years earlier, as illustrated in Figure 3. Given the long timeframe of the study, attrition was a

significant risk. We were able to resurvey 74 percent of baseline households. We have examined

whether the treatment ­ either by itself or in interaction with baseline outcome variables ­

affects the likelihood of attrition, and have found no evidence that suggests concerns of bias due

to attrition from the survey sample frame, as demonstrated in Appendix F.


Community leader surveys. We surveyed a key informant from each village (most frequently, the

village chief or another local traditional leader) about local services at baseline and as part of our

follow-up surveys. In our follow-up surveys, we also surveyed the area's representative in the

district government (the district assemblyperson).


Administrative data on local election returns and candidates. We obtained the official local

election returns and candidate forms for the local government elections held in the end of 2010

and the beginning of 2011 from the Electoral Commission of Ghana. We consider only the

electoral areas containing study villages in our analysis (N=122). Many electoral areas contain

two study villages from the same village grouping; only three contain villages from different

village groupings assigned to both treatment and control. We code electoral areas as treated if

they contain any study villages assigned to treatment. By the time of these elections, the vast

majority of the treated communities had been exposed t o THP's programming, as Figure 3

illustrates, although many had had a completed community center for less than a year.


The statistical analysis of the effects of the NGO's programming is complemented with evidence

from a qualitative follow-up study conducted in 12 communities in 2015, the method and results

of which are described in Appendix G.


                                                 23
Figure 3. Timeline of data collection and program roll out




V.   Results: Cross-Institutional Effects and Distributional
Consequences

We are interested in whether participatory development aid has cross-institutional mobilization

effects that improve engagement with pre-existing hereditary and elected leadership and/or

displacement effects that reduce investment through pre-existing institutions. In addition, we

consider whether there are partisan biases in either of these effects. We begin by considering

the evidence for each type of cross-institutional effect, using household, leadership and

administrative data on participation, accountability and investment in local public goods, before

considering the aggregate effects of participatory development on the distribution of

socioeconomic outcomes. Due to the imperfect take-up of the programming among treated

communities, we estimate both the "intent to treat" (ITT) and" treatment on the treated" (TOT)



                                               24
effects, using assignment to treatment as an instrument for mobilizing to receive programming

at the village level in the latter case.


We evaluate effects by constructing indices for each area of hypothesized impact. This provides

a clearer picture of the overall effect of the participatory approach in each area, and helps

address the problem of multiple hypothesis testing. Each index is created from a group of

variables measuring outcomes associated with the concept of interest by averaging the

standardized sub-components, and then re-standardizing the index.15 As a result, the effect of

the program on the indices should be interpreted in terms of standard deviations of the index

within the control group.


We examine the effects of participatory programming at two different levels of analysis,

depending on the unit of measurement. Many of our measures come from our household survey,

in which case outcomes are measured at the household level. In addition, we have measures of

local government investment and measures of political participation in local government

measured at the level of the electoral district (called "electoral areas").


The Intent to Treat (ITT) estimate of the effect of THP on household-level outcomes is 1 from

the following OLS regression specification:


                              = 0 + 1  + 2  +  + 




15In some cases, the sub-components are also themselves indices of variables, as explained in
Appendix H.
                                                 25
where i indexes households, j indexes village groupings, and k indexes districts.  is an

indicator variable that takes a value of 1 if the village grouping was assigned to treatment in the

lottery,  is the baseline measure of the outcome variable (where available), and  are district

fixed effects. In cases where baseline data was available for some but not all observations, we

dealt with missing data using dummy variable adjustment. The error term is clustered at the

village grouping level. For electoral area level outcomes, we replace  with  , and  is a

variable that takes a value of 1 if any sampled village in the electoral area was assigned to

treatment and 0 if all sampled villages in the electoral area were assigned to control; in these

models, standard errors are clustered by village groupings.16 Given imperfect take-up at the

village-level, we also estimate the Treatment on the Treated (TOT) using an instrumental variable

estimator implemented using the Generalized Method of Moments (GMM).17


In addition to estimating the models on the entire sample, we also estimate separate models by

baseline support for the party of the president during the major period of the study, the NDC

(see Figure 3). For the household-level analysis, we estimate separate models for households in

which the majority of respondents identified as NDC supporters in our baseline survey, which

was conducted just prior to the 2008 national elections (28 percent of households), and

households in which the majority of respondents did not identify as NDC supporters, either

because they supported other parties or had no political allegiance (72 percent of households).




16 In cases where villages in the same electoral area fall in different village groupings, we have
joined the two village groupings for the purpose of calculating standard errors.
17 The first stage results are included in Appendix I.


                                                26
In the village-level analysis, we distinguish between villages in which at least 30 percent of

households are affiliated with the NDC and those without.18


First, we use household survey data in Table 2 to examine whether there are effects on citizen's

participation in village-level governance, their perceptions of the accountability of the village

chief, and their perceptions of the accountability of their district assembly member. Our measure

of participation in village governance is an index averaging associational membership, village

assembly attendance and village assembly contributions. Our measure of the accountability of

the village chief's leadership is an index averaging the village chiefs' accessibility, openness to

dissent and trustworthiness. Our measure of the accountability of the assemblymember is an

index averaging assemblymembers' accessibility, perceived responsiveness and trustworthiness.


We find that participatory development increased participation in village-level governance for

members of the NDC only. Focusing on the effect of the treatment on the treated (TOT) across

the entire sample, we observe an increase in participation of 0.10 standard deviations (se=0.08),

which is not statistically significant at conventional levels. However, there are heterogeneous

effects depending on partisan affiliation. For NDC-affiliated households, the effect is 0.40

standard deviations (se=0.17), which is statistically significant at the 95 percent confidence level;

for all other households, we estimate a small and not statistically significant negative effect

(effect = -0.09 standard deviations; se=0.12).




18 This cut-off was chosen because it represents an above-average level of support for the NDC
in rural Eastern region, where just over 28 percent of our respondents felt an affiliation toward
the NDC. In Appendix J, we show the results are robust to different cut-offs.
                                                 27
We find more consistently positive effects on perceptions of the quality of the village chiefs'

leadership. Using the TOT estimates, we find a positive effect of 0.21 standard deviations across

the entire sample (se=0.09), which is statistically significant at the 95 percent confidence level.

The estimated effect size is larger and more statistically significant for NDC-affiliated households,

but the effects are positive regardless of partisan affiliation. In contrast, we find no evidence that

participatory development changed citizens' perceptions of the accountability of the district

assembly members, either across the sample as a whole or in either partisan subgroup.


Next, we look for evidence of mobilization effects in community-level data in Table 3, with the

outcomes collected from electoral data measuring the participation of voters and candidates in

the 2010/2011 district elections and leadership survey data measuring the participation of local

assembly members in district government. Focusing on the TOT estimates, voter turnout

decreased on average by 10 percentage points (se = 4pp) in communities that took up the

treatment, an effect that is statistically significant at the 95 percent confidence level. However,

these negative effects are concentrated entirely within villages with below average levels of NDC

support, where voter turnout decreased on average by 17 percentage points (se=8pp); among

NDC-affiliated villages, participatory development had a small and not statistically significant

effect on voter turnout (effect = -4 percentage points, se=6pp).


In contrast, there appear to have been positive mobilization effects at the candidate level.

Focusing on the TOT estimates, we find an average increase of 0.52 candidates running for office

in the 2010/2011 local government elections (se=0.30), which is statistically significant at the 90

percent confidence level. However, these effects are concentrated entirely within NDC-affiliated



                                                 28
villages, where we find an average increase of almost 2 additional candidates running for office

(se=0.51), which is statistically significant at the 99 percent confidence level. In contrast, in

villages with below average support for the NDC, participatory development is estimated to have

a slightly negative but not statistically significant effect on the number of candidates for office.


Finally, we consider how active the assemblymember elected in the 2010/2011 local government

elections reported being in office. We use data from our interviews with assembly members to

create an index of their activity level, averaging the district assembly members' attendance at

district assembly meetings, the number of times they raised issues in district assembly meetings,

the number of times they met one-on-one with their DCE, the number of times they met with

community leaders, the number of times they met with voters, the number of infrastructure

projects they facilitated and the number of NGOs (excluding THP) whose activities they

facilitated.




                                                 29
Table 2. Village Participation and Local Accountability (Household Survey Data)

                      Entire Sample                            NDC Aligned HHs                                     Non-NDC Aligned HHs
                      (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)      (5)        (6)               (7)            (8)     (9)         (10)    (11)          (12)
                      ITT       TOT        Control    N        ITT Effect TOT Effect        Control        N       ITT Effect TOT      Control       N
                      Effect    Effect     mean                (st.       (st. error)       mean                   (st. error) Effect  mean
                      (st.      (st.       (st.                error)                       (st. dev.)                         (st.    (st.
                      error)    error)     dev.)                                                                               error)  dev.)
 Community            0.054     0.103      0.000        2746     0.214*      0.400*           -0.026        680    -0.042      -0.089 0.039            1704
 Participation        (0.045) (0.082)      (1.000)               (0.096)     (0.172)          (0.960)              (0.052)     (0.115) (1.022)
 Index
 Village       Chief 0.111* 0.211* 0.000                2744     0.175*      0.324*           0.114         680      0.099+        0.211+ -0.075       1703
 Accountability        (0.047) (0.091) (1.000)                   (0.072)     (0.131)          (1.004)                (0.057)       (0.122) (0.988)
 Index
 District              0.069      0.131      0.000      2743     -0.050      -0.092           0.110         680      0.046         0.098     -0.007    1702
 Assemblymember (0.072) (0.131) (1.000)                          (0.096)     (0.179)          (0.969)                (0.076)       (0.157) (1.020)
 Accountability
 Index
 Notes: +significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Column (1) presents OLS estimates (with standard errors reported in parentheses),
 clustered at the unit of randomization (village cluster), and controlled for district effects. Each row reports results for a single OLS regression. Column
 (2) reports IV-GMM treatment-on-the-treated estimates (with standard errors reported in parentheses) with mobilizing to receive an epicenter being
 the first stage clustered at the unit of randomization (village cluster). Column (3) reports endline control means (with standard deviations reported in
 parentheses). Column (4) reports the number of observations. Columns 5-8 report the same entities using the sample of NDC-aligned households.
 Columns 9-12 report the same entities using the sample of non-NDC aligned households.




                                                                                30
Table 3. Local Government Participation and Representation (Electoral Data and Leadership Surveys at Electoral District Level)

                      Entire Sample                                NDC Aligned Villages (>=30 % NDC HHs)                  Non-NDC Aligned Villages (< 30 % NDC
                                                                                                                          HHs)
                          (1)           (2)          (3)     (4)         (5)                (6)           (7)      (8)       (9)        (10)        (11)    (12)
                      ITT Effect       TOT         Control    N      ITT Effect         TOT Effect     Control      N    ITT Effect TOT Effect    Control    N
                      (st. error)     Effect        mean             (st. error)        (st. error)     mean             (st. error) (st. error)   mean
                                    (st. error)      (st.                                             (st. dev.)                                 (st. dev.)
                                                    dev.)
 Voter turnout in -0.051*             -0.095*     0.502         111 -0.019            -0.037        0.471        44    -0.086*       -0.174*      0.502        51
 district elections (0.025)           (0.042)     (0.143)              (0.040)        (0.062)       (0.122)            (0.040)       (0.078)      (0.143)
 (proportion)
 Number           of 0.278+           0.523+        2.526       122 0.975**           1.905**       2.143        49    -0.155        -0.291       2.800        62
 candidates            (0.167)        (0.299)       (0.804)            (0.233)        (0.505)       (0.727)            (0.239)       (0.486)      (0.761)
 District              0.419+         0.759+        0.000       106 0.765*            1.802*        -0.350       46    0.004         -0.130       0.296        53
 Assemblymembe (0.225)                (0.396)       (1.000)            (0.333)        (0.759)       (1.053)            (0.272)       (0.463)      (0.880)
 r Activity Index
 Notes: + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Column (1) presents OLS estimates (with standard errors reported in parentheses), clustered
 at the unit of randomization (village cluster), and controlled for district effects. Each row reports results for a single OLS regression. Column (2) reports IV-
 GMM treatment-on-the-treated estimates (with standard errors reported in parentheses) with mobilizing to receive an epicenter being the first stage clustered
 at the unit of randomization (village cluster). Column (3) reports endline control means (with standard deviations reported in parentheses). Column (4) reports
 the number of observations and the unit of observation. Columns 5-8 report the same entities on the sample of villages with higher than average baseline
 support for the NDC. Columns 9-12 report the same entities using the sample of villages with lower than average baseline support for the NDC.




                                                                                   31
Across the entire sample, we find a positive mobilization effect on district assembly members'

activities. Focusing on the TOT estimates, THP increased elected representatives' reported

activity levels by 0.76 standard deviations (se=0.41), a substantively large effect that is

statistically significant at the 90 percent confidence level. However, the effect is concentrated

entirely within villages with high support for the NDC, where the increase was 1.8 standard

deviations (se=0.76), which is statistically significant at the 95 percent confidence level. In

contrast, the estimated effect on participatory development in villages with low levels of NDC

support is very small, though estimated with considerable error (effect =-0.13 standard

deviations; se=0.46).


Taken together, the evidence in Tables 2 and 3 suggests that participatory development has

cross-institutional mobilization effects in this context, but only for those who were politically

aligned with the incumbent government. In households and villages affiliated with the NDC, we

find positive and significant mobilization effects for 4 of the 6 outcomes considered. In contrast,

for households and villages that do not strongly support the NDC, we do not see a consistent

pattern in the effects, and we even observe a significant negative effect on voter turnout in the

district elections. Importantly, these differences in mobilization effects are not a result of

different exposure to THP. Appendix Table D1 shows that we do not observe partisan differences

in participation within treatment villages. Instead, it appears that the skills and capacity

developed through THP need to be complemented with partisan connections to the centers of

government power in order to translate into increased levels of engagement.




                                                32
Next we consider the effects of participatory development on investment in local public goods

through preexisting institutions. On the one hand, the observed improvements in engagement

with these institutions could plausibly result in greater investment, resulting in a positive effect.

On the other hand, these institutions may be less willing or able to funnel resources into local

public goods once these are being provided through participatory development institutions,

causing a negative displacement effect. We consider the effects of participatory development on

two streams of investment in local public goods ­ voluntary contributions from households to

fund projects and district government investment in local projects. The first type of investment

is often mobilized through traditional village institutions, while the second type of investment is

the result of district-level representation and investment decisions.


In Table 4 Panel A, we consider the effect of participatory development programming on

household contributions to self-help projects other than the epicenter. We calculate the value

of each household's contributions to public goods as the sum of their monetary and labor

contributions to local public goods other than the epicenter in the previous twelve months.19


We find that participatory development programming decreases voluntary contributions to other

local projects. The TOT effect is a 9.7 GHS decrease (se=5.7) in the value of contributions, which

is statistically significant at the 90 percent confidence level. However, the decrease in voluntary

contributions appears to be concentrated more within NDC-aligned households; here we observe

a 26.7 GHS decrease (se=15.9), which is statistically significant at the 90 percent confidence level.



19We impute the value of labor contributions by multiplying the number of (eight hour) days
worked by the typical daily wage for an unskilled agricultural task (weeding) in the village; data
on the typical daily wage for men and women was collected as part of our community survey.
                                                 33
Among non-NDC aligned households, we observe a smaller 7.2 GHS decrease (se=6.05), which is

estimated with considerable error. If we distinguish between voluntary contributions to projects

in sectors in which THP explicitly works (health, water, micro-finance, sanitation and community

center construction) and projects in sectors in which THP does not work, we observe a larger

decrease in contributions to projects in sectors in which THP is working across the sample as a

whole and also in the sample of NDC households, but the point estimate on contributions to

public goods in other sectors is also negative (though measured with a large amount of error).


In Table 4 Panel B, we consider the effect of THP programming on the scope of projects financed

by the local government in the electoral area in the most recent electoral term (2011-2014). As

part of our community survey, we collected information on whether the local government

financed projects in nine different sectors during this time period -- health, water, sanitation,

childcare, micro-finance, education, road, power and agricultural processing. We measure local

government investment as the proportion of these sectors in which they financed a project

between 2011 and 2013.20


We estimate no change in the proportion of sectors in which the local government financed

projects across the sample as a whole. Interestingly, despite the fact that NDC-aligned villages

experienced larger increases in political participation as a result of participatory development,

there is little evidence that they managed to increase government investment through this

engagement; in fact, there is a 9.2. percentage point decrease in local government investment




20   Unfortunately, we were unable to collect reliable data on the amount invested in each project.
                                                 34
associated with participatory development in NDC-aligned villages, but the estimate is measured

with considerable error (se=0.083pp).


The effect on overall government investment hides differences between government investment

in sectors on which THP efforts were concentrated and sectors in which THP placed less

emphasis. Focusing on the TOT effect, we see a reduction of 6.8 percentage points (se=0.04pp)

in the proportion of THP sectors with local-government financed projects, essentially eliminating

any government investment in these sectors. In contrast, we find an increase of 7.4 percentage

points (se=0.04pp) in the proportion of non-THP sectors with local-government financed

projects. Both of these effects are statistically significant at the 90 percent confidence level.

When we split the sample between NDC-aligned and non-NDC-aligned villages, the effects on

investment in different sectors are each estimated with considerable error, but with suggestive

evidence that the increase in non-THP sectors is concentrated in non-NDC-aligned villages.


Thus, Table 4 indicates that any positive effects of participatory development on engagement

with pre-existing institutions did not result in greater investment in local public goods through

these institutions. For the NDC-aligned households who experienced the largest improvements

in political engagement as a result of the program, we observe negative displacement effects in

citizens' contributions to other local public goods (statistically significant at the 90 percent

confidence level) and suggestive evidence that local governments might have displaced funds

from these communities too. Although participatory development may have improved

engagement with pre-existing institutions on some dimensions, this was not associated with

increased ability to mobilize resources behind community-level projects.



                                               35
Table 4. Mobilization of Public Goods by Households (Panel A) and Government (Panel B)

 PANEL    A:  HH                      ENTIRE SAMPLE                              NDC Aligned HHs                                Non-NDC Aligned HHs
 MOBILIZATION
                        (1)           (2)        (3)        (4)      (5)        (6)           (7)          (8)    (9)           (10)          (11)          (12)
                        ITT Effect    TOT        Control    N        ITT        TOT Effect    Control      N      ITT Effect    TOT Effect    Control       N
                        (st. error)   Effect     mean                Effect     (st. error)   mean                (st. error)   (st. error)   mean (st.
                                      (st.       (st.                (st.                     (st. dev.)                                      dev.)
                                      error)     dev.)               error)
 HH contributions to -5.10+           -9.73+     15.31       2745   -14.33+      -26.72+       22.45       680 -3.38            -7.22          14.08        1704
 non-THP        public (2.90)         (5.71)     (84.00)            (8.087)      (15.92)       (139.98)            (2.79)       (6.05)         (61.5)
 goods (cedis)
 HH contributions to -3.73           -7.10        4.24       2745 -10.66         -19.88        11.18       680 -1.26+           -2.69+         2.24         1704
 public goods in THP (2.41)          (4.66)       (67.31)            (8.22)      (15.70)       (137.42)            (0.72)       (1.56)         (15.0)
 sectors (cedis)
 HH contributions to -1.38           -2.63        11.08      2745 -3.67          -6.84         11.27       680 -2.12            -4.52          11.84        1704
 public goods in non- (1.97)         (3.78)       (50.45)            (2.41)      (4.66)        (28.68)             (2.71)       (5.81)         (59.73)
 THP sectors (cedis)
 PANEL B: GOVT                       ENTIRE SAMPLE                    NDC Aligned Villages (>=30 % NDC HHs)        Non-NDC Aligned Villages (< 30 % NDC HHs)
 MOBILIZATION
 Proportion        of 0.005          0.006        0.072      117      -0.056     -0.092        0.092       48      0.035        0.074               0.065     58
 sectors with local (0.033)          (0.053)      (0.162)             (0.054)    (0.083)       (0.223)             (0.052)      (0.082)             (0.126)
 gov funded projects
 Proportion of THP -0.038+           -0.068+      0.054      116      -0.063     -0.112        0.070       48      -0.038       -0.060              0.049     57
 sectors with local (0.022)          (0.036)      (0.158)             (0.054)    (0.083)       (0.223)             (0.023)      (0.041)             (0.118)
 gov funded projects
 Proportion of non- 0.044+           0.074+       0.025      115      0.006      0.020         0.025       47      0.071        0.128+              0.026     57
 THP sectors with (0.024)            (0.040)      (0.048)             (0.016)    (0.027)       (0.050)             (0.046)      (0.074)             (0.049)
 local gov funded
 projects
 Notes: +significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Column (1) presents OLS estimates controlling for district effects (with standard errors,
 reported in parentheses, clustered at the unit of randomization, the village cluster). Each row reports results for a single OLS regression. Column (2) reports IV-
 GMM treatment-on-the-treated estimates with mobilizing to receive an epicenter instrumented by treatment assignment (with standard errors, reported in
 parentheses, clustered at the unit of randomization). Column (3) reports endline control means (with standard deviations reported in parentheses). Column (4)
 reports the number of observations. For panel A, columns 5-8 (9-12) report the same entities using the sample of NDC-aligned (non-NDC aligned) households.
 For panel B, columns 5-8 (9-12) report the same entities on the sample of villages with higher than average (lower than average) baseline support for the NDC.
 THP sectors are health, water, sanitation, childcare, microcredit; non-THP sectors are road, power, agricultural processing, and primary/secondary education.


                                                                               36
Table 5. Poverty Alleviation and Service Access

                               ENTIRE SAMPLE                                  NDC Aligned HHs                               Non-NDC Aligned HHs
                        (1)       (2)     (3)          (4)        (5)           (6)            (7)          (8)        (9)        (10)     (11)       (12)
                        ITT      TOT    Control         N         ITT       TOT Effect      Control          N     ITT Effect     TOT   Control        N
                      Effect    Effect   mean                   Effect      (st. error)      mean                  (st. error) Effect    mean
                        (st.     (st.     (st.                    (st.                     (st. dev.)                              (st.     (st.
                      error)    error)   dev.)                  error)                                                          error)    dev.)
 Overall      Well-   -0.051   -0.097    0.000         2792    -0.232*         -0.430*            -0.050     690     -0.060     -0.128    0.063         1732
 Being Index         (0.071)   (0.135) (1.000)                 (0.095)         (0.191)           (1.048)             (0.075)   (0.162) (0.996)
     Food Security     0.046    0.086    0.000         2749      0.017           0.032             0.123     680      0.045      0.096   -0.042         1707
              Index  (0.046)   (0.087) (1.000)                 (0.076)         (0.139)           (1.170)             (0.051)   (0.109) (0.952)
      Literacy and    -0.089   -0.171    0.000         2792     -0.090          -0.167            -0.155     690     -0.120     -0.260    0.057         1732
  Education Index    (0.077)   (0.149) (1.000)                 (0.100)         (0.176)           (1.035)             (0.090)   (0.200) (1.012)
       Health and     -0.064   -0.121    0.000         2792    -0.244+         -0.454+             0.026     690     -0.046     -0.099    0.007         1732
   Nutrition Index   (0.087)   (0.166) (1.000)                 (0.144)         (0.273)           (0.950)             (0.083)   (0.178) (0.993)
 Water, Envt and      -0.107   -0.199    0.000         2792    -0.250+          -0.460            -0.080     690     -0.096     -0.204    0.085         1732
 Sanitation Index    (0.118)   (0.219) (1.000)                 (0.144)         (0.282)           (1.121)             (0.132)   (0.273) (0.977)
  Livelihoods and      0.103    0.194    0.000         2792     -0.001          -0.002            -0.037     690      0.078      0.165    0.052         1732
          Financial  (0.087)   (0.160) (1.000)                 (0.115)         (0.207)           (1.061)             (0.095)   (0.194) (1.008)
   Inclusion Index
 Notes: +significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Column (1) presents OLS estimates (with standard errors reported in parentheses),
 clustered at the unit of randomization (village cluster), and controlled for district effects. Each row reports results for a single OLS regression. Column
 (2) reports IV-GMM treatment-on-the-treated estimates (with standard errors reported in parentheses) with mobilizing to receive an epicenter being
 the first stage clustered at the unit of randomization (village cluster). Column (3) reports endline control means (with standard deviations reported in
 parentheses). Column (4) reports the number of observations. Columns 5-8 report the same entities using the sample of NDC-aligned households.
 Columns 9-12 report the same entities using the sample of non-NDC aligned households. Full details on the construction of each index and the ITT
 effect and TOT effect on each sub-component are reported in Appendix H.




                                                                                37
Did the THP programming, either through the direct results of the programming itself or through

its indirect effects on leadership at the community and district level, cause any measurable

improvement in the lives of citizens? We measure the aggregate socioeconomic well-being effect

of THP by averaging its effects across five broad areas ­ food security, education and literacy,

health and nutrition, environment, and economic livelihoods. We focus on these five outcome

areas because they are highlighted in THP's programming documents and because they are

encompassing goals, well-positioned to capture effects even if resources are fungible across

sectors, and related closely to the sectors emphasized in the millennium development goals and

associated conceptions of human development. For each area of potential impact, we created

an index based on variables measuring numerous related outcomes, often combined into sub-

indices, as shown in Appendix H.21 Collectively, these indices captured specific improvements in

well-being in the sectors targeted by THP's programming ­ for example, better access to health

care, the adoption of specific agricultural practices, and access to credit ­ as well as broader

measures of households' well-being, such as household income, expenditure and the value of

total food consumption.


The effect of THP on the main indices is reported in Table 5. The results indicate that the THP had

disappointing results across the entire sample. Focusing on the TOT estimate, THP reduced well-

being by 0.10 standard deviations (se=0.135), although the effect is imprecisely estimated and




21The construction of the indices was not put forward in a preanalysis plan, as the practice was
not common at the time this study began in 2008. However, the survey instrument is available
online and provides the basis, without omission, for the construction of the indices. We also
based the data collection and thus construction of the indices on indicators emphasized in THP's
own theory of change and programming.
                                                38
thus particularly large and positive as well as large and negative results cannot be ruled out.

However, for NDC-aligned households, the negative effect is starker. Here we estimate a decline

in well-being of 0.43 standard deviations as a result of receiving participatory development

(se=0.19), which is statistically significant at the 95 percent confidence level. In contrast, for non-

NDC aligned households, we cannot reject the null of no effect (effect=-0.13; se=0.16).


How is it that NDC-aligned households in aid-receiving villages became worse off than their

counterparts who did not receive participatory development? The evidence in Tables 2 and 3

indicates that NDC-aligned voters were more politically mobilized as a result of participatory

development. However, Table 4 suggests that participatory development also caused greater

displacement of resources for these households, especially in the allocation of their own

household resources but also possibly in the allocation of state resources by local governments.

Our interpretation is that NDC supporters were over-mobilized into participatory development:

they diverted effort into a project that did not ultimately meet expectations. Importantly, the

THP project fell short of expectations in two ways: its direct effects on socioeconomic outcomes

through the delivery of public goods and services were smaller than anticipated, and its indirect

effects on socioeconomic outcomes through improved engagement with pre-existing political

institutions were also negligible, despite the fact that THP was broadly successful in organizing

higher levels of engagement.


This provides an explanation for how incumbent co-partisans became distributive losers as a

result of participatory development. Revisiting the expectations outlined in Table 1, our

explanation is more complex situation than any of the single scenarios included in this table. In



                                                  39
the context of the THP in Ghana, we observe the greater mobilization of government co-

partisans theorized in row 3, but this did not translate into increased socioeconomic benefits; in

fact, it appears to correspond with effort displacement from more productive activities, leaving

co-partisans aid recipients worse off than co-partisans who do not receive aid, as predicted in

row 5, column 2.



VI.    Conclusion


In a randomized controlled trial of participatory development aid in Ghana, we find high levels of

participation from community members, but no change in aggregate socioeconomic outcomes.

We also find important heterogeneous treatment effects, specifically that households and

villages with pro-government alignment had greater displacement of resources from other

efforts towards the new aid-led activities. Yet the project did not end up generating changes in

socioeconomic outcomes, thus leading to a negative impact for pro-government households.


As our theoretical expectations outlined in Table 1 indicate, the effects of participatory

development aid are complex and likely to vary by context. To think more crisply about the

external validity of our findings with respect to participatory development, we highlight two

issues related to the specific NGO we study: implementation fidelity and program design. THP's

program implementation appears to have delivered on two key objectives regarding process: we

observe high levels of participation and inclusiveness. As a result, we think it unlikely that issues

with program implementation explain our disappointing findings with regards to investment and

socioeconomic outcomes. On program design, THP requires particularly high levels of community



                                                 40
involvement and community contributions compared to other participatory approaches.

Although it could be argued this makes it a paradigmatic case of community-based development,

it means that displacement effects between involvement in THP and contributions to other local

public goods are likely to be particularly pronounced. THP's program is also multi-faceted and

multi-sectoral, in contrast to participatory programs that focus on single sectors or provide block

grants. By pushing simultaneously in many areas, it may have been more difficult for THP

programming to improve upon the outcomes that local contributions and government resources

were already accomplishing in these diverse areas. This broad scope of activities could also have

created greater implementation challenges.


In this context, we find unintended consequences from participatory development aid, which

have implications for both the literature on the cross-institutional effects of participatory

development and the literature on the distributional consequences of international aid. We

contribute to the first literature by showing the limitations of participatory development even

when it meets its goal of encouraging greater participation in government. We find that

participatory development institutions can be effective in organizing greater engagement with

pre-existing political institutions for co-partisans of the government. In this sense, our study

findings contrast with other studies of participatory development; in the few studies that have

explicitly examined cross-institutional mobilization by analyzing effects on public participation in

local government, scholars have measured null effects (White, Menon, and Waddington 2018),

with the one exception being Casey et al. (2012). Our study on the other hand represents a best

case scenario for positive cross-institutional effects, and also provides a plausible explanation for

the null effects observed elsewhere: in the absence of strong political parties that provide citizens

                                                 41
with access to power, participatory development institutions are likely to have limited effects on

political participation.


However, despite this promising first stage effect, the greater mobilization induced by the

participatory development institutions did not result in improvements in public goods provision

or socioeconomic outcomes. In fact, greater mobilization was actually associated with worse

distributional outcomes due to displacement effects. Our findings are striking in that they suggest

that even if aid institutions successfully increase mobilization in pre-existing institutions ­ no

small feat ­ this might not make a difference. In most developing countries, there is limited fiscal

decentralization in the sense that that most fiscal power still rests in the national-level executive

office, and improved engagement with local representatives may not result in greater local

investment (Grossman and Lewis 2014). In fact, in spending more time engaging with relatively

powerless local authorities, citizens may be displacing effort from activities that would be more

productive in advancing their well-being.


We also contribute to the literature on the distributional consequences of international aid,

adding nuance to our understanding of who benefits from aid. To date, the debates in this

literature have been on how to ensure aid does not benefit only government supporters.

However, we show that ­ in settings in which aid disappoints ­ co-partisans of the incumbent

government may become distributive losers if they receive aid.


Government copartisans become distributional losers as a result of three aspects of the context

studied: the distribution of aid inputs was neutral (both across communities, where it was

randomly allocated, and within communities), its effects disappointed relative to initial


                                                 42
expectations, and co-partisans of the government were subject to greater displacement effects.

This makes this aid context different from the ones studied by Briggs (2012; 2014) and Jablonski

(2014), who observe non-neutral distribution of aid inputs, but do not measure the distributional

consequences of aid for socioeconomic outcomes. However, we do not think that the context we

study is particularly unique. Indeed, other studies have shown that many aid projects ­ especially

those delivered via NGOs ­ are delivered neutrally with regards to political cleavages (Brass 2012;

Briggs 2017). We also know many aid projects simultaneously fail to have large socioeconomic

effects (Easterly 2006; Dionne 2017). We have less existing evidence on how frequently

displacement effects are larger for government co-partisans, and this is where we would

recommend more research. However, in highly partisan contexts, there are strong theoretical

reasons for expecting co-partisans of the government to be subject to greater displacement

effects as a result of aid (Golden and Min 2013), suggesting our results may generalize to diverse

forms of aid in numerous contexts.




                                                43
REFERENCES


Almond, Gabriel, and Sidney Verba. 1963. The Civic Culture: Political Attitudes and Democracy in
        Five Nations. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Anderson, Christopher, and Yuliya Tverdova. 2003. "Corruption, Political Allegiances and
        Attitudes Toward Government in Contemporary Democracies." American Journal of
        Political Science 47 (1): 91­109.
Arhin, Kwame. 1985. Traditional Rule in Ghana: Past and Present. Accra: Sedco Publications.
Asunka, Joseph. 2017. "Non-Discretionary Resource Allocation as Political Investment: Evidence
        from Ghana." Journal of Modern African Studies 55 (1): 29­53.
Avdeenko, Alexandra, and Michael Gilligan. 2015. "International Interventions to Build Social
        Capital: Evidence from A Field Experiment in Sudan." American Political Science Review
        109 (3): 427­49.
Baldwin, Kate. 2013. "Why Vote with the Chief? Political Connections and Public Goods
        Provision in Zambia." American Journal of Political Science 57 (4): 794­809.
Bardhan, Pranab K., and Dilip Mookherjee. 2000. "Capture and Governance at Local and
        National Levels." American Economic Review 90 (2): 135­39.
        https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.90.2.135.
Beath, Andrew, Fotini Christia, and Ruben Enikolopov. 2013. "Do Elected Councils Improve
        Governance? Experimental Evidence on Local Institutions in Afghanistan." MIT Political
        Science Department Research Paper 2013 (24).
Bergstrom, Theodore, Lawrence Blume, and Hal Varian. 1986. "On the Private Provision of
        Public Goods." Journal of Public Economics 29 (1): 25­49.
Berman, Sheri. 1997. "Civil Society and Political Institutionalization." American Behavioral
        Scientist 40 (5): 562­74.
Boulding, Carew. 2010. "NGOs and Political Participation in Weak Democracies: Subnational
        Evidence on Protest and Voter Turnout from Bolivia." The Journal of Politics 72 (April):
        456­68. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022381609990922.
------. 2014. NGOs, Political Protest, and Civil Society. Cambridge University Press.
Brass, Jennifer N. 2012. "Why Do NGOs Go Where They Go? Evidence from Kenya." World
        Development 40 (2): 387­401. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2011.07.017.
Briggs, Ryan C. 2012. "Electrifying the Base? Aid and Incumbent Advantage in Ghana." The
        Journal of Modern African Studies 50 (4): 603­24.
        https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X12000365.
------. 2014. "Aiding and Abetting: Project Aid and Ethnic Politics in Kenya." World
        Development 64 (C): 194­205.
------. 2017. "Does Foreign Aid Target the Poorest?" International Organization 71 (1): 187­
        206. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818316000345.
Burgess, Robin, Remi Jedwab, Edward Miguel, Ameet Morjaria, and Gerard Padró i Miquel.
        2015. "The Value of Democracy: Evidence from Road Building in Kenya." American
        Economic Review 105 (6): 1817­51. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20131031.
Büthe, Tim, Solomon Major, and André de Mello e Souza. 2012. "The Politics of Private Foreign
        Aid: Humanitarian Principles, Economic Development Objectives, and Organizational

                                              44
        Interests in NGO Private Aid Allocation." International Organization 66 (4): 571­607.
        https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818312000252.
Cammett, Melani. 2014. Compassionate Communalism: Welfare and Sectarianism in Lebanon.
        Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Casey, Katherine, Rachel Glennerster, and Edward Miguel. 2012. "Reshaping Institutions:
        Evidence on Aid Impacts Using a Preanalysis Plan." The Quarterly Journal of Economics
        127 (4): 1755­1812. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qje027.
Casey, Katherine, Rachel Glennerster, Edward Miguel, and Maarten Voors. 2018. "Skill versus
        Voice in Local Development." Working Paper 25022. National Bureau of Economic
        Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w25022.
Crook, Richard C., Richard C. Crook, James Manor, and Fellows of the Institute of Development
        Studies James Manor. 1998. Democracy and Decentralisation in South Asia and West
        Africa: Participation, Accountability and Performance. Cambridge University Press.
Deserranno, Erika, Aisha Nansamba, and Nancy Qian. 2019. "Aid Crowd-Out: The Effect of NGOs
        on Government-Provided Public Services," 59.
Dietrich, Simone. 2013. "Bypass or Engage? Explaining Donor Delivery Tactics in Aid Allocation."
        International Studies Quarterly 57 (4): 698­712.
Dionne, Kim Yi. 2017. "Doomed Interventions by Kim Yi Dionne." Cambridge Core. November
        2017. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108157797.
Easterly, William. 2006. The White Man's Burden: Why the West's Efforts to Aid the Rest Have
        Done so Much Ill and so Little Good. NY: Penguin.
Faye, Michael, and Paul Niehaus. 2012. "Political Aid Cycles." American Economic Review 102
        (7): 3516­30. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.102.7.3516.
Fearon, James D., Macartan Humphreys, and Jeremy M. Weinstein. 2015. "How Does
        Development Assistance Affect Collective Action Capacity? Results from a Field
        Experiment in Post-Conflict Liberia." American Political Science Review 109 (3): 450­69.
        https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055415000283.
Franck, Raphaël, and Ilia Rainer. 2012. "Does the Leader's Ethnicity Matter? Ethnic Fa voritism,
        Education, and Health in Sub-Saharan Africa." American Political Science Review 106 (2):
        294­325. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055412000172.
Golden, Miriam, and Brian Min. 2013. "Distributive Politics Around the World." Annual Review
        of Political Science 16 (1): 73­99. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-polisci-052209-
        121553.
Grossman, Guy, and Janet I. Lewis. 2014. "Administrative Unit Proliferation." American Political
        Science Review 108 (1): 196­217. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000567.
Hodler, Roland, and Paul Raschky. 2014. "Regional Favoritism." The Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 129 (2): 995­1033.
Humphreys, Macartan, Raúl Sánchez de la Sierra, and Peter van der Windt. 2014. "Social and
        Economic Impacts of Tuungane: Final Report on the Effects of a Community Driven
        Reconstruction Program in Eastern Democratic Republic of Congo."
Jablonski, Ryan S. 2014. "How Aid Targets Votes: The Impact of Electoral Incentives on Foreign
        Aid Distribution." World Politics 66 (2): 293­330.
        https://doi.org/10.1017/S0043887114000045.


                                              45
Khilji, Nasir, and Ernest Zampelli. 1994. "The Fungibility of U.S. Military and Nonmilitary
         Assistance and the Impacts on Expenditures of Major Aid Recipients." Journal of
         Development Economics 43: 345­62.
King, Elisabeth, and Cyrus Samii. 2014. "Fast-Track Institution Building in Conflict-Affected
         Countries? Insights from Recent Field Experiments." World Development 64 (December):
         740­54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2014.06.030.
Kramon, Eric, and Daniel N. Posner. 2013. "Who Benefits from Distributive Politics? How the
         Outcome One Studies Affects the Answer One Gets." Perspectives on Politics 11 (2):
         461­74. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1537592713001035.
------. 2016. "Ethnic Favoritism in Education in Kenya." Quarterly Journal of Political Science 11
         (1): 1­58. https://doi.org/10.1561/100.00015005.
Lindberg, Staffan I., and Minion K. C. Morrison. 2005. "Exploring Voter Alignments in Africa:
         Core and Swing Voters in Ghana." The Journal of Modern African Studies 43 (4): 565­86.
         https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X05001229.
Lust, Ellen, and Lise Rakner. 2018. "The Other Side of Taxation: Extraction and Social Institutions
         in the Developing World." Annual Review of Political Science 21 (1): 277­94.
         https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-polisci-042716-102149.
MacLean, Lauren M. 2010. Informal Institutions and Citizenship in Rural Africa. Cambridge:
         Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511730368.
Mansuri, Ghazala, and Vijayendra Rao. 2013. Localizing Development: Does Participation Work?
         Washington, D.C: World Bank.
Mesquita, Bruce Bueno de, and Alastair Smith. 2009. "Political Survival and Endogenous
         Institutional Change." Comparative Political Studies 42 (2): 167­97.
         https://doi.org/10.1177/0010414008323330.
Moyo, Dambisa. 2009. Dead Aid: Why Aid Is Not Working and How There Is a Better Way for
         Africa. New York: Macmillan.
Murtazashvili, Jennifer Brick. 2016. Informal Order and the State in Afghanistan. Cambridge:
         Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316286890.
Nathan, Noah L. 2019. Electoral Politics and Africa's Urban Transition: Class and Ethnicity in
         Ghana. Cambridge Studies in Comparative Politics. Cambridge, United Kingdom; New
         York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Norris, Pippa. 2011. Democratic Deficit: Critical Citizens Revisited. New York: Cambridge
         University Press.
Oates, Wallace E. 1972. Fiscal Federalism. The Harbrace Series in Business and Economics. New
         York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Olken, Benjamin A., and Monica Singhal. 2011. "Informal Taxation." American Economic
         Journal: Applied Economics 3 (4): 1­28. https://doi.org/10.1257/app.3.4.1.
Ostrom, Elinor. 1990. Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective
         Action. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
------. 1996. "Crossing the Great Divide: Coproduction, Synergy, and Development." World
         Development 24 (6): 1073­87. https://doi.org/10.1016/0305-750X(96)00023-X.
Putnam, Robert D, Robert Leonardi, and Rafaella Y Nanetti. 1993. Making Democracy Work.
         Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.


                                                46
Torpey-Saboe, Nichole. 2015. "Does NGO Presence Decrease Government Spending? A Look at
       Municipal Spending on Social Services in Brazil." World Development 74 (C): 479­88.
Verba, Sidney, Norman H. Nie, Research Professor of Political Science and Director of the
       Institute for Quantitative Study of Society Norman H. Nie, Norman H. Nie, and Jae-on
       Kim. 1978. Participation and Political Equality: A Seven-Nation Comparison. Cambridge
       University Press.
Weghorst, Keith R., and Staffan I. Lindberg. 2013. "What Drives the Swing Voter in Africa?:"
       American Journal of Political Science 57 (3): 717­34.
       https://doi.org/10.1111/ajps.12022.
White, H., R. Menon, and H. Waddington. 2018. "Community-Driven Development: Does It
       Build Social Cohesion or Infrastructure? A Mixed-Method Evidence Synthesis."
       Monograph. 2018. http://www.3ieimpact.org/en/publications/working-papers/3ie-
       working-paper-30/.
Wilson, Louis E. 1987. "The Rise of Paramount Chiefs among the Krobo (Ghana)." The
       International Journal of African Historical Studies 20 (3): 471­95.
       https://doi.org/10.2307/219690.
Wright, Joseph, and Matthew Winters. 2010. "The Politics of Effective Foreign Aid." Annual
       Review of Political Science 13 (1): 61­80.
       https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.polisci.032708.143524.




                                             47
