                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 CULTURE AND GENDER ALLOCATION OF TASKS:
                   SOURCE COUNTRY CHARACTERISTICS AND
          THE DIVISION OF NON-MARKET WORK AMONG US IMMIGRANTS

                                      Francine D. Blau
                                       Lawrence Kahn
                                     Matthew L. Comey
                                      Amanda R. Eng
                                    Pamela A. Meyerhofer
                                      Alexander Willén

                                      Working Paper 26931
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26931


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2020




The authors thank Claudia Olivetti and session participants at the American Economic
Association meetings, Atlanta, Georgia, January 2019. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Francine D. Blau, Lawrence Kahn, Matthew L. Comey, Amanda R. Eng, Pamela A.
Meyerhofer, and Alexander Willén. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Culture and Gender Allocation of Tasks: Source Country Characteristics and the Division
of Non-market Work among US Immigrants
Francine D. Blau, Lawrence Kahn, Matthew L. Comey, Amanda R. Eng, Pamela A. Meyerhofer,
and Alexander Willén
NBER Working Paper No. 26931
April 2020
JEL No. J13,J15,J16,J22

                                          ABSTRACT

There is a well-known gender difference in time allocation within the household, which has
important implications for gender differences in labor market outcomes. We ask how malleable
this gender difference in time allocation is to culture. In particular, we ask if US immigrants
allocate tasks differently depending upon the characteristics of the source countries from which
they emigrated. Using data from the 2003-2017 waves of the American Time Use Survey
(ATUS), we find that first-generation immigrants, both women and men, from source countries
with more gender equality (as measured by the World Economic Forum's Global Gender Gap
Index) allocate tasks more equally, while those from less gender equal source countries allocate
tasks more traditionally. These results are robust to controls for immigration cohort, years since
migration, and other own and spouse characteristics. There is also some indication of an effect of
parent source country gender equality for second-generation immigrants, particularly for second-
generation men with children. Our findings suggest that broader cultural factors do influence the
gender division of labor in the household.

Francine D. Blau                                Amanda R. Eng
ILR School                                      Department of Economics
Cornell University                              Cornell University
268 Ives Hall                                   2301 Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Ithaca, New York 14853-3901                     Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER                                        are54@cornell.edu
fdb4@cornell.edu
                                                Pamela A. Meyerhofer
Lawrence Kahn                                   Department of Policy Analysis and Management
ILR School                                      2305 Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Cornell University                              Cornell University
258 Ives Hall                                   Ithaca, NY 14850
Ithaca, NY 14853                                pam299@cornell.edu
lmk12@cornell.edu
                                                Alexander Willén
Matthew L. Comey                                Department of Economics
Department of Economics                         Norwegian School of Economics
Cornell University                              Helleveien 30
443 Uris Hall                                   5045 Bergen
Ithaca, NY 14853                                Norway
mlc349@cornell.edu                              alexander.willen@nhh.no
I. Introduction

           As female labor force participation has increased, the female share of non-market or

household work has gained attention in the gender inequality literature (e.g., Burda, Hamermesh,

and Weil, 2013; Bianchi, Milkie, Sayer, and Robinson, 2000; Coltrane, 2000; Ralsmark, 2017).

Like the gender wage gap and male-female differences in labor force participation, the gender

gap in housework has also decreased, with much of the reduction reflecting decreases in

women's housework time (Bianchi, Milkie, Sayer, and Robinson, 2000). While men's

housework time increased through the 1980s, there has been little subsequent change (Bianchi,

Milkie, Sayer, and Robinson, 2000; Blau and Kahn, 2007; and Blau and Winkler, 2018). Despite

some convergence, women continue to perform a disproportionate amount of housework and

childcare. This leads to many employed women taking on a "second shift" in the household

(Hochschild, 1989). For example, in 2014, employed married women spent somewhat less time

on market work but considerably more time on work in the home than employed married men,

resulting in an average of 4.6 hours more of total work--defined as housework plus market

work--for women.1

           More broadly, women's greater responsibility for housework and caregiving may be

associated with decisions that reduce their labor market success compared to men's, including

weaker labor force attachment (Mincer and Polachek, 1974), a lesser willingness to work long

hours (Goldin, 2014), restricted job search and commuting time (Le Barbanchon, Rathelot, and

Roulet, 2019; Butikofer, Løken, and Willén, 2019), or supplying less effort for similar hours

worked (Becker, 1985). These decisions, as well as decisions regarding, for example, part-time

work, and matches to occupations and firms are likely implicated in the "child penalty": a



1
    Calculated from Blau and Winkler (2018), Table 4.1, p. 68.

                                                          1
decrease in women's earnings relative to men's earnings associated with the arrival of children

(e.g., Kleven, Landais, and Søgaard, 2019; Waldfogel, 1998).2

         In an effort to more fully understand the determinants of the household division of labor

and how malleable that division is, we explore the impact of source-country culture --

specifically gender norms -- on the levels of male and female household labor supplied by first-

and second-generation immigrants in the United States (the first generation refers to the

immigrants themselves, the second generation to their native-born children). By culture, we

mean beliefs and preferences related to gender norms that originate in the immigrant's source-

country.3 In the remainder of the paper, we will use the terms culture and gender norms

interchangeably. The relationship between culture and the household division of labor is of

particular interest because, as the proportion foreign born continues to rise, the influence of

source country culture will continue to play a large role in the future of gender equality in the

United States (Blau, Kahn, and Papps, 2011). Specifically, this project studies the effect of

source country gender equality on the gender division of household labor and which types of

tasks (housework or childcare) drive any differences. To examine this question, we use the

2003-2017 waves of the American Time Use Survey (ATUS) to measure non-market work and

the Global Gender Gap Index (GGI) from the World Economic Forum to measure culture and

gender norms in source countries.4 The GGI is comprised of a variety of indictors that measure

social, political, and economic equality of men and women. We further control for source




2
  For evidence that housework reduces wages, see, for example, Hersch (2009). We note that demand-side factors
like discrimination against mothers may also play a role in the child penalty, see, Correll, Benard, and Paik (2007).
3
  We follow Fernández and Fogli (2009) in defining culture in terms of beliefs and preferences.
4
  The GGI has been used as an indicator of gender equality in a number of other studies. See, for example, Guiso,
Monte, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008); Zentner and Mitura (2012); Fryer and Levitt (2010); and Nollenberger,
Rodríguez-Planas, and Sevilla (2016).

                                                          2
country fertility and GDP per capita in an effort to isolate the cultural factors picked up by the

GGI.5

           We find that female immigrants from more gender equal countries, as measured by a

higher GGI, spend significantly fewer hours per week on non-market work, allocating less time

to both housework and childcare. Among second-generation women, parents' source country

GGI has no statistically significant impact on non-market work, though the signs are in the

expected direction. An additional important contribution of this paper is that we also examine

how source country characteristics influence men's time allocation, whereas much of the

previous work on source country gender roles and immigrant behavior focuses primarily on

women. We find that men from more gender equal countries do higher levels of non-market

work, including both housework and childcare. Further, second-generation men--particularly

those with children--whose parents came from more gender equal countries spend significantly

more time on housework and childcare than their counterparts from more traditional countries.

           A concern with our research design is that the identified differences in the non-market

work allocation of immigrant men and women from high- and low-GGI countries may be driven

by selection. That is, perhaps couples choosing to migrate from low-GGI countries

disproportionally allocate non-market work to women relative to the typical couple from those

countries, while couples choosing to migrate from high-GGI countries disproportionally allocate

non-market work to men relative to the typical couple from those countries. However, for such

selection to be consistent with our findings, any country-related selection biases would have to

operate substantially differently in low- compared to high-GGI countries, with immigration

being selective of the most traditional couples from low-GGI countries and the least traditional


5
    The GGI is intentionally designed to not measure overall levels of economic development.

                                                          3
couples from the high-GGI countries. Below, we provide a detailed discussion of why we believe

these selection patterns to be unlikely.

        We conclude our analysis by exploring how immigrant status and source country gender

equality are related to the non-market work "penalty" faced by wives who violate the male

breadwinner norm, extending analysis by Bertrand, Kamenica, and Pan (2015). We find that this

penalty is significantly larger for immigrant women than native women: immigrant wives that

just outearn their husbands do 4.5 additional hours of non-market work, while their native

counterparts only do an additional 1.5 hours of non-market when just outearning their husbands.

While we do not find a significant effect of the GGI on the size of this penalty for women, we do

find that men from more gender-equal source countries are significantly less prone to reducing

non-market work when they are outearned by their wives.

II. Relationship to Previous Literature

        Coltrane (2000) summarizes the research findings on household division of labor from

the 1990s as women reducing, men increasing, but women still doing considerably more

housework. Bianchi, Milkie, Sayer, and Robinson (2000) and Bianchi, Sayer, Milkie, and

Robinson (2012) confirm this finding through the early 2000s: though women have cut their

housework hours and men have increased theirs since the mid-1960s, women still did 63.3

percent of housework as of 2009-10.6 Bianchi, Milkie, Sayer, and Robinson (2000) found that

about half of the decreases in women's housework could be accounted for through compositional

changes--such as increased labor force participation, later marriages, and fewer children--while

relatively little (15 percent) of the male increase in housework could be accounted for by such




.6 Blau and Winkler (2018), Table 4.1, present similar results for 2014--with married women doing 63.2 percent of
housework.

                                                        4
compositional changes. With respect to childcare, researchers find a similar persistence of

unequal gender division of labor. Although parents of both genders spend more time with their

children now than they did in the 1960s, mothers still devote more time to childcare than fathers

(Gauthier, Smeeding and Furstenberg, 2004; and Bianchi, Milkie, Sayer and Robinson, 2012).

        Beyond these broader time trends, previous research has also focused on determinants of

cross-sectional variation in parents' household time. Education has emerged as a major factor. In

particular, highly educated American parents spend more time with their children relative to

other education groups, despite also working more outside the home (Guryan, Hurst, and

Kearney, 2008). Education also tends to be positively associated with more egalitarian attitudes

towards gender roles (see, e.g., Campbell and Horowitz, 2016; Cunningham, 2008; Kosteas,

2013; Davis and Greenstein, 2009; and Ralsmark, 2017).7

        We contribute to the literature on gender differences in the allocation of non-market work

by exploring the impact of an explicit measure of culture on the gender division of non-market

work. Our results are of interest in suggesting an important and persistent effect of cultural

factors on this division. Moreover, as the proportion foreign born continues to rise, our results

imply that the influence of source country culture likely will continue to play a role in the future

of gender equality in the United States.

        While the literature cited above on the household division of labor does not distinguish

between the behavior of immigrants and natives, there exists a large literature concerning how

immigrants and their native-born children (the second generation) assimilate to gender norms in

the United States, primarily focusing on fertility and labor supply. Blau (1992) found a positive


7
  Interestingly, using data on 15 European countries, Ralsmark (2017) found that mandatory increases in education
reduced agreement with the gender norm that men should be the breadwinner ("When jobs are scarce, men should
have more right to a job than women"), but not the norm that women should be the homemaker ("A woman should
be prepared to cut down on her paid work for the sake of her family.")

                                                        5
effect of source country fertility rates on immigrant women's fertility, and Antecol (2000) found

that source country female labor force participation rates were positively correlated with US

labor force participation of immigrant women. Blau, Kahn, and Papps (2011) identified a

significant relationship between the assimilation of immigrant women's labor supply and gender

roles in the source country: immigrant women from countries with high female labor supply

persistently work more than those from low female labor supply countries and fully assimilate to

native participation levels, while women from low female labor supply countries shrink the labor

supply gap with natives over time but never fully close it. Blau and Kahn (2015) confirm that

source country female labor supply affects labor supply in the host country even after controlling

for the immigrants' own labor supply prior to immigration.8 Blau, Kahn, Brummund, Cook, and

Larson-Koester (forthcoming) examine the impact of son preference on fertility decisions,

finding stronger evidence of son preference for immigrants from less gender equal source

countries (i.e., countries with a lower value of the GGI).

        With respect to the descendants of immigrants, Antecol (2000) found a positive

correlation between US and source country labor force participation for "second and higher

generation" immigrants, defined by their answer to the 1990 Census question on ancestry,

although the effect was weaker than it was for first-generation immigrants. Similarly, the labor

supply and fertility behavior of US-born daughters of immigrants (the second generation) has

been found to be positively associated with female labor force participation and fertility rates in

their parents' country of origin (Fernández and Fogli, 2009; and Blau, Kahn, Liu and Papps,




8
 Research on other countries confirms the positive relationship between source country female labor supply and
immigrant women's labor supply in the host country. Using labor force participation of the source country as a
proxy for norms about women's roles, Bredtmann and Otten (2013) find that higher source country labor force
participation increases immigrant women's labor supply in their host country using immigrants from 26 European
countries in the European Social Survey.

                                                       6
2013). Finally, the Blau, Kahn, Brummund, Cook, and Larson-Koester (forthcoming) finding of

stronger evidence of son preference in fertility decisions for immigrants from less gender equal

source countries extends to second-generation immigrants whose parents are from such

countries.

        We contribute to this literature on immigrants and the second generation by exploring the

role of source country gender equality on the allocation of non-market work between men and

women within the household. We find such an association and further confirm that it is not

simply a reflection of immigrant labor supply decisions.

III. Theoretical Framework

        We conceptualize the household time allocation decision in the spirit of Becker (1965)

and Mincer (1962). That is, we consider a married couple maximizing total household utility by

choosing how to allocate the wife's and husband's time between market work and non-market

work. By allocating time to market work, the household earns wages that can be converted into

consumption goods, and by allocating time to non-market work, the household produces

household goods. Utility is then a function of these consumption and household goods. In these

types of models, market productivity -- reflected by a wage level -- serves as a force pulling

spouses toward market work, while productivity in household production serves as a force

pulling spouses toward non-market work. In the context of this paper, we further consider the

role of culture in this decision.

        Before proceeding further, it is important to describe more explicitly what we mean by

culture. We follow Fernández and Fogli (2009), who define differences in culture as "systematic

differences in preferences and beliefs across either socially or geographically differentiated

groups" (147). In this paper, we are particularly interested in culture as it relates to gender



                                                  7
norms: attitudes about men and women's relative roles in economic, social, and political spheres.

Such "systematic differences in preferences" regarding gender norms may translate to

preferences about the amount of work men and women do in the market and in the household,

justifying their inclusion directly into the household utility function. That is, we consider

households having not only preferences for household and market good consumption, but also

having preferences over the time allocation decision itself. In the appendix, we provide a stylized

model of household utility and production, solving for optimal non-market work and showing

how it depends on such a gender norm.9 We operationalize the gender norm as a utility penalty

that is increasing in the wife's market work and decreasing in the husband's market work.

        The comparative static of interest in our paper is the time allocation response to changes

in the strength of the gender norm. That is, holding wages and productivity constant, how does a

spouse's time allocation change with stronger or weaker gender norms? A key result in our

stylized model is that the wife's non-market work increases in the strength of the gender norm

and the husband's non-market work decreases in the strength of the gender norm. However, the

model -- and these types of models more broadly -- makes explicit how the time allocation

decision also depends on the wage rate and household productivity of each spouse. It is quite

plausible that gender norms themselves affect wages or productivity. This foreshadows the

primary empirical challenge of our paper: estimating the effect of culture on time allocation,

holding constant the other factors related to market and non-market productivity. We address this

challenge through the inclusion of control variables in our regressions, and we provide a




9
  We thank Claudia Olivetti for suggesting a model of the type we present. Note, that while the theoretical model
considers wages, our empirical work is reduced form with respect to wages. The reason we do not include wages is
to avoid well-known problems of estimating (imputing) a wage rate for non-labor force participants.

                                                        8
discussion in the methods section below about how to think about the role of these control

variables in the context of the model described above.

IV. Data

        To measure non-market work, we use time diary data from the 2003-2017 waves of the

American Time Use Survey (ATUS) conducted by the US Bureau of Labor Statistics.10 The

ATUS elicits time diary data based on respondents' recall of the previous day's activities via

telephone interviews, recording each activity and time spent on each activity during a 24-hour

period. Respondents are notified of the interview in advance, and the interviewer collects "a

detailed account of the respondent's activities, starting at 4 a.m. the previous day and ending at 4

a.m. on the interview day."11 Time diary data are generally agreed to be the most accurate form

of time use survey data (e.g., Kan and Pudney, 2008) and even perform well compared to

researcher-coded data from wearable cameras (Harms et al, 2019).

        ATUS respondents are selected from the outgoing rotation group of the Current

Population Survey (CPS), with adjustments to make the sample representative of the population

of the United States and over-sampling of minority households. One respondent from the CPS

household over the age of 14 is randomly selected to complete the interview. Because

respondents can be linked to the CPS, we are able to observe not only a rich set of their own

demographic information but also the same demographic information for respondents' spouses

and children. The CPS also asks each individual about their parents' country of birth, allowing

us to identify second-generation immigrants.




10
   For more information on this data set, see https://www.atusdata.org/atus/about_atus.shtml and
https://www.bls.gov/tus/atususersguide.pdf.
11
   https://www.bls.gov/tus/atusfaqs.htm#1.

                                                         9
           We restrict our sample to married respondents in heterosexual relationships where both

the respondent and the spouse are between the ages of 18 and 64. We focus on couples because

it is for this group that the time allocation decision has the most salience. We present results for

all married couples to provide a bottom line for the married population. We also show separate

results for families with children, because these families are making child care decisions. Since

time use data are only available for one respondent in each household, we are not able to observe

the time allocation of the respondent's spouse. However, by enforcing these sample restrictions,

we can estimate for the population how married men and women divide household labor.12 We

also exclude individuals whose diary day was a holiday, as well as natives born abroad and

immigrants whose year of immigration is missing. This resulted in an analysis sample of 73,448

observations, including 12,455 immigrants.

           Our dependent variables are housework, primary childcare, and total non-market work,

each measured in hours per week. We study housework and primary childcare separately in

addition to total non-market work since the allocation of time to childcare has changed over time

and differs across education groups. Our measure of housework includes tasks such as laundry,

food preparation, and cleaning, as well as exterior household activities such as lawn care and

vehicle repair. It also includes household management tasks such as financial management and

household organization and planning. Primary childcare is all the time spent with household

children, either engaging in an activity with the children or supervising the children. This

includes physical care of children, playing, helping with homework, and obtaining or providing

medical care for children. This does not include time when the child was present but where the

main activity during that period was not related to the child (i.e., secondary childcare). Total



12
     All analyses were repeated including those in heterosexual partnerships but not married and results were similar.

                                                           10
non-market work time combines housework and primary childcare tasks while adding time spent

caring for adults and time spent grocery shopping. See the Data Appendix for additional details

on the construction of the sample and the time use variables.

         Table 1 provides some motivation for the study by comparing mean values of total non-

market work, housework, and childcare by immigrant generation and gender.13 The first

generation is defined as individuals who are foreign born; the second generation as native-born

individuals with at least one foreign-born parent; and the third-plus generation as native-born

individuals both of whose parents are also native born. Overall, the data show much larger

gender gaps in total non-market work and in housework for first-generation immigrants than for

second-generation immigrants, whose gender gaps are relatively close to those of third-plus

generation natives. This supports our expectation that immigrants are a more traditional group

with respect to gender roles, on average, compared to natives, at least for time spent doing

housework. The gender gap in childcare hours among those with children is more similar across

generations, though somewhat higher for first- and second-generation immigrants than third-plus

generation natives. In addition, based on these aggregates, there appears to be assimilation in

total non-market work and housework from first- to second-generation immigrants for both

women and men, with the total non-market work and housework of both second-generation men

and women being quite similar to that of their third-plus-generation counterparts. Of course,

similarities between second- and third-plus-generation time allocation at the mean does not rule

out heterogeneity within the group of second-generation individuals related to the source

countries of their parents.


13
  All means in this table are computed using sampling weights, which we discuss in more detail in the Methods
section below. When we control for source country characteristics in the analyses restricted to first- or second-
generation immigrants, the mean values are very similar to those shown in Table 1, with the sample size reduced
only slightly due to missing data on country characteristics.

                                                         11
         The explanatory variable of interest is the Global Gender Gap Index (GGI) calculated by

the World Economic Forum, our measure of source country gender norms. The measure is

constructed using four equally-weighted subindexes--economic participation and opportunity,

educational attainment, health and survival, and political empowerment--that are averaged to

produce an index with values between 0 (total inequality) and 1 (total equality). Each subindex

is comprised of various indicators of gender equality, measured in female-to-male ratios so as to

represent the gap between men and women rather than the level of development in the measured

country. Each indicator is weighted by an amount inversely proportional to its standard

deviation, so that a standard deviation change in each indicator has the same relative impact on

its respective subindex. Some of the indicators included in the index are labor force

participation, wages, professional and technical employment, literacy rate, primary school

enrollment, sex ratio at birth, healthy life expectancy, seats in parliament, and years as head of

state. For more details on the inputs and calculation of the Index, see Hausmann, Tyson, and

Zahidi (2007). To be included in the Index, a country must have data available for at least 12 of

the 14 indicators in the Index. Ideally, we would use a GGI from a period prior to our sample

period; however, since the GGI began in 2006, this is not possible. We use an average of the

2006 and 2007 GGI values as our measure of gender norms in the source country to create a

more stable measure, while pre-dating as many of our observations as possible.14 In 2006, 115

countries were included in the index, representing over 90 percent of the world's population.

Immigrants from countries without a valid GGI are excluded from our sample. We match 93.8

percent of the immigrants in our sample to a valid GGI value (using sample weights). The



14
  In the few instances where a GGI value is not available in 2006 but is available in a later year, we use the earliest
year it was available. This affects about 6 percent of the immigrants in our sample. The latest year used is 2010, but
most immigrants without a 2006 value matched to a 2007 value.

                                                          12
average GGI in our sample is 0.66 with a minimum of 0.529 and a maximum of 0.813. Countries

such as Sweden, Norway and Finland are among the highest scoring countries, and Saudi Arabia,

Pakistan and Egypt among the lowest.

         As further motivation for our study, Figure 1 plots the raw relationship between a

country's GGI score and the respective female-male mean total non-market work difference for

immigrants from that country for countries with at least 30 ATUS observations. The figure

reveals a statistically significant negative relationship between source country GGI and gender

inequality in non-market work. That is, immigrants from countries with more gender equality, as

measured by a higher GGI score, share non-market work activities more equally by gender, as

measured by a difference closer to zero. A regression line fitted through the points has a slope

coefficient of -52.54 hours of non-market work per week and is significant at better than the 5

percent level.15 Note, however, that this regression does not include any controls and weights

each country equally. We explore the role of covariates in individual-level regressions in later

sections. Figure 1 also gives a sense of the distribution of GGI scores, showing a majority of

countries with scores between 0.60 and 0.70 and a mass of scores around 0.65; this compares to a

score of 0.702 for the United States, providing further evidence that immigrants on average come

from countries with more traditional gender roles than the United States (Blau, Kahn and Papps,

2011).

         In our analyses below, we also include controls for source country fertility and GDP per

capita, since these measures may affect immigrant time use decisions apart from the factors the




15
  As noted, for this figure, we dropped source countries with less than 30 ATUS observations to avoid showing any
possibly misleading country-level differentials. Including these dropped countries in the simple bivariate regression
of the non-market work gender differential on GGI yields a slope coefficient of -62.6, significant at the 1 percent
level. Note that the full set of countries is included in our regression analyses below.

                                                         13
GGI is designed to capture. Both of these variables primarily come from the World Bank.16

Since both total fertility and GDP per capita are available for a longer period than GGI, we

compute country averages for these variables beginning with 2000 and continuing through 2007

so that we observe all of our source country characteristics through the same end date. All other

control variables come from the ATUS and the CPS obtained from IPUMS.17

V. Methods

         To examine in more detail the role of source country culture (or gender norms) on non-

market work allocation, we turn to regression-adjusted results. As discussed in the theoretical

framework section, the time allocation decision is a function of market and non-market

productivity, as well as individual preferences. To the extent that productivity is correlated with

culture, our results would be biased without proper controls. However, culture itself may be a

cause of gender differences in productivity. For example, culture may influence women's

attachment to the labor force through expectations related to their education and career choices.

We believe these channels are interesting, but also seek estimates that represent a "purer" effect

of culture. For that reason, we control for source country GDP and fertility rates and also provide

a suite of regression specifications that vary in the extent to which our measure of culture can

operate through variables related to individual labor market preparation and attachment.

         Specifically, in our regression-adjusted results, we first provide a parsimonious

specification with some basic controls (specified below) but omitting the individual's education,

number of children, and spousal characteristics. This specification examines the total effect of

the GGI as it impacts time allocation both directly and indirectly through these variables. We



16
   See the Data Appendix for information on the sources for GDP per capita for the countries for which it is missing
from the World Bank data.
17
   See, https://www.atusdata.org/atus/ and https://cps.ipums.org/cps/.

                                                         14
then provide specifications that include these variables as controls in order to provide a more

stringent test of the direct impact of source country culture as it relates to gender norms.

However, we stress that education, own-fertility, and spousal characteristics themselves are

possible outcomes of source country culture. Regression specifications that add these additional

controls will give more conservative estimates of the role of culture in immigrant time allocation

decisions, making us more confident that we have isolated an effect of culture per se. Thus, this

is our preferred specification. We conclude our main specifications by controlling for the wife's

market work, which by far is our most conservative specification. Time allocated to market and

non-market work is jointly determined. We include this specification to descriptively explore the

question of whether results for housework and childcare simply reflect differences in time

allocated to market work or persist even after controlling for time spent in market work. The

specification including the wife's market work is also robust to possible biases related to

differential legal work status across men and women from different source countries (e.g.,

women's lower likelihood of having an employment visa).18 However, given the endogeneity of

market work, our preferred specification excludes wife's market work.

        Before estimating the impact of specific source country characteristics, we first

benchmark the immigrant data by examining the difference between immigrants and natives in

the gender division of household labor. While Table 1 shows differences in non-market work for

men and women across immigrant generations, it is possible that compositional differences

account for such disparities. To explore the role of composition, we estimate regressions for the




18
   Blau & Kahn (2015) are able to observe visa status using the New Immigrant Survey. They find that women are
somewhat more likely than men to come on a family visa and somewhat less likely than men to have an employment
visa. However, visa status itself could be an outcome of culture, with gender norms determining which spouse's
employment options are paramount. See the later discussion about possible selection biases on why we think this
issue to be minimal.

                                                      15
three non-market work dependent variables with controls. Specifically, we estimate separate

regressions for men and women using the following OLS model:

(1) !!"#$% =  $& +  $' &''()*+,-! +  $( ./01,23/,/*+-(1,! +  $) 4! + 5" +  6# +  7$ +

8% +  9!"#$% 

where! is either total non-market work, housework, or primary childcare (measured in weekly

hours), for individual i, reporting on day of the week d, in month m, of year y, living in state s.

Immigrant is a dichotomous variable equal to one if the respondent was born outside the United

States.19 Second Generation is a dichotomous variable equal to one if the respondent was born

in the United States and at least one of the respondent's parents was born in another country.

The omitted category is natives: respondents born in the United States, both of whose parents are

also US born. Thus, natives correspond to the third-plus generation. In the most parsimonious

specification, 4 includes controls for the respondent's age, age squared, and race/ethnicity

(measured in five mutually exclusive categories: Non-Hispanic White, Non-Hispanic Black,

Non-Hispanic Asian, Non-Hispanic Other, and Hispanic, with Non-Hispanic White serving as

the reference group). We then add controls for education (four discrete categories: less than

High School, High School, Some College, and College+, with less than High School serving as

the reference group), children (number of children in age groups 0-5, 6-12, and 13-17,

respectively), and spouse characteristics (spouse age, age squared, race/ethnicity, and education).

In a final specification, we add controls for the wife's usual hours of market work.20 All

regressions control for day of week, month, year, and state fixed effects (5" , 6# , 7$ , and8% ,



19
   For the initial immigrant-native comparisons, those born in US territories are included as immigrants. They are
excluded from subsequent analyses that include source country characteristics since such variables are not available
for them.
20
   Regressions including this variable also include an indicator variable equal to 1 if the wife's hours of market work
vary from week to week in which case wife's usual hours of market work are set to 0.

                                                          16
respectively) and 9 is the error term. For each sex and specification, we estimate the model on a

sample of all individuals (including those without children) and a sample restricted to those with

at least one child under 18 in order to perform a more focused analysis.

       We next focus on first- and second-generation immigrants to examine the relationship

between source country characteristics and the division of labor by gender. We estimate the

following OLS equation separately by gender and first- or second-generation immigrant status:

(2)!!"#$% =  >& +  >' 3/,2/*3+?&,2/@ + >( .1A*0/B1A,-*CB+*+0-/*(E-(0E +  >) F! +

0" +  2# +  /$ +  G% +  A!"#$% 

where the subscripts and the dependent variables, Y, are defined as above. The coefficient of

interest is >' , which measures the association between time allocated to non-market work

activities and the Gender Gap Index (GGI). Source Country Characteristics include the fertility

rate and GDP per capita variables, as detailed above. In our most parsimonious specification, F

includes all the variables in the initial 4-vector in Equation (1) and additionally includes for

immigrants: years since migration and its square, as well as immigration cohort (categorized

based on year of migration: pre-1970, 1970-79, 1980-89, 1990-99, 2000-09, and 2010-17, with

pre-1970 as the omitted cohort). As in Equation (1), controls for education, children, spouse

characteristics, and wife's market work are added in the second specification. Spouse

characteristics include all the variables in 4 for the spouse and, in addition, dummies for spouse

immigrant and spouse second-generation immigrant status and interactions between the spouse

immigrant dummy and the variables related to immigrant status: years since migration and its

square and the immigrant cohort dummies. We include the same fixed effects from Equation (1).

As above, for each gender and specification we estimate the model on a sample of all individuals

and a sample restricted to those with at least one child under 18.


                                                 17
         Equation (2) is estimated separately for first- and second-generation immigrants. For

first-generation immigrants, the source country characteristics are those of the country from

which they emigrated. For second-generation immigrants, the source country characteristics are

those of their parents. We are able to observe parents' birthplace by linking the ATUS data to

the CPS. Second-generation immigrant respondents are assigned the source country

characteristics of their mother, unless the mother's source country characteristics are missing or

the mother was born in the United States. In that case, they are assigned their father's source

country characteristics. We follow this procedure because the high correlation between father's

and mother's birthplace when both are foreign born makes estimating separate effects of father's

and mother's source country difficult in a sample of this size. (Of second-generation immigrants

where both parents are foreign born, both parents are from the same source country for 87.2

percent of our sample.) We prioritize mother's birthplace because Blau, Kahn, Liu and Papps

(2013) found that the effect of mother's source country characteristics (fertility and female labor

supply) on second-generation women's behavior is generally larger than that of the father's

source country characteristics (fertility and female labor supply). We tested prioritizing father

source country characteristics and results were similar. All regressions are weighted using

ATUS sampling weights adjusted so that each year receives the same weight. In regressions

estimated using Equation (2), standard errors are clustered at the immigrant or parental birthplace

level.

         Because the GGI is an agglomeration of several equality measures, there are several

culture-based interpretations for these regressions. A significant coefficient on GGI could be

directly indicative of attitudes about a woman's role in the household: immigrants may have

explicit expectations about non-market work allocation that are reflective of source country



                                                18
culture. However, in our more parsimonious specifications, the coefficient on GGI could also

capture the effect of cultural attitudes about women's education and economic participation. That

is, since low-GGI countries provide fewer education and economic opportunities for women,

women from these countries tend to have lower potential market wages and, thus, immigrant

households from low-GGI countries optimize household production by shifting non-market work

to women. We believe this to still be a story of culture. However, our specifications with the full

suite of controls aim to isolate cultural channels that are largely independent of labor force

behavior.

        A culture-based interpretation of our results is also consistent with married couples

continuing non-market work allocation practices that were used before their migration. In fact,

we find that male-female non-market work differences within OECD countries are highly

correlated with the GGI.21 This suggests that immigrant time allocation behavior is likely

reflective of what couples were doing before they migrated. To the extent this is the case, we

believe this still to be a story of cultural transmission, since the source country characteristics

continue to affect the migrants' behavior despite their US residence and exposure to the US

environment and norms. However, based on past research, we think it is likely that culture has an

effect on behavior independent of own behavior prior to migration. Specifically, Blau and Kahn

(2015) found that immigrant women's labor supply in the United States was positively affected

by source country female labor supply even after controlling for the immigrants' own labor force

activity before migrating. This finding suggests a cultural influence beyond the immigrants'




21
  Specifically, we use data compiled by the OECD for countries in the OECD plus China and South Africa (we
were unable to find such summary measures for other countries). The correlation between the GGI and the source
country female-to-male non-market work ratio is -0.72, and a simple regression of that ratio on the GGI returns a
coefficient of -32.63 that is significant at the 0.001 level.

                                                        19
actual pre-migration behavior for that variable and potentially for the variables we study here as

well.22



VI. Results

Differences in Time Allocation Across Immigrant Generations

          We first study the differences in time allocation across immigrant generations: natives,

first-generation immigrants, and second-generation immigrants. (For simplicity, we use the term

natives to refer to the third-plus generation.) To do this, we estimate Equation (1), which relates

non-market work to immigrant status and a set of controls. The results from this analysis are

presented in Table 2. The first three columns show the results for total non-market work with

each panel showing the results for a different sample. Panel A includes all women, Panel B is

restricted to women with at least one child under the age of 18, Panel C includes all men, and

Panel D is restricted to men with at least one child under the age of 18. The first column of each

outcome reports results for the parsimonious regression of Equation (1), including controls for

the respondent's age and race/ethnicity, as well as day of the week, month, year, and state fixed

effects. The second column of each outcome adds controls for education, children, and spouse

demographics, all detailed in the methods section above. This is our preferred specification. In

Columns (3), (6), and (9), we add controls for wife's market work. As noted earlier, wife's

market work time is determined jointly with non-market work; however, including it as a control

is useful in descriptively tracing the mechanism through which source country culture can affect

the allocation of non-market time and ascertaining whether differences in non-market work

solely reflect differences in labor supply decisions. Compared to our preferred specification, the


22
  Blau and Kahn (2015) used the New Immigrant Survey, which contains information on individual migrants' pre-
migration labor force activity. The CPS does not include such information.

                                                      20
results indicate that differences in wife's market work account for only a small portion of the

immigrant-native difference in total non-market work: about 29 percent for women and 9 percent

for men.

        Across all samples, immigrants are more traditional than natives, the reference group,

with immigrant women doing significantly more total non-market work and immigrant men

doing significantly less. This finding is robust across all specifications, including controlling for

wife's market work in Column (3), and always statistically significant at the 1 percent level.

Among women, restricting the sample to only those with children increases the magnitude of the

immigrant effect. In Column (2)--our preferred specification--the immigrant effect on total

non-market work is an additional 3.8 weekly hours compared to natives for all women, or an

additional 5.1 weekly hours for immigrant women with children. These increases represent 14

and 15 percent of the respective female sample averages. For immigrant men, the effect is a

decrease of 2.1 weekly hours for all men, or 1.8 hours for immigrant men with children. These

represent 14 and 11 percent of the respective male sample means. Columns (4) through (9)

repeat the analyses separately for housework and childcare, showing that the total non-market

work difference is driven primarily by differences in time spent on housework, though there is a

small and significant effect for childcare among women with children in our preferred childcare

specification shown in Column (11), Panel B.23

        Second-generation immigrants are much more similar to natives than they are to

immigrants. While in the parsimonious specification there is some evidence of a significant

effect in the expected direction for childcare, these effects are not statistically significant in our

preferred specification, suggesting that they reflect the impact of differences in education and


23
  As noted, our definition of total non-market work includes some items not in housework or childcare, such as
caring for others in the household. These amounted to a very small portion of total non-market work time.

                                                        21
other variables between second generation immigrants and natives. Although not significant, the

coefficient for second-generation women in the parsimonious specification is always in the

expected (traditional) direction across all outcomes. Among second-generation men, the

estimated coefficients are small and not statistically significant in every specification, with the

exception of the effect on childcare in the parsimonious specifications, where we obtain

significant "wrong signed" (positive) effects.

         An additional set of findings from the regressions shown in Table 2 (results not shown) is

that more highly educated women and men spend more time with children relative to less highly

educated individuals, an effect consistent with previous research (Gauthier, Smeeding, and

Furstenberg 2004; Guryan, Hurst, and Kearney 2008). Specifically, for respondents with

children, the effect of having a bachelor's degree or more (compared to anything less) is 0.85

additional hours of childcare by women and 0.44 additional hours of childcare by men. Both

effects are significant at the 1 percent level.24 The effect for women is especially noteworthy

because the impact of a BA+ on housework is significantly negative, as one might expect.

The Effect of Source Country Characteristics on Immigrants

         Having established that immigrants are generally more traditional in their allocation of

time to non-market work, we now turn to the role of source-country culture--measured through

source country gender equity--on this relationship. While we continue to provide results that

sequentially add additional control variables, as in Table 2, we again note that our preferred

specification is that which includes children and spousal demographics controls. This

specification includes the main determinants of time allocated to non-market activities but omits


24
  We also ran these regressions including indicators for less than high school, high school diploma, and some
college, leaving BA+ as the omitted category. All of these coefficients were significant and negative with two
exceptions: the some college coefficient was very slightly positive but highly insignificant for all men and negative
but insignificant for men with children.

                                                         22
the control for wife's market work, which we included to determine whether the results for non-

market work persist even when taking into account the endogenously determined time spent in

the market.

       Table 3 shows the results of estimating Equation (2) for all female immigrants (Panel A)

and female immigrants with at least one child under 18 (Panel B), with corresponding

specifications presented for men in Table 4. The estimates in Table 3, Column (1) show that

women from more gender equal countries do less total non-market work than women from less

gender equal countries. This finding is robust to the addition of controls for children and spousal

characteristics in (Column (2). When we further control for the respondent's market work hours

in Column (3), the effect is still significantly negative for both all women and women with

children, with the coefficients 43 percent as large as those in Column (2) for both samples. Thus,

in an accounting sense, nearly 60 percent of the impact of source country gender equality on total

non-market work operates through its effect on market work hours. However, even controlling

for market work, immigrant women migrating from more gender-equal countries do considerably

less total non-market work. The models for housework and childcare also show significantly

negative effects of GGI. The absolute effect is larger for housework than for childcare, but the

effects are quite similar relative to their respective sample means in our preferred specifications.

Specifically, the ratio of the GGI coefficient to the respective mean is -1.11 for housework

and -0.98 for childcare for all women. The results are similar when we restrict the sample to

those with children (Table 3, Panel B), but the magnitude of the coefficients is somewhat larger.

Moreover, the absolute effect of GGI on housework continues to be larger than its effect on

childcare hours for this group, and the effect relative to the mean is now also larger for

housework than childcare (-1.33 for housework and -0.87 for childcare).



                                                 23
        Overall, Table 3 shows statistically significant and moderately large negative effects of

source country gender equality on immigrant women's total non-market hours, housework hours,

and childcare hours. These findings suggest a further impact of source country culture on

immigrant behavior beyond that observed in previous studies that examined outcomes such as

fertility, female labor supply, or son preference.

        Table 4 presents analogous results for male immigrants. In just about every case, we find

statistically significant positive effects of GGI on men's total non-market work, housework, and

childcare although the coefficients for total non-market work and housework are smaller in

absolute value than they are for women in our preferred specification (not controlling for

women's market work). That is, greater source country gender equality raises men's

contributions to household production. This increase is smaller in magnitude than the decrease

in women's hours for total non-market work and housework although, given men's smaller mean

levels of non-market work and housework hours, percentage effects tend to be much larger for

men than for women. These findings point to a role of cultural factors in influencing the non-

market time allocation decisions of men as well as women.

        To further assess the magnitude of the estimated effects of source country GGI, we

compare Canada, with a GGI at the 90th percentile of our sample's GGI distribution and a value

of 0.72, to India, at the 10th percentile of our sample with a GGI of 0.60.25 Specifically, in Table

5 we calculate the effect on each dependent variable of changing GGI from India's to Canada's

level, based on our preferred specification. For all female immigrants, we find a decrease in total

non-market work of 4.3 hours per week (13 percent of the sample average); a decrease in

housework of 3.0 hours per week (13 percent of the sample average); and a decrease in childcare


25
  These percentiles are computed using individual immigrant women as data points, weighted by sampling weights.
Thus, larger sending countries implicitly receive larger weight in the calculations.

                                                      24
of 1.0 hours per week (12 percent of the sample average).26 Thus, the magnitude of the effect of

such a change in source country gender equality is noticeable and fairly similar across each

dependent variable relative to its sample average. Results are similar for immigrant women with

children, with effects relative to their means for total non-market work (14 percent) and

housework (16 percent) only slightly larger than for all immigrant women and a proportional

impact on childcare (10 percent) that is actually slightly smaller than for all immigrant women.

        For men, Table 5 indicates that a change from India's to Canada's GGI value raises

men's non-market work and housework by larger percentages than the corresponding reductions

for women. Moreover, the effect of source country gender equality is especially noteworthy for

men's childcare: the effect of a change from India's to Canada's GGI values raises the childcare

hours of men with children 1.4 hours per week in our preferred specification, an effect that is

statistically significant and almost identical in magnitude to the corresponding reduction found

for women with children. This means that total parental time with children is approximately

unchanged. Of course, relative to the average childcare hours for men with children, this impact

is a much larger percentage than it is for women (a 25 percent increase for men vs. a 10 percent

decrease for women).

        These results indicate that greater source country gender equality lowers immigrant

women's and raises immigrant men's total non-market work, housework and childcare.

Combining these two effects implies that greater source country gender equality lowers the

gender gap in non-market work, just as it does for market labor supply (Blau, Kahn, and Papps,

2011). This is shown explicitly in Table 5 in the columns labeled H - J and



26
  Recall that our definition of total non-market work includes some activities not included in housework or
childcare; therefore, the sum of the GGI effects on housework and childcare need not be the same as the GGI effect
on total non-market time.

                                                        25
(H - J)/J/+,3+?. Results are similar for all immigrant women and those with children

considered separately. Raising the GGI from India's to Canada's level lowers women's hours

and raises men's hours and therefore lowers the gender gap in hours. The decreases in the

gender gap in non-market work range from 35 to 38 percent among all immigrants and from 37

to 40 percent for immigrants with children, and each effect is highly statistically significant. In

absolute terms, the effect of higher source country GGI is larger for housework than for

childcare. Specifically, going from the India to Canada GGI value leads to statistically

significant reductions in the housework gender gap of 5.2 and 6.2 hours per week for immigrants

with and without children, respectively, and reductions in the childcare gender gap of 1.8 and 2.7

hours per week for immigrants with and without children, respectively. However, relative to the

average gender gap, the impacts are slightly larger for childcare than housework.

        An additional set of results associated with Tables 3 and 4 concerns the changes in

immigrant non-market work with additional time in the United States. Since the model includes

own and spouse cohort dummy variables and we have independent cross-sections, we can

interpret the years since migration (YSM) and partner YSM coefficients as measuring the impact

of time in the United States relative to arrival (Borjas, 1985).27 Table A1 shows the results of

simulations where we estimate the effect of years since arrival on non-market work time for

immigrant couples who migrated together 10, 20 or 30 years ago, relative to what would be

observed on arrival.28 For immigrant women, total non-market work and housework decrease

with time in the US, assimilating towards native levels. The effects are consistently negative, as



27
   Of course, like other analyses using independent cross-sections, our interpretation of the YSM coefficients must
be qualified by admitting the possibility of selective return migration (Lubotsky 2007).
28
   These simulations are based on Columns (2), (5), and (8) of Tables 3 and 4. Namely, these specifications include
controls for YSM and YSM ­squared for both the respondent and the partner. The simulation results simply sum
these four relevant coefficients scaled by the respective YSM or YSM-squared value. The same YSM value is used
for the respondent and spouse. Standard errors are computed accordingly.

                                                        26
one might expect with assimilation toward US norms, though only statistically significant for

women with children. The point estimates for women's childcare are smaller than for

housework in magnitude (both absolutely and relative to the mean) but are in the expected

negative direction (i.e., consistent with childcare time decreasing with time in the US). For

immigrant men, there is some evidence of total non-market work and housework decreasing in

YSM and childcare increasing in YSM, though none of these effects are statistically significant.

          The specifications in Tables 3 and 4 do not include the GGI of an immigrant's spouse

(in the likely event that he/she is married to an immigrant). This means that the effects of own

GGI in these tables can be seen as a reduced-form effect for the immigrant's GGI, taking the

spouse's GGI as potentially endogenous. Specifically, it may be difficult to distinguish the

effects of one's own GGI from that of spouse GGI for those married to immigrants, especially

since many immigrants are married to someone from the same country of origin. In our sample,

80.6 percent of immigrant women and 82.9 percent of immigrant men had immigrant spouses,

and of those immigrants with immigrant spouses, 86.9 percent of immigrant women and 87.0

percent of immigrant men were born in the same country as their spouse. Further, the correlation

between own and partner GGI for immigrants with immigrant spouses is 0.89. Nonetheless, it is

potentially interesting to take account of the type of country the spouse comes from, beyond the

controls for spouse immigrant and spouse second generation.

       In Table 6, we explore the impact of spouse's GGI in a way that is meaningful given the

high correlation between own and spouse GGI. The table shows the results of models restricted

to immigrants married to immigrants and where we include the children and spouse control

variables (i.e., the specifications of Columns (2), (5), and (8) of Tables 3 and 4). Because of the

collinearity between own and spouse's GGI, we present the sum of the own and spouse GGI



                                                 27
coefficients, as well as the individual GGI coefficients. The sum of one's own and one's

spouse's GGI effects can be seen as the result of comparing an immigrant couple that migrates

together from a country with a higher value of GGI to an otherwise similar couple migrating

from a country with a lower value of GGI. Compared to the GGI coefficients in Tables 3 and 4

(where we did not control for spouse's GGI), the sums in Table 6 provide the effect of a stronger

"treatment" of source country culture for spouses from countries with the same GGI. Looking

first at women, the sum of the own and spouse GGI effect is in each case slightly larger than the

own GGI effect in Table 3, although the sum in Table 6 is not significantly different from the

individual GGI coefficient in Table 3.29 For example, looking at all immigrant women, the sum

of one's own and one's spouse's GGI effects for total non-market work is -41.6 hours per week

and is highly significant; the individual GGI effect in Table 3 is -35.8 hours per week and is also

highly significant. Thus, for women, there is some suggestive evidence that being married to

someone coming from the same country provides a stronger treatment of source country culture.

           For immigrant men, there is also some evidence of a stronger treatment effect for those

married to immigrant women from a country with the same GGI than for the average immigrant

man, but the evidence is weaker than it is for women. On the one hand, the sums of own and

spouse GGI effects in Table 6, Panel B for all immigrant men married to immigrant women are

slightly smaller compared to the own GGI effects for all immigrant men in Table 4, suggesting

no stronger treatment effect. On the other hand, the sums for immigrant men with children in

Table 6 for total non-market work and housework are somewhat larger than the own GGI effects




29
  The own GGI coefficients for women shown in Table 6 are much larger in magnitude than those for spouse's GGI
for Total Non-Market Work and Housework, perhaps reflecting a stronger influence of one's own culture than one's
spouse's culture; however, the effect of spouse's GGI is larger than the own GGI effect for childcare, perhaps
reflecting the difficulty in distinguishing the two effects because of their collinearity.

                                                      28
in Table 4, although not significantly so; the sum for childcare in Table 6, Panel D for men with

children is, however, about the same size as the corresponding GGI coefficient in Table 4.30

Possible Selection Biases

        The results presented so far suggest strong negative effects of source country gender

equality on immigrant women's non-market work time and positive effects on immigrant men's

non-market work time. We have interpreted such findings as indicating the role of source

country culture as measured by the Gender Gap Index on immigrant behavior in the United

States. However, it is possible that women migrating from higher GGI countries are relatively

more market and less home oriented than the average for their country, while immigrant men

from high GGI countries may be more home-oriented than average men from their countries. If

so, then the effects of GGI we have shown may simply be due to selection (i.e., who migrates)

rather than a true effect of source country culture on immigrant behavior in the United States.

This type of selection is somewhat more nuanced than typical immigration selection stories. For

example, our results would not be biased simply because couples are induced to immigrate by

economic opportunities for husbands, leading to a disproportionate share of non-market work

falling on wives. It would instead have to be the case that the aforementioned behavior operated

more extremely in low-GGI compared to high-GGI countries. Similarly, our results would not be

biased simply if couples from low-GGI countries were induced to immigrate to the US for

different reasons than couples from high-GGI countries, perhaps due to economy-wide shocks in

low-GGI countries but personal reasons in high-GGI countries. Instead, motivators would have




30
  For men, the relative effects of own and spouse GGI in Table 6 are unstable. For example, among all immigrant
men (married to immigrant women), the effect of spouse GGI on housework is about equal to the effect of own GGI;
however, for married men with children, the own effect is much larger. The results for men give us further reason to
be careful about making strong conclusions about the relative impacts of own and spouse GGI given the high level
of collinearity.

                                                        29
to differ between countries in how they induced immigration for couples of various non-market

work allocation inclinations. Differential visa status between husbands and wives would have to

operate in the same way to bias our results.

       We believe selection of the type outlined above is very unlikely to be driving our results,

and that the estimated effects of GGI at least in part reflect the transmission of culture. For one

thing, the cost of immigration (psychic and assimilation costs) is likely to be lower in general for

those with more similar tastes and skills to those of US natives. If this is the case, it would

suggest that, to the extent selection plays a role, women who are most similar to US women

would choose to migrate here. Thus, for example, the women migrating from low-GGI countries

would be those most likely to be less traditional in their time allocation preferences compared to

others in their source countries. This would dampen observed differences in the behavior of

women from different source countries once living in the United States, causing a downward

bias in the estimated effect of source country GGI and making it harder to obtain our results.

       Additionally, an effect of source country characteristics independent of possible selection

bias is consistent with findings from Blau and Kahn (2015). Using data from the New

Immigrant Survey, which has information on immigrants' work hours before migrating, they

found that immigrant women's labor supply in the United States was positively affected by

source country female labor supply, even after controlling for immigrant women's own labor

force activity before migrating. Women from high female labor supply source countries (and

therefore likely high GGI countries) who did not work before migrating are likely to be

especially negatively selected for labor supply; yet source country female labor supply exerted a

large positive impact on their labor supply in the United States, implying a strong effect of

culture. Unfortunately, neither the New Immigrant Survey nor the ATUS have data on pre-



                                                 30
migration non-market work for immigrants. However, if a cultural impact was important for

labor supply, it is not unreasonable to believe it is also important for time allocation within the

home.

Second-Generation Immigrants

        While it is interesting to see the evidence that source country culture continues to

influence immigrant behavior in the United States after migrating, another question relates to the

persistence of such effects, not only over the immigrant's own time in the United States but also

across generations. We are able to address this question because the CPS provides information

on parents' birthplace. As noted above, while differences between the native born and second

generation immigrants are not substantial in our Table 2 baseline regressions, this does not

preclude variation within this group related to source country. This is what we seek to

investigate here, focusing specifically on the effect of GGI.

        As noted above, to match ATUS respondents to parent source country characteristics, we

use mother's source country characteristics unless the mother was born in the United States or

her source country characteristics are missing, in which case, we use the father's source country

characteristics. As also discussed above, we use the source country characteristics of just one

parent due to the high correlation between the birthplace of each parent for second-generation

respondents with two foreign born parents and prioritize the mother's birthplace because

mother's source country has been found to have larger effects on second-generation women's

fertility and labor supply--variables related to gender roles (Blau, Kahn, Liu and Papps, 2013).

Results were similar, however, when we used father's source country characteristics when

available.




                                                 31
           Table 7 shows the results from estimating Equation (2) for second-generation immigrants

for our preferred specification, i.e., including controls for children and spouse characteristics, but

not for the wife's market work. For all women and women with children (shown in Panels A

and C), the estimated effects of parent GGI on total non-market work, housework, and childcare

are negative, as they were for immigrant GGI in Table 3. However, they are generally much

smaller in magnitude than for immigrants and are not statistically significant for any of the

dependent variables. We note that the sample size of the second generation is much smaller than

for that of immigrants, which may help to account for the lack of significance. Nonetheless, a

reasonable conclusion is that the effect of parent country's GGI on time allocation for second-

generation women is weaker than the impact of source country GGI for immigrants, an outcome

one might expect if women assimilate to US norms across generations.

           The results for male second-generation immigrants (shown in Panels B and D) are

actually stronger than those for women and constitute our most interesting finding for the second

generation. Most noteworthy are the positive and statistically significant effects of parent GGI

on total non-market work and childcare for men with children.31 The childcare effects are even

larger than they are for immigrant men. For all second-generation men, higher parent GGI has

statistically insignificant negative effects on total non-market work and housework, but

significant positive effects on childcare. These positive findings for childcare suggest cultural

transmission of source country gender roles across generations particularly as they affect the

time men devote to their children.

VII. Robustness Checks and Additional Analyses

Alternative Children Controls Accounting for Sex of Child



31
     These effects are almost identical and equally as significant when we control for the wife's market work.

                                                           32
       As detailed above, our preferred specification includes controls for children. Children are

measured using continuous variables counting the number of children in each of three age

ranges: 0-5, 6-12, and 13-17. These controls do not account for the gender composition of the

children. In a comprehensive review, Lundberg (2005) points to fairly robust findings that,

overall, fathers tend to spend more time with sons than daughters. In addition, recent research by

Baker and Milligan (2016) finds that both mothers and fathers invest more time in teaching

activities with girls, particularly young girls, while fathers spend more time in recreational and

sports activities with boys as they age. This raises the question of whether our results for first-

and second-generation immigrants would be affected were we to explicitly control for children's

gender composition. To capture this age and gender differential, we use the same age ranges as

in our main specification but separate boys and girls (# girls 0-5, # boys 0-5, etc.). We test the

sensitivity of our results to both alternative children controls that account for gender and the

interaction of the Gender Gap Index with children's age and gender. The first set of results,

available on request, shows that our estimates of the impact of GGI for immigrants and second-

generation immigrants--both men and women--are nearly identical when we control for the

gender of children. We then investigate whether GGI affects the relative childcare given to boys

and girls but do not find evidence that this is the case.

Relative Contributions of GGI Subindexes

       To examine whether some aspects of source country gender equality are more important

than others, Table A2 reproduces our preferred GGI specification from Tables 3 and 4 but

substitutes the total GGI variable with the four GGI subindexes: political equality, health

equality, economic participation equality, and education equality. Before discussing the results,




                                                  33
a note of caution is in order. Some of the components of the index are noticeably positively

correlated, so attempting to break out the impact of the separate components may be difficult.32

         The female specifications in Table A2 show that the education subindex is significantly

negatively related to the three dependent variables and that the economic participation subindex

is significantly negatively related to housework and nearly significantly negatively related to

total non-market work. Thus, these two subindexes appear to drive our findings for the overall

index for women. The male specifications show similar patterns, with the education and

economic participation subindexes playing an important role in higher male non-market work,

though the education subindex results are never significant. Interestingly, the health subindex

was associated with large increases in non-market work for both men and women, with all of the

effect seeming to operate through housework. The effect of the political subindex was largely

indistinguishable from zero for both men and women.

Immigrant Age at Arrival

         One may suspect that immigrants arriving in the United States as children would be less

susceptible to source country gender norms. Thus, including immigrants that arrived as children

may understate the full transmission of source country culture. To explore this hypothesis, we

examine whether our main results become stronger after dropping immigrants that arrived before

age 18--a restriction that drops about 27 percent of the immigrant sample. These results are

available in full upon request. For female immigrants, the sample restriction leads to results that

are slightly stronger but nearly indistinguishable from the main specifications in Table 3.

However, for male immigrants, dropping immigrants who arrived as children results in more



32
  In particular, the correlation coefficients are relatively high for the following: Health-Education (0.59), Economic-
Education (0.33), and Political-Economic (0.21); but less so for the following: Political-Health (-0.07), Political-
Education (-0.07), and Health-Economic (0.03).

                                                          34
substantial increases in the GGI coefficients in several of the specifications from Table 4. For

example, in our preferred specifications, the GGI coefficient for total non-market work increased

from 26.10 to 32.49 and the coefficient on childcare increased from 6.39 to 8.70. Thus, for men,

migrating as an adult does appear to impart a larger "dose" of source country culture than

migrating as a child, although it should be acknowledged that the differences between the

corresponding coefficients are not significant.

VIII. The Impact of Gender Norms About Relative Income

           We next explore how our findings relate to recent research on the gender norm that

women should not outearn their husbands, or that the husband should be the primary

breadwinner. Specifically, Bertrand, Kamenica, and Pan (2015), henceforth BKP, found

evidence suggesting that US women who outearn their husbands increase their non-market work

time as a way to compensate for violating this gender norm in market work. BKP find evidence

of this phenomenon cross-sectionally and within couples.33 They also cite a large discontinuity

in the distribution of the wife's relative income at the point at which the wife would earn more

than her husband, suggesting that women alter their labor market choices to avoid violating the

male breadwinner norm.

           We extend the BKP analysis relating to this non-market work compensation, specifically

looking at how the "penalty" differs between immigrants and natives and whether source country

gender inequality affects the size of the penalty. We further examine how parent source country

gender inequality may affect the penalty for second-generation immigrant wives. Our findings

above show that immigrant women generally do more non-market work than native women and

that source country inequality exacerbates this difference. Hence, we hypothesize that the non-



33
     Similar to us, their cross-sectional analysis uses the ATUS.

                                                            35
market work penalty paid by immigrant women who outearn their husbands will be higher than

that of natives and that the penalty will be exacerbated by source country gender inequality. In

addition, we study whether men receive any compensating benefit in the form of lower non-

market work time if their wives outearn them.

         To examine these issues, we follow BKP by defining an indicator variable for couples in

which the wife earns more than the husband (Wife Earns More) and then regressing non-market

work on this indicator and a host of control variables.34 We extend the analysis by including

source country characteristics, including GGI, as well as an interaction between Wife Earns

More and GGI. However, to benchmark our main results, we first run a simpler specification

that does not include source country characteristics, estimated for the entire sample and then

separately for natives, immigrants, and second-generation immigrants. That is, we estimate the

following regression, which is very similar to one used by BKP, separately for women and men:

(3)!!"#$% =  N& +  N' H(G/O+*,EJ1*/! +  N( P/Q+-(R/O+*,(,)E! +  N) 4! + )" +  # +

S$ + T% +  R!"#$%

where the subscripts are defined as above and ! is weekly total non-market work, also as defined

above. For this analysis, in the interest of brevity, we focus on the overall effect for total non-

market work, but mention results using childcare and housework as separate outcomes when

interesting. Relative Earnings equals the wife's earnings divided by the sum of husband's and


34
   We continue to use our sample restrictions and control variables from above whenever applicable. With the
exception of our use of more recent years of data, the BKP sample restrictions were nearly identical to ours. Two
small differences to note: they include 65 year olds, while we drop those older than 64, and we drop diary entries
from holidays, while they do not. BKP also define their non-market work variable slightly differently than we do
and use a slightly different set of control variables and fixed effects. Notably, our definition of non-market work
differs due to our inclusion of care for household and non-household adults and our exclusion of non-grocery
shopping, obtaining professional services, and travel related to shopping or obtaining services. We believe that adult
care is non-market "work," while shopping and obtaining professional services could in many cases be considered
self-care or leisure. Finally, BKP do not run separate male and female regressions, but instead interact all variables
with a sex indicator variable. Our results are broadly similar when we adhere to the BKP sample and variable
definitions as closely as possible.

                                                         36
wife's earnings. Wife Earns More is a dummy variable equal to one if Relative Earnings is

strictly greater than 0.5. Our parameter of interest is the coefficient on Wife Earns More (1). A

vector of controls 4! includes a cubic in the log of wife's and husband's earnings; log of the total

household income; and, as defined in Section IV, controls for both spouse's race/ethnicity,

education, and age , as well as controls for number and ages of children. For our specification

that focuses on immigrants, 4! also includes controls for immigration cohort and years since

arrival, as well as partner immigration status, years since migration, and immigration cohort, all

as defined in Section IV. For our specification that focuses on second-generation immigrants,

we of course omit the own immigration-related controls but include the spousal immigration-

related controls. As above, the regressions also include day, month, year, and state fixed effects

(gd, hm, jy, and ks). See the Data Appendix for more discussion on variable construction.

       To incorporate source country characteristics, we then estimate the following

regression--again, separately for men and women--for first- or second-generation immigrants:

(4)!!"#$% =  8& +  8' H(G/O+*,EJ1*/! +  8( P/Q+-(R/O+*,(,)E! +  8) 33&! +

8+ (H(G/O+*,EJ1*/!  33&! ) +  8, F! + Q" +  ,# + ?$ + V% +  R!"#$%

where again, the subscripts have been defined above and Y is weekly total non-market work.

Now, our parameters of interest are the coefficients on Wife Earns More (1), GGI (3), and their

interaction (4). For second-generation immigrants, we use parent source country characteristics,

including GGI, as defined above. Here, the vector of control variables Zi includes all the

variables from Xi above in addition to controls for source country (or parent source country for

second-generation immigrants) GDP and fertility. Fixed effects also correspond to those used in

the above specification.




                                                 37
        Note that for both regressions, the specifications are somewhat similar to a regression

discontinuity design (RDD), with Relative Earnings serving as the running variable. However,

in this context, there may be non-random sorting on either side of the 50 percent relative

earnings threshold. Nonetheless, exploring how non-market work changes for women and men

when the wife chooses to cross this relative earnings threshold is interesting for immigrants and

natives alike. Also of note, the inclusion of the cubic in log earnings for both the ATUS

respondent and the spouse help give Relative Earnings a somewhat flexible functional form, but

makes the coefficient on Relative Earnings difficult to interpret. For this reason, we focus on the

Wife Earns More coefficients and their interaction with the GGI. All regressions are weighted

using ATUS sampling weights adjusted so that each year receives the same weight. For the

immigrant and second-generation immigrant regressions, we cluster all standard errors at the

birthplace and parent birthplace level, respectively.

        The results of estimating Equations (3) and (4) are shown in Table 8 for women and in

Table 9 for men. Column (1) of each table shows results for Equation (3), while in Column (2),

we estimate Equation (4) for the sample of first- and second-generation immigrants but omit the

interaction of GGI and Wife Earns More. In Column (3) we add the interaction.

        We reproduce the central BKP finding of a penalty for wives who outearn their husbands,

with results shown in Panel A of Table 8. We find that these women do about 1.9 more hours

per week of non-market work compared to those who earn the same or less than their spouses;

this result is highly significant at the 1 percent level.35 This coefficient is similar to but

somewhat smaller than that found by BKP, who estimate that women spend approximately 2.3 to



35
   Running the regressions separately for housework and childcare suggests that roughly two-thirds of the magnitude
of the effect operates through housework and roughly one-third operates through childcare. Both regressions return a
significant coefficient on Wife Earns More.

                                                        38
3 hours more per week of non-market work when they earn more than their husbands. Panel B

restricts the sample to native women, corresponding to the third­plus generation. The results

here are similar to those for all women, though slightly smaller, which is not surprising, as

natives make up the majority of that sample. On the other hand, immigrant women who outearn

their husbands pay a significant and much larger penalty compared to their native counterparts,

as seen in Panel C. Specifically, Column (1) shows a highly significant coefficient on Wife

Earns More of 4.5 additional hours of non-market per week, and the effect is significantly

greater than the corresponding native effect at the 5% level. The results for second-generation

immigrants are also positive, but not significant and slightly smaller than those for natives. As in

the case of BKP, this set of results runs counter to Becker (1981), which would predict that as the

wife's earnings make up a larger portion of total household earnings, her comparative advantage

for household production likely falls and she spends fewer hours per week on non-market

work.36

          The point estimates discussed above suggest that the norm against wives outearning

husbands is stronger for immigrants overall than for natives, consistent with our results in Table

2, as well as other research (e.g., Blau, Kahn and Papps 2011), which suggest that immigrants

have a more traditional division of labor by gender than natives. However, if there are relatively

fewer immigrant wives earning more than their husbands, there might be a concern that outliers

are driving this result. This is unlikely, however, because the proportion of wives who earn more

than their husband is fairly similar for immigrants and natives. About 27 percent of native wives




36
  Comparative advantage depends on each partner's value of non-market time relative to market time compared to
the other partner. Thus, the expectation in the text implicitly assumes that the increase in the relative value of wife's
market time is not offset by a comparable rise in the value of her non-market time.

                                                           39
earn more than their husbands, while this is true of about 20 percent of first-generation

immigrant wives and 27 percent of second-generation.

         Columns (2) and (3) of Table 8 show the results associated with Equation (4). Adding

GGI and other source country controls in Column (2) very slightly lowers the coefficient on Wife

Earns More, but it remains highly significant. The coefficient on GGI is not statistically

significant, but in the expected negative direction.37 In Column (3), we show the key interaction

effects between GGI and the indicator for whether the wife earns more. In both cases, the

interaction effect has the "wrong" sign (it is positive) but is insignificant. Thus, while we find

that immigrant women face a higher penalty as a result of outearning their husbands, we do not

find evidence that this behavior varies significantly with the degree of source country gender

equality. For second-generation women, we also find positive but insignificant coefficients on

the interaction between parent GGI and Wife Earns More.

         Table 9 shows the effect of the wife earning more for men's non-market work. Given the

penalty found above for wives who cross the 50 percent relative earnings threshold, we might

expect some of their increased non-market work to substitute for work that would otherwise be

done by the husband. This would imply a negative coefficient on Wife Earns More for men.

However, our estimates for Equation (3)--shown in Column (1) of Table 9--suggest that this is

not the case. The estimated effects are never close to significance and the coefficient is slightly

positive in all but one instance (second generation men, for whom the effect of Wife Earns More

is insignificantly negative).38



37
   The result for GGI in Table 8, Column (2) for immigrants contrasts with the much larger, statistically significant
effect of this variable in our main model shown in Table 3. This is likely due to the additional controls included in
Table 8, including wife's and husband income, wife's relative income, and whether the wife earns more than her
husband--controls that are likely to be affected by GGI.
38
   However, when we estimate the regression using childcare as the outcome, we do find that immigrant men do 1.2
fewer hours of work when their wives earn more, significant at the 5 percent level.

                                                         40
        Columns (2) and (3) in Panels C and D of Table 9, which correspond to our estimates for

Equation (4), show results of introducing source country characteristics (or parent source country

characteristics for second-generation immigrants). In contrast to the results for women, we do

find some evidence for immigrant men that more gender equity in the source country affects

men's housework time in the expected direction. In Column (2), which omits the interaction of

GGI and Wife Earns More, the coefficient on GGI for immigrants is significant and in the

expected positive direction. Most interestingly, in Column (3) we find a significantly negative

main effect of wives earning more and a significantly positive interaction effect between wives

earning more and source country GGI. In other words, source country equality may indeed be an

important mitigating factor in the otherwise negative effect of Wife Earns More on men's non-

market work. When we explore this result using housework and childcare as separate outcomes,

we find that this interaction effect is driven entirely by housework. While we do obtain some

suggestive findings for immigrants, the corresponding results for second-generation men are not

significant.

        To aid interpretation of the role of GGI on the wife earning more effect for immigrant

men's non-market work, we calculated the predicted effects evaluated at a low level of GGI

(India's 0.60) and a high level (Canada's 0.72) for the specification used in Column (3), Panel C

of Table 9. Our results suggest that at a low level of GGI, men who are outearned by their wives

do significantly less non-market work than otherwise, seemingly reaping a benefit from the

violation of the gender norm; however at higher levels of GGI, there is no evidence that men do

less non-market work when their wives cross the 50 percent relative earnings threshold.

Specifically, we found that at India's GGI level, the effect of the wife earning more for men is a




                                                41
significant 3.2 fewer hours of non-market, but at Canada's level, a wife earning more is

associated with an insignificant 2.2 hour increase in non-market work.

        A concern that has been raised with respect to analyses like the one above is that wives

may systematically underreport earnings and husbands may systematically overstate their

earnings so as not to violate the gender norm of husbands outearning their wives. For this

reason, some women with a computed relative earnings ratio below 0.5 may actually outearn

their husbands. Murray-Close and Heggeness (2018) find evidence of this by comparing CPS

reported earnings with administrative earnings records from the Social Security Administration.

Specifically, in their primary specification they find that when a wife earns more than her

husband, the wife's reported earnings are 1.5 percentage points lower than her administrative

earnings and the husband's reported earnings are 2.9 percentage points higher than his

administrative earnings. This suggests that households with a wife that just outearns her husband

would on average have reported relative earnings of 0.489, though it is likely that some women

in the 0.489 to 0.5 range are accurately reporting that their husbands have higher earnings.

Further, other authors have pointed out that rounding, heaping, and other reporting problems

have led to a mass point of couples with artificially identical reported earnings.39 Given the

similarities between the above regressions to RDD, this could bias the composition of the

"control group" just to the left of the threshold. In light of the aforementioned findings, we

reproduce our BKP-style regressions from Tables 8 and 9 while dropping all observations with

relative earnings between 0.489 and 0.50, inclusive. All our main findings are robust to this




39
  Binder and Lam (2019) find that artificial features of earnings reporting--such as top-coding, rounding, and
imputation--create a large mass point of couples with identical reported earnings. Relatedly, Zinovyeva and
Tverdostup (2018) show that family businesses and co-working of spouses can contribute to a mass point of couples
with identical reported earnings. We were able to reproduce this mass point in our data set.

                                                       42
specification. These results are shown in full in Tables A3 and A4, which correspond to Tables

8 and 9, respectively.

       Overall, we find evidence that the non-market work penalty faced by wives who earn

more than their husbands is stronger for immigrants than natives although we do not find

evidence that the size of the penalty varies with source country gender equality. However, there

is some suggestive evidence that men coming from a culture with a lower level of gender

equality will reap the benefit of their wives' violation of the gender norm by doing less non-

market work, whereas men coming from countries with a higher level of gender equality do not.

IX. Conclusion

       Despite increasing female labor force participation prior to the 1990s and decreases in the

gender wage gap dating from the 1980s, the gender gap in non-market work remains large and

persistent. Although there has been some convergence, women still spend considerably more

hours on housework than men, even if they are employed. This persistence in the gender

differences in the allocation of time within the home likely contributes to gender differences in

labor market outcomes. In contemplating how this division of labor may change, one question is

whether it is malleable in the face of broader cultural factors. We address this question by using

the American Time Use Survey to estimate the impact of source country culture on the gender

division of household labor among US immigrants. One contribution of this paper is to study the

impact of source country culture among men as well as women.

       Overall, we find that immigrants have a more traditional division of labor than natives in

that, even controlling for their characteristics, immigrant women tend to allocate more time to

non-market work than their native counterparts, while immigrant men tend to allocate less.

Using the Gender Gap Index from the World Economic Forum as an indicator, we find that



                                                43
source country gender norms do affect this division of household labor--influencing the time

allocation decisions of men as well as women. Women from more gender equal countries spend

fewer hours per week on household labor than their counterparts from less gender equal

countries, allocating less time to both housework and childcare. Men from more gender equal

countries spend more hours per week on non-market work compared to men from less gender

equal countries, both for housework and childcare.

       To further examine the impact of culture, as well as to gauge the extent of assimilation

across immigrant generations, we look at second-generation immigrants. Based on descriptive

statistics, we find that the total non-market work and housework of second-generation women

and men are much more similar to natives with native parents than they are to immigrants,

suggesting some intergenerational assimilation. In terms of the impact of parental source

country gender equality, while we find no significant effect on the non-market work, housework

or childcare of second-generation women, we do find effects for second-generation fathers.

Specifically, we find that those from more gender egalitarian countries spend significantly more

time on non-market work and childcare.

       Finally, we study the impact of source country culture on the strength of the traditional

norm that men are the primary breadwinners and should outearn women. Specifically, previous

research has found that women who violate this norm pay a penalty by doing more housework

(Bertrand, Kamenica and Pan, 2015). While we find that this norm holds on average in our data

for both immigrants and native women, the penalty is larger for immigrants, consistent with

immigrants being a more traditional group in terms of gender norms. However, the size of the

penalty among immigrant women does not vary significantly with source country gender equity.

For men, while we find no evidence of a significant effect of wives earning more on non-market



                                                44
work overall, immigrant men coming from a culture with a lower level of gender equality do

appear to reap the benefit of their wives' violation of the gender norm by doing less housework,

whereas this is not the case for men from more gender equitable source countries.




                                               45
Theory Appendix

Consider a stylized framework where a husband and wife each have --  [0,1] units of time to
allocate toward market production and 1 -  -- units to allocate toward non-market production,
for )  {', G}. The household has a joint utility function that is increasing and concave in total
market good consumption 0 and household good consumption ^. Utility also depends additively
on a convex gender norm function _(-. , -# ) that penalizes the wife's market work relative to the
husband's market work. Market goods can be purchased with wages earned from market work,
while household goods are produced via non-market production. The husband and wife can
differ in their exogenous wage rate `- and productivity in home production.

Couples maximize utility subject to a market good consumption (income) constraint and their
household non-market goods production function. Before putting any more structure on the
model, note two main general results. First, couples will optimize their time at the point when the
marginal utility gain from market work is equal to the marginal utility gain of non-market work.
Second, the wife's market work will decrease in the magnitude of the gender norm (and hence
her non-market work will increase), while the husband's market work will increase in the
magnitude of the gender norm (and hence his non-market work will decrease). In the absence of
income effects, market work will increase in the wage rate and non-market work will increase in
home productivity for both men and women.

To see this in a concrete example, we assume that households solve the following maximization
problem, where utility is additively separable with a linear gender norm penalty and a Cobb-
Douglas household production function:

                                 max 0 + a log ^ - _b-. - -# c
                                 /! ,/"
                                     E. -.0 =  `# -# + `. -.
                                                              '21
                                  ^ = e(1 - -# )1 b1 - -. c

where N  (0,1) is the relative productivity of the husband in household good production and _
is a positive scalar. First order conditions yield the following solution for optimal non-market
work time:

                                                
                                                   a(1 - N)
                                          1 -  -. =
                                                    `. - _
                                                
                                                     aN
                                          1 -  -# =        
                                                    `# + _

The general conclusions from above may be seen explicitly in these first order conditions. That
is, non-market work is increasing in _ for women and decreasing in _ for men. Further, since
this model does not have income effects, non-market work is increasing in relative productivity
and decreasing in the wage rate for both men and women. For market work, the converse holds.
Note that specific parameterizations must be checked for corner solutions (namely, if the penalty
is too large, the wife will spend all her time in home production).


                                                  46
This framework can easily accommodate modeling the wage rate as an endogenous function of
the gender norm penalty. For example, we may imagine the gender norm representing a general
attitude about women's accumulation of human capital and thus a stronger penalty decreases her
market productivity and hence her wage rate. In this case, the first order conditions for
optimization remain the same, though we need to explicitly note the dependence of the wife's
wage on _ for the comparative statics with respect to the penalty. If we assume that the wife's
wage decreases in the gender norm, the direction of the effect on non-market allocation is the
exact same but with a stronger magnitude.

While the theoretical model considers wages, our empirical work is reduced form with respect to
wages in order to avoid well-known problems of estimating (imputing) a wage rate for labor
force nonparticipants. This makes it important to control for variables related to human capital to
isolate the effect of the penalty. However, the model discussed in this preceding paragraph
suggests that those variables are themselves endogenous, motivating our empirical strategy of
testing the effect of source country gender norms with and without the inclusion of human
capital controls such as age and education.




                                                47
Data Appendix

I. Variable Definitions

   A. Demographic Variables from the ATUS and CPS

Race and Ethnicity
   · We control for race and ethnicity using a set of indicator variables for five mutually-
        exclusive categories: White non-Hispanic, Black non-Hispanic, Asian non-Hispanic,
        other non-Hispanic, and Hispanic.
   · Respondent is classified as Hispanic if the respondent reports being Hispanic or reports
        his/her ethnicity as Spanish, Portuguese, Mexican, Puerto Rican, Latin American Indian,
        South American Indian, or Mexican American Indian.
   · Respondent is classified as black non-Hispanic if the respondent reports being any
        detailed race that includes black and is not classified as Hispanic.
   · Respondent is classified as Asian non-Hispanic if the respondent is not classified as
        Hispanic or black non-Hispanic and reports race as Asian or any mixed race including
        Asian.
   · Respondent is classified as white non-Hispanic if the respondent is not classified as
        Hispanic, black non-Hispanic, or Asian non-Hispanic and reports race as white.
   · Respondent is classified as other non-Hispanic if none of the above classifications apply.
First- and Second-Generation Immigration Variables
   · Respondents are classified as first generation if they report their birthplace as outside the
        50 states or the District of Columbia. Note that we count respondents born in US
        territories as immigrants, though they are not included in most immigrant analyses due to
        not having independent source country characteristics.
   · Respondents are classified as second generation if they were born in the fifty states or the
        District of Columbia and they report that either of their parents was born outside the
        United States.
            o Second-generation immigrant respondents are assigned the source country
                 characteristics of their mother unless their mother's source country characteristics
                 are missing or their mother is US born. In that case, they are assigned their
                 father's source country characteristics. We follow this procedure because the
                 high correlation between father's and mother's birthplace when both are foreign
                 born makes estimating separate effects of father's and mother's source country
                 difficult in a sample of this size. (Of second-generation immigrants where both
                 parents are foreign born, both parents are from the same source country for 87.2
                 percent of our sample.) We compare our results to those that prioritize father
                 source country characteristics and find them to be similar.
   · We use the term native to refer to those who were born in the United States, with both
        parents born in the US. That is, natives may be considered third-plus-generation
        immigrants.


                                                 48
   ·  We compute years since migration as the difference between the survey year and the mid-
      point of the binned response to year of immigration. The mid-point of the binned
      response to year of immigration is also used to assign immigration cohorts.
Earnings Variables in Section VII
      · We set earnings to 0 for those reporting to be unemployed or out of the labor force.
          We set earnings to missing if reported earnings are outside the ATUS defined range.
          We inflate top-coded earnings by 1.5. According to IPUMS: "[The individual
          earnings variable] was collected at the time of the ATUS interview. However,
          earnings information was only collected at that time for respondents who changed
          jobs or employers since the final CPS interview, or whose earnings were allocated in
          the final CPS interview. For other respondents, earnings information was carried
          forward from the final CPS interview" (https://www.atusdata.org/atus-
          action/variables/EARNWEEK#description_section). Further, spousal earnings are not
          updated at the time of the ATUS interview, but are always carried forward from the
          final CPS interview. The final CPS interview takes place two to five months before
          the ATUS interview.
      · Our measure of total household income comes from the CPS family income variable,
          which includes earned and unearned income of all household members. This variable
          is not updated at the time of the ATUS interview. Family income is reported in
          ranges, and we use the mid-point of reporting bins.
      · We set log earnings to zero for those with 0 earnings.
      · Relative earnings are defined as the wife's earnings divided by the sum of the
          husband's and wife's earnings. If only one spouse is employed, relative earnings are
          set to 1 or 0 accordingly.

   B. Country Characteristics Variables

Total Fertility
   · Total fertility data come from the World Bank, available at
       http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.DYN.TFRT.IN. In the regressions with country
       characteristics, we include 2000-2007 country averages of total fertility.

GDP Per Capita
  · Most GDP per capita data come from the World Bank, available at
     http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.PP.KD. GDP for Argentina, Burma
     (Myanmar), and Syria is constructed from UN Stats data on GDP by Type of Expenditure
     at current prices and at constant 2005 prices in national currency units, available at
     http://data.un.org/Data.aspx?d=SNAAMA&f=grID%3A101%3BcurrID%3ANCU%3Bpc
     Flag%3A0 and
     http://data.un.org/Data.aspx?q=gdp&d=SNAAMA&f=grID%3a102%3bcurrID%3aNCU
     %3bpcFlag%3a0, respectively. PPP conversion rates come from
     http://icp.worldbank.org/icp/QueryResults.aspx?r=-1&ds=0&y=3&ws=1. We use the
     World Bank methodology to convert to GDP per capita, PPP.

                                             49
Global Gender Gap Index
   · The index of gender equality comes from the World Economic Forum's "The Global
      Gender Gap Report." In the regressions with country characteristics, we include 2006-
      2007 country averages of the index, unless a 2006 value is not available, in which case
      we use the earliest value available up until 2012. The 2006 and 2007 reports are
      available at http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GenderGap_Report_2006.pdf and
      http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GenderGap_Report_2007.pdf.



   C. ATUS Variables

       We define housework as all activities that fall under the broad ATUS "Household
       Activities" category. These include housework, food and drink preparation and cleanup,
       home maintenance, lawn and garden care, pet care, appliance care, and household
       administrative tasks. We define primary childcare as care for children living in the
       household, including the "second-tier" ATUS categories of "Caring for & Helping HH
       Children," "Activities Related to HH Children's Education," and "Activities Related to
       HH Children's Health." We define total non-market work as the sum of these housework
       and childcare variables, as well as time spent grocery shopping and all the activities
       included in the "second-tier" ATUS categories of "Caring for Household Adults,"
       "Helping Household Adults," and "Caring for & Helping NonHH Members."

II. Sample Selection

We use data from the 2003-2017 waves of the American Time Use Survey (ATUS). For the
main analysis, we focus on first- and second-generation immigrants as defined above. When
natives are included, they are defined as those who are born in the United States with both
parents born in the US. Regressions are weighted by ATUS sampling weights that are
normalized to provide equal weighting for each sample year.

We restrict our sample to married respondents in heterosexual partnerships where both the
respondent and their spouse are between the ages of 18 and 64. To do this, we keep only
respondents who report being married with a spouse present in the household. To collect partner
characteristics, we match these respondents to the member of their respective households who
lists the respondent as a spouse. If no household member lists the respondent as a spouse, we
match the respondent to the member of the household who lists the respondent as an unmarried
partner. We then drop any remaining respondents who do not match. We also exclude
observations recorded on holidays, natives born abroad, and immigrants whose year of
immigration is missing. While we are not able to observe the time allocation of the respondent
and their partner, by enforcing these restrictions, we can estimate for the population how married
men and women divide household labor. All analyses were repeated including those in
heterosexual partnerships but not married. To do this, we do not impose the initial restriction of
keeping only respondents claiming to be married with a spouse present. We follow the same

                                                50
partner match procedure outlined above. Our results are similar when partnered respondents are
included (results available on request).
In some regressions, the sample is implicitly restricted due to missing data on control variables.
Regressions that control for a range of spousal characteristics resulted in a few dropped
observations that had missing values for any of these characteristics. Further, some immigrants
did not match to source country characteristics and are therefore dropped from regressions
including these characteristics. Namely, some source countries do not have GGI scores
available, a list that includes any US territory, Taiwan, Haiti, Iraq, Hong Kong, and Laos.
We also recoded the source country of some immigrants to make matching possible. This
included assigning individuals from England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland to the
source country characteristics of the UK; assigning individuals from Azores to Portugal;
assigning individuals from Kosovo to Albania; assigning individuals from Palestine to Israel; and
assigning individuals from "USSR, n.s." to Russia.




                                                51
                                              References

Antecol, Heather. 2000. "An Examination of Cross-Country Differences in the Gender Gap in
      Labor Force Participation Rates," Labour Economics 7 (July): 409-426.

Baker, Michael and Kevin Milligan. 2016. "Boy-Girl Differences in Parental Time Investments:
       Evidence from Three Countries." Journal of Human Capital 10 (Winter): 399-441.

Becker, Gary S. 1965. "A Theory of the Allocation of Time." Economic Journal 75 (September):
       493-517.

Becker, Gary S. 1981. Treatise on the Family. (Cambridge: Harvard University Press; Enlarged
       edition, 1991).

Becker, Gary S. 1985. "Human Capital, Effort, and the Sexual Division of Labor." Journal of
       Labor Economics 3 (January, Part 2): S33­58.

Bertrand, Marianne, Emir Kamenica, and Jessica Pan. 2015. "Gender Identity and Relative
       Income Within Households." Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (May): 571-614.

Bianchi, Suzanne M., Melissa A. Milkie, Liana C. Sayer, and John P. Robinson. 2000. "Is
       Anyone Doing the Housework? Trends in the Gender Division of Household Labor."
       Social Forces 79 (September): 191-228.

Bianchi, Suzanne M., Melissa A. Milkie, Liana C. Sayer, and John P. Robinson. 2012.
       "Housework: Who Did, Does, or Will Do It, and How Much Does It Matter?" Social
       Forces 91 (September): 55-63.

Binder, Ariel J. and David Lam. 2019. "Is There a Male Breadwinner Norm? The Hazards of
       Inferring Preferences from Marriage Market Outcomes." NBER Working Paper 24907.

Blau, Francine D. 1992. "The Fertility of Immigrant Women: Evidence from High-Fertility
       Source Countries," in George J. Borjas and Richard B. Freeman, eds., Immigration and
       the Work Force: Economic Consequences for the United States and Source Areas
       (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press), pp. 93-133.

Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2007. "Changes in the Labor Supply Behavior of
       Married Women: 1980-2000." Journal of Labor Economics 25 (July): 393-438.
Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2015. "Substitution between Individual and Source
       Country Characteristics: Social Capital, Culture, and US Labor Market Outcomes among
       Immigrant Women." Journal of Human Capital 9 (Winter): 439-482.
Blau, Francine D., Lawrence M. Kahn, Peter Brummund, Jason Cook, and Miriam Larson-
       Koester. Forthcoming. "Is There Still Son Preference in the United States?" Journal of
       Population Economics, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00148-019-00760-7.

Blau, Francine D., Lawrence M. Kahn, Albert Yung-Hsu Liu, and Kerry L. Papps. 2013. "The
       Transmission of Women's Fertility, Human Capital, and Work Orientation Across
       Immigrant Generations." Journal of Population Economics 26 (April): 405-435.

                                               52
Blau, Francine D., Lawrence M. Kahn and Kerry L. Papps. 2011. "Gender, Source Country
       Characteristics and Labor Market Assimilation Among Immigrants: 1980-2000." Review
       of Economics and Statistics 93 (February): 43-58.

Blau, Francine D. and Anne E. Winkler. 2018. The Economics of Women, Men, and Work, 8th ed.
       New York: Oxford University Press.

Borjas, George J. 1985. "Assimilation, Changes in Cohort Quality, and the Earnings of
        Immigrants." Journal of Labor Economics 3 (October): 463-489.

Bredtmann, Julia and Sebastian Otten. 2013. "The Role of Source- and Host-Country
      Characteristics in Female Immigrant Labor Supply." Munich Personal RePEc Paper No.
      44544.

Burda, Michael, Daniel Hamermesh, and Philippe Weil. 2013. "Total Work and Gender: Facts
       and Possible Explanations." Journal of Population Economics 26 (January): 239-261.

Bütikofer, Aline, Katrine V. Løken, and Alexander Willén. 2019. "Building Bridges and
       Widening Gaps: Efficiency Gains and Equity Concerns of Labor Market Expansions."
       NHH Discussion Paper 19/2019.

Campbell, Colin and Jonathan Horowitz. 2016. "Does College Influence Sociopolitical
     Attitudes?" Sociology of Education 89 (January): 40-58.

Coltrane, Scott. 2000. "Research on Household Labor: Modeling and Measuring the Social
       Embeddedness of Routine Family Work." Journal of Marriage and the Family 62
       (November): 1208-1233.

Correll, Shelley J., Stephen Benard, and In Paik. 2007. "Getting a Job: Is There a Motherhood
        Penalty?" American Journal of Sociology 112 (March): 1297­338.

Cunningham, Mick. 2008. "Changing Attitudes toward the Male Breadwinner, Female
      Homemaker Family Model: Influences of Women's Employment and Education over the
      Lifecourse." Social Forces 87 (September): 299-323.

Davis, Shannon N., and Theodore N. Greenstein. 2009. "Gender Ideology: Components,
       Predictors, and Consequences." Annual Review of Sociology 35: 87-105.

Fernández, Raquel, and Alessandra Fogli. 2009. "Culture: An Empirical Investigation of
      Beliefs, Work, and Fertility." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1
      (January): 146-177.

Fryer, Roland G. and Steven D. Levitt. 2010. "An Empirical Analysis of the Gender Gap in
        Mathematics." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2 (April): 210­240.

Gauthier, Anne H., Timothy M. Smeeding, and Frank F. Furstenberg. 2004. "Are Parents
       Investing Less Time in Children? Trends in Selected Industrialized Countries."
       Population and Development Review (December): 647-671.

                                               53
Goldin, Claudia. 2014. "A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter." American Economic
       Review 104 (April): 1091-1119.

Guiso, Luigi, Ferdinando Monte, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2008. "Education Forum:
       Culture, Gender, and Math." Science 320: 1164­1165.

Guryan, Jonathan, Erik Hurst, and Melissa Kearney. 2008. "Parental Education and Parental
      Time with Children." Journal of Economic Perspectives 22 (Summer): 23-26.

Harms, Tersa, Jonathan Gershuny, Aiden Doherty, Emma Thomas, Karen Milton, and Charlie
      Foster. 2019. "A Validation Study of the Eurostat Harmonised European Time Use Study
      (HETUS) Diary Using Wearable Technology." BMP Public Health 19 (Supplement 2):
      455-464.

Hausmann, Ricardo, Laura D. Tyson, and Saadia Zahidi. 2007. The Global Gender Gap Report
     2007. Geneva, Switzerland: World Economic Forum.

Hersch, Joni. 2009. "Home Production and Wages: Evidence from the American Time Use
       Survey." Review of Economics of the Household 7 (June): 159-178.

Hochschild, Arlie R. 1989. The Second Shift. New York: Avon Books.

Kan, Man Yee and Stephen Pudney. 2008. "Measurement Error in Stylized and Diary Data on
      Time Use." Sociological Methodology 38(1): 101-132.

Kleven, Henrik, Camille Landais, and Jakob Egholt Søgaard. 2019. "Children and Gender
      Inequality: Evidence from Denmark." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
      11 (October): 181-209.

Kosteas, Vasilios D. 2013. "Gender Role Attitudes, Labor Supply, and Human Capital
       Formation." Industrial Relations 52 (October): 915-940.

Le Barbanchon, Thomas, Roland Rathelot, and Alexandra Roulet. 2019. "Gender Differences in
       Job Search: Trading off Commute Against Wage." Available at
       SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3467750.

Lubotsky, Darren. 2007. "Chutes or Ladders? A Longitudinal Analysis of Immigrant Earnings."
      Journal of Political Economy 115 (October): 820-867.

Lundberg, Shelly. 2005. "Sons, Daughters, and Parental Behavior." Oxford Review of Economic
      Policy 21, No. 3 (Autumn): 340-356.

Mincer, Jacob. 1962. "Labor Force Participation of Married Women," in H. Gregg Lewis ed.,
      Aspects of Labor Economics, Universities National Bureau of Economic Research
      Conference Series 14 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press), pp. 63-97.

Mincer, Jacob, and Solomon Polachek. 1974. "Family Investment in Human Capital: Earnings of
      Women." Journal of Political Economy 82(Mar.-Apr.): S76-S108.

                                             54
Murray-Close, Marta and Misty L. Heggeness. 2018. "Manning Up and Womaning Down: How
      Husbands and Wives Report Their Earnings When She Earns More." SESHD Working
      Paper #2018-20. United States Census Bureau.

Nollenberger, Natalia, Núria Rodríguez-Planas, and Almudena Sevilla. 2016. "The Math Gender
       Gap: The Role of Culture." American Economic Review 106 (May): 257-261.

Ralsmark, Hilda. 2017. "Education, Norms, and Gender Equality." Working Paper in
      Economics No. 702, Department of Economics, University of Gothenburg.

Waldfogel, Jane. 1998. "Understanding the `Family Gap' in Pay for Women with Children."
      Journal of Economic Perspectives 12 (Winter): 137­56.

Zentner, M. and K. Mitura, "Stepping Out of the Caveman's Shadow: Nations' Gender Gap
       Predicts Degree of Sex Differentiation in Mate Preferences." 2012. Psychological
       Science 25: 1176-1185.

Zinovyeva, Natalia and Maryna Tverdostup. 2018. "Gender Identity, Co-Working Spouses and
      Relative Income within Households." IZA Discussion Paper No. 11757.




                                             55
Figure 1: GGI and Female-Male Non-Market Work (NMW) Differential by Country




                                    56
Table 1: Total Non-Market Work, Housework, and Childcare by Gender and Immigrant Generation
I. All Men and Women
                                                           Panel A. Women
                                                          Natives with Native                                      Second-Generation
                                       All                                                 Immigrants
                                                                Parents                                               Immigrants
Non-Market Work                       27.63                      26.26                        33.09                      28.48
Housework                             18.11                      17.11                        22.45                      17.51
Childcare                              6.98                      6.476                        8.584                      8.534
N                                    38,582                     29,639                        6,618                      2,325
                                                            Panel B. Men
                                                          Natives with Native                                      Second-Generation
                                       All                                                 Immigrants
                                                                Parents                                               Immigrants
Non-Market Work                       15.14                      15.51                        13.29                      15.94
Housework                             10.14                      10.67                        7.822                      10.30
Childcare                             3.491                      3.345                        3.919                      4.120
N                                    34,866                     27,033                        5,837                      1,996
                                                         Panel C. Women-Men
                                                          Natives with Native                                      Second-Generation
                                       All                                                 Immigrants
                                                                Parents                                               Immigrants
Non-Market Work                       12.49                      10.75                          19.8                     12.54
Housework                              7.97                       6.44                        14.628                     7.21
Childcare                             3.489                      3.131                         4.665                     4.414

II. Men and Women with Children Under Age 18
                                                           Panel A. Women
                                                          Natives with Native                                      Second-Generation
                                       All                                                 Immigrants
                                                                Parents                                               Immigrants
Non-Market Work                       33.43                      31.95                        38.04                      33.15
Housework                             18.83                      17.35                        23.73                      17.61
Childcare                             12.68                      12.66                        12.42                      13.70
N                                    26,161                     19,480                        4,994                      1,687
                                                            Panel B. Men
                                                          Natives with Native                                      Second-Generation
                                       All                                                 Immigrants
                                                                Parents                                               Immigrants
Non-Market Work                       16.89                      17.58                        14.54                      17.64
Housework                             9.317                      9.888                        7.493                      9.462
Childcare                             6.386                      6.568                        5.652                      6.997
N                                    23,276                     17,509                        4,382                      1,380
                                                         Panel C. Women-Men
                                                          Natives with Native                                      Second-Generation
                                       All                                                 Immigrants
                                                                Parents                                               Immigrants
Non-Market Work                       16.54                      14.37                          23.5                     15.51
Housework                             9.513                      7.462                        16.237                     8.148
Childcare                             6.294                      6.092                         6.768                     6.703
Notes: Data are from waves 2003-2017 of the ATUS. Variables are measured in hours per week. The sample includes respondents aged 18-64 who
are married with a spouse aged 18-64 present in the household. Observations that fall on public holidays, natives born abroad, and same sex
couples are excluded. Data are weighted using ATUS sampling weights adjusted so that each year receives the same weight.




                                                                    57
Table 2: Regression-Adjusted Relationship Between Non-Market Work and Immigrant Generation
                                                            (1)                   (2)                  (3)                    (4)                   (5)                   (6)                   (7)                   (8)                   (9)
                                                        Total Non-            Total Non-           Total Non-
                                                                                                                         Housework             Housework             Housework              Childcare             Childcare             Childcare
                                                       Market Work           Market Work          Market Work
Panel A: All Women
Immigrant                                     5.698***                         3.809***              2.690***              5.297***              3.913***             3.197***              0.766***                0.269                -0.0101
                                               (0.438)                          (0.425)               (0.404)               (0.332)               (0.338)              (0.328)               (0.227)               (0.199)               (0.196)
Second-Generation Immigrant                    0.840*                            0.565                 0.613                 0.178                 0.423                0.454               0.683***               0.0869                 0.101
                                               (0.509)                          (0.479)               (0.456)               (0.385)               (0.381)              (0.370)               (0.263)               (0.224)               (0.221)
Observations                                   38,582                           38,565                38,565                38,582                38,565               38,565                38,582                38,565                 38,565
R-squared                                       0.045                            0.159                 0.239                 0.047                 0.072                0.128                 0.162                 0.397                 0.414
Mean                                            27.63                            27.64                 27.64                 18.11                 18.11                18.11                 6.980                 6.980                 6.980
Panel B: Women With at Least One Child Under 18
Immigrant                                     6.760***                         5.073***              3.189***              6.058***              4.534***             3.466***               0.753**               0.666**               -0.0334
                                               (0.516)                          (0.516)               (0.486)               (0.372)               (0.382)              (0.369)               (0.310)               (0.300)               (0.293)
Second-Generation Immigrant                     0.769                            0.412                 0.776                -0.0469                0.254                0.455                0.909**                0.218                 0.361
                                               (0.609)                          (0.587)               (0.551)               (0.439)               (0.434)              (0.419)               (0.366)               (0.341)               (0.332)
Observations                                   26,161                           26,150                26,150                 26,161               26,150               26,150                 26,161               26,150                 26,150
R-squared                                       0.047                            0.120                 0.224                  0.056                0.084                0.147                  0.123                0.246                 0.283
Mean                                            33.43                            33.44                 33.44                  18.83                18.83                18.83                  12.68                12.68                 12.68
Panel C: All Men
Immigrant                                    -2.126***                         -2.127***            -1.930***             -2.084***             -1.812***             -1.648***               0.0589                -0.220                -0.183
                                               (0.363)                           (0.368)              (0.368)               (0.297)               (0.306)               (0.306)              (0.168)               (0.161)               (0.161)
Second-Generation Immigrant                    0.0354                             -0.228               -0.184                -0.309                -0.254                -0.218              0.437**               0.0603                0.0686
                                               (0.438)                           (0.433)              (0.432)               (0.359)               (0.359)               (0.359)              (0.203)               (0.189)               (0.189)
Observations                                   34,866                            34,858               34,858                34,866                34,858                34,858                34,866               34,858                34,858
R-squared                                       0.055                              0.081                0.084                 0.064                 0.065                 0.068                0.083                 0.212                 0.212
Mean                                            15.14                              15.14                15.14                 10.14                 10.14                 10.14                3.491                 3.491                 3.491
Panel D: Men With at Least One Child Under 18
Immigrant                                    -1.907***                         -1.819***            -1.490***             -1.871***             -1.705***             -1.487***              -0.0863                -0.124               -0.0142
                                               (0.434)                           (0.446)              (0.445)               (0.326)               (0.338)               (0.338)              (0.250)               (0.250)               (0.250)
Second-Generation Immigrant                     0.362                            0.0595                0.102                 -0.148              -0.0816               -0.0552                0.602*                 0.180                0.195
                                               (0.538)                           (0.533)              (0.532)               (0.404)               (0.405)               (0.404)              (0.310)               (0.299)               (0.299)
Observations                                   23,276                            23,271               23,271                23,276                23,271                23,271                23,276               23,271                 23,271
R-squared                                       0.070                             0.089                0.095                  0.072                0.074                 0.079                 0.054                 0.123                0.125
Mean                                            16.89                             16.89                16.89                  9.317                9.316                 9.316                 6.386                 6.387                6.387
Education, Children, and Spouse Controls                                            X                    X                                           X                     X                                           X                    X
Wife's Market Work Controls                                                                              X                                                                 X                                                                X
Notes: Data are from waves 2003-2017 of the ATUS. The unit of observation is an ATUS respondent. The dependent variable is measured in hours per week. The sample includes those aged 18-64 who are married with a spouse aged 18-64 present in
the household. Observations that fall on public holidays, natives born abroad, and same sex couples are excluded. The sample does include individuals who work zero hours. All regressions include controls for the respondents' age, age squared, and a
set of race/ethnicity dummy variables, as well as fixed effects for state, survey day, survey month, and survey year. Education controls include dummies for a high school degree, some college, and a college degree or more. Children controls are
continuous variables for the number of children in the age ranges 0-5, 6-12, and 13-17. Spouse demographic controls are the spouses' age, age-squared, and a set of education and race dummy variables. Wife market work controls are the weekly number
of hours worked by the wife in the relationship, as well as a dummy variable indicating if the wife's hours vary. Regressions are weighted using ATUS sampling weights adjusted so that each year receives the same weight. Standard errors are in
parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).




                                                                                                                         58
Table 3: Effect of Source Country Characteristics on Non-Market Work for Female Immigrants
                                                             (1)                   (2)                   (3)                    (4)                   (5)                    (6)                   (7)                   (8)                   (9)
                                                         Total Non-            Total Non-            Total Non-
                                                                                                                           Housework             Housework             Housework               Childcare             Childcare             Childcare
                                                        Market Work           Market Work           Market Work
Panel A: All Women
Gender Gap Index (GGI)                      -48.56***                           -35.76***               -15.48*             -34.44***             -25.30***               -11.85*             -12.56***              -8.579**                 -2.899
                                              (12.43)                             (10.55)               (8.646)               (8.576)               (7.669)               (6.642)               (4.633)               (3.636)                (3.136)
GDP per Capita ($1,000s)                     0.256***                            0.182***              0.112**               0.174***              0.158***              0.112***              0.0783**               0.0132                -0.00629
                                             (0.0763)                            (0.0545)              (0.0467)              (0.0515)              (0.0385)              (0.0326)              (0.0367)              (0.0239)               (0.0231)
Fertility                                    1.908***                             1.334**              1.073**               1.725***              1.641***              1.468***                0.192                 -0.327                -0.400*
                                              (0.719)                             (0.592)               (0.490)               (0.637)               (0.539)               (0.442)               (0.296)               (0.212)                (0.223)
Observations                                   6,198                               6,192                 6,192                 6,198                 6,192                 6,192                 6,198                  6,192                  6,192
R-squared                                      0.082                               0.198                 0.306                 0.081                 0.125                 0.207                 0.160                  0.354                  0.381
Mean                                           33.55                               33.56                 33.56                 22.77                 22.77                 22.77                 8.720                  8.719                  8.719
Panel B: Women With at Least One Child Under 18
Gender Gap Index (GGI)                      -46.12***                           -43.94***              -18.91**             -37.12***             -31.94***              -17.25**                -8.165                -10.92*                -1.650
                                              (11.93)                             (10.81)               (9.300)               (10.41)               (9.372)               (8.645)               (6.653)                (6.002)               (5.542)
GDP per Capita ($1,000s)                     0.301***                            0.230***               0.115**              0.179***              0.167***               0.101**              0.0989**                 0.0333               -0.0102
                                             (0.0739)                            (0.0664)              (0.0542)              (0.0502)              (0.0457)              (0.0382)              (0.0466)               (0.0351)              (0.0343)
Fertility                                      1.368                               1.041                 0.717                1.457*                1.360*                1.179*                 -0.229                 -0.506               -0.635*
                                              (0.988)                             (0.841)               (0.743)               (0.845)               (0.741)               (0.661)               (0.461)                (0.351)               (0.359)
Observations                                   4,710                               4,704                 4,704                 4,710                 4,704                 4,704                  4,710                  4,704                 4,704
R-squared                                      0.087                               0.150                 0.274                 0.092                 0.126                 0.202                  0.157                  0.264                 0.309
Mean                                           38.35                               38.36                 38.36                 23.96                 23.97                 23.97                  12.51                  12.51                 12.51
Education, Children, and Spouse Controls                                             X                     X                                           X                     X                                             X                     X
Wife's Market Work Controls                                                                                X                                                                 X                                                                   X
Notes: Data are from waves 2003-2017 of the ATUS. The unit of observation is an ATUS respondent. The dependent variable is measured in hours per week. The sample includes female, immigrant respondents aged 18-64 who are married with a
spouse aged 18-64 present in the household. Observations that fall on public holidays and same sex couples are excluded. The sample does include individuals who work zero hours. All regressions include controls for the respondents' age, age
squared, race/ethnicity, years since migration, years since migration squared, and immigration cohort, as well as fixed effects for state, survey day, survey month, and survey year. Education controls are dummy variables for a high school degree, some
college, or any completed college degree. Children controls are continuous variables for the number of children in the age ranges 0-5, 6-12, and 13-17. Spouse demographic controls correspond to those used for the respondent, as well as indicators for
whether the spouse is a first- or second-generation immigrant. Wife market work controls are the weekly number of hours worked by the wife in the relationship, as well as a dummy variable indicating if the wife's hours vary. Regressions are weighted
using ATUS sampling weights adjusted so that each year receives the same weight. Robust standard errors clustered at the birthplace level are in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).




                                                                                                                           59
Table 4: Effect of Source Country Characteristics on Non-Market Work for Male Immigrants
                                                            (1)                   (2)                    (3)                    (4)                   (5)                   (6)                   (7)                   (8)                   (9)
                                                        Total Non-            Total Non-             Total Non-
                                                                                                                           Housework             Housework             Housework              Childcare             Childcare             Childcare
                                                       Market Work           Market Work            Market Work
Panel A: All Men
Gender Gap Index (GGI)                                    27.07***              26.10***              22.43***              21.26***              18.25***               15.08**                 4.334               6.385**                5.529*
                                                           (7.987)               (8.492)               (8.163)               (6.963)               (6.599)                (6.297)               (3.012)               (2.861)               (2.924)
GDP per Capita ($1,000s)                                   0.0132                -0.0228               -0.0160               -0.0253               -0.0423                -0.0367              0.0505*                0.0276                0.0290
                                                          (0.0470)              (0.0492)              (0.0491)              (0.0375)              (0.0384)               (0.0379)              (0.0297)              (0.0265)              (0.0265)
Fertility                                                   0.549                 0.241                 0.143                 0.202                 0.110                  0.0195               0.377*                 0.126                 0.100
                                                           (0.445)               (0.460)               (0.445)               (0.389)               (0.401)                (0.386)               (0.208)               (0.189)               (0.192)
Observations                                                5,461                 5,458                 5,458                 5,461                 5,458                  5,458                 5,461                 5,458                 5,458
R-squared                                                   0.071                 0.094                 0.102                 0.075                 0.082                  0.091                 0.072                 0.157                 0.159
Mean                                                        13.30                 13.30                 13.30                 7.848                 7.847                  7.847                 3.943                 3.945                 3.945
Panel B: Men With at Least One Child Under 18
Gender Gap Index (GGI)                        32.87***                          31.49***              26.79***              21.07***               19.58**               16.16**               12.57***              11.96***              10.67***
                                               (7.497)                           (8.544)               (8.557)               (7.141)                (7.513)               (7.469)               (3.934)               (3.744)               (3.931)
GDP per Capita ($1,000s)                        0.0286                          -0.00172              0.00948                -0.0147                -0.0308               -0.0224               0.0629                0.0462                0.0494
                                              (0.0619)                          (0.0661)              (0.0664)              (0.0389)               (0.0413)              (0.0426)              (0.0396)              (0.0355)              (0.0352)
Fertility                                      -0.0433                            -0.200                -0.311                -0.233                 -0.293                -0.384                0.384                 0.260                 0.223
                                               (0.468)                           (0.503)               (0.488)               (0.376)                (0.415)               (0.404)               (0.286)               (0.257)               (0.262)
Observations                                    4,127                              4,125                 4,125                 4,127                  4,125                 4,125                4,127                 4,125                 4,125
R-squared                                       0.083                              0.098                 0.107                 0.083                  0.089                 0.098                0.080                 0.127                 0.129
Mean                                            14.50                              14.50                 14.50                 7.513                  7.509                 7.509                5.629                 5.634                 5.634
Education, Children, and Spouse Controls                                             X                     X                                            X                     X                                          X                     X
Wife's Market Work Controls                                                                                X                                                                  X                                                                X
Notes: Data are from waves 2003-2017 of the ATUS. The unit of observation is an ATUS respondent. The dependent variable is measured in hours per week. The sample includes male, immigrant respondents aged 18-64 who are married with a spouse
aged 18-64 present in the household. Observations that fall on public holidays and same sex couples are excluded. The sample does include individuals who work zero hours. All regressions include controls for the respondents' age, age squared,
race/ethnicity, years since migration, years since migration squared, and immigration cohort, as well as fixed effects for state, survey day, survey month, and survey year. Education controls are dummy variables for a high school degree, some college,
or any completed college degree. Children controls are continuous variables for the number of children in the age ranges 0-5, 6-12, and 13-17. Spouse demographic controls correspond to those used for the respondent, as well as indicators for whether
the spouse is a first- or second-generation immigrant. Wife market work controls are the weekly number of hours worked by the wife in the relationship, as well as a dummy variable indicating if the wife's hours vary. Regressions are weighted using
ATUS sampling weights adjusted so that each year receives the same weight. Robust standard errors clustered at the birthplace level are in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).




                                                                                                                           60
Table 5: Effect of an Increase in GGI from India's to Canada's Value on the Gender Gap in Non-Market Work for Immigrants
I. Mean Values
                               Panel A. All Immigrants                                                  Panel B. Immigrants with at Least One Child Under 18
                             Women            Men               W-M                                                 Women           Men          W-M
Total                        33.56           13.30              20.25                         Total                 38.36           14.50        23.86
Housework                    22.77            7.85              14.93                         Housework             23.97           7.51         16.46
Childcare                     8.72            3.95              4.77                          Childcare             12.51           5.63          6.88

II. Effect of a 0.12 change in GGI (India to Canada)
                           Panel A. All Immigrants                                                          Panel B. Immigrants with at Least One Child Under 18
                                                                                (W-M) /                                                                                       (W-M) /
                             Women              Men              W-M                                                       Women               Men             W-M
                                                                               Mean Gap                                                                                      Mean Gap
Total                      -4.292***         3.132***         -7.424***        -0.367***      Total                       -5.273***         3.779***        -9.052***        -0.379***
                             (1.266)          (1.019)           (1.625)          (0.080)                                    (1.297)          (1.025)          (1.654)          (0.069)
Housework                  -3.036***         2.190***         -5.226***        -0.350***      Housework                   -3.833***         2.349**         -6.182***        -0.375***
                             (0.920)          (0.792)           (1.214)          (0.081)                                    (1.125)          (0.902)          (1.441)          (0.088)
Childcare                   -1.029**         0.766**          -1.796***        -0.376***      Childcare                    -1.310*          1.435***        -2.745***        -0.399***
                             (0.436)          (0.343)           (0.555)          (0.116)                                    (0.720)          (0.449)          (0.849)          (0.123)
Notes: Effects are based on the models in Tables 3 and 4 corresponding to Columns 2, 5, and 8 for total non-market work, housework, and child care, respectively. Appropriately adjusted
standard errors are in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).




                                                                                            61
Table 6: Combined Effect of Own and Partner GGI on Non-Market Work for Immigrants with Immigrant Partners
                                          (1)              (2)                (3)                (4)                                                                (5)                       (6)
                                   Total Non-Market                                       Total Non-Market
                                                        Housework         Childcare                                                                           Housework                   Childcare
                                         Work                                                   Work
                                                                         Panel A. All Women                                                                Panel B. All Men
Own GGI                                              -51.38***            -37.14**                -5.164                               16.76                7.875                9.583
                                                       (18.39)             (17.83)               (10.13)                              (22.09)             (9.873)              (13.83)
Partner GGI                                             9.780               9.315                 -6.466                               6.324                7.388               -4.347
                                                       (18.34)             (14.49)               (11.58)                              (20.97)             (9.209)              (14.94)
Sum of Own and Partner GGI                          -41.598***           -27.821***            -11.630**                             23.087**            15.263**                5.235
                                                      (12.127)             (8.199)               (5.110)                             (10.157)             (7.246)              (3.398)
Observations                                            4,738               4,738                  4,738                               4,305                4,305                4,305
R-squared                                               0.199               0.128                  0.347                               0.101                0.085                0.173
Mean                                                    34.63               23.74                  8.792                               13.06                7.550                3.866
                                                       Panel C. Women With at Least One Child Under 18                                 Panel D. Men With at Least One Child Under 18
Own GGI                                              -65.73**                    -47.56                     -14.12                     50.14                      26.52                      15.34
                                                       (25.79)                  (29.08)                    (14.99)                   (34.19)                    (17.88)                    (23.94)
Partner GGI                                             17.72                     13.38                      1.752                    -14.95                     -2.824                     -3.941
                                                       (26.69)                  (25.04)                    (16.31)                   (33.48)                    (16.31)                    (24.75)
Sum of Own and Partner GGI                          -48.007***                -34.181***                   -12.366                  35.188***                  23.698***                  11.403***
                                                      (12.939)                  (9.241)                    (8.164)                   (9.523)                    (8.436)                    (3.885)
Observations                                            3,657                     3,657                      3,657                     3,320                      3,320                      3,320
R-squared                                               0.166                     0.129                      0.274                     0.112                      0.095                      0.160
Mean                                                    38.67                     24.68                      12.11                     14.18                      7.410                      5.325
Notes: Data are from waves 2003-2017 of the ATUS. The unit of observation is an ATUS respondent. The dependent variable is measured in hours per week. The sample includes immigrant respondents
aged 18-64 who are married to an immigrant spouse aged 18-64 present in the household. Observations that fall on public holidays and same sex couples are excluded. The sample does include individuals
who work zero hours. All regressions include controls for the respondents' age, age squared, education, race/ethnicity, years since migration, years since migration squared, and immigration cohort, as well
as fixed effects for state, survey day, survey month, and survey year. Regressions also control for the number of children in the age ranges 0-5, 6-12, and 13-17, as well as for spouse demographic controls
corresponding to those used for the respondent. These are the controls corresponding to Columns 2, 5, and 8 of Tables 3 and 4. Regressions are weighted using ATUS sampling weights adjusted so that
each year receives the same weight. Robust standard errors clustered at the birthplace level are in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).




                                                                                                    62
Table 7: Effect of Source Country Characteristics for Second-Generation Immigrants
                                                       (1)                          (2)                        (3)                      (4)                          (5)                       (6)
                                                Total Non-Market                                                                 Total Non-Market
                                                                               Housework                   Childcare                                           Housework                   Childcare
                                                      Work                                                                             Work
                                                                    Panel A. All Women                                                                 Panel B. All Men
Parent Gender Gap Index (GGI)                           -14.38              -10.07               -3.325                                 -1.274                -7.371              9.711*
                                                       (13.60)             (7.615)              (6.378)                                (9.402)               (8.760)             (5.157)
Parent GDP per Capita ($1,000s)                        0.0402              0.0400               -0.0296                               0.139***             0.117***             -0.00966
                                                      (0.0580)            (0.0488)             (0.0238)                               (0.0453)              (0.0361)            (0.0210)
Parent Source Country Fertility                         -1.136              -0.922               -0.613                                  0.899                 0.543              0.375
                                                       (1.181)             (0.905)              (0.489)                                (0.728)               (0.597)             (0.417)
Observations                                             1,985               1,985                1,985                                  1,706                 1,706              1,706
R-squared                                                0.215               0.145                0.417                                  0.173                 0.145              0.324
Mean                                                     28.59               17.66                8.628                                  15.86                 10.34              4.021
                                                       Panel C: Women With at Least One Child Under 18                                   Panel D: Men With at Least One Child Under 18
Parent Gender Gap Index (GGI)                           -18.79              -7.059               -9.528                               34.14***                 12.39              19.28*
                                                       (11.69)             (6.219)              (8.402)                                (11.16)               (9.225)             (9.975)
Parent GDP per Capita ($1,000s)                        0.0313              0.0393               -0.0299                                0.0584                0.0699              -0.0118
                                                      (0.0498)            (0.0366)             (0.0363)                               (0.0516)              (0.0432)            (0.0371)
Parent Source Country Fertility                         -1.196              -0.580              -1.232*                               1.952**               1.596**               0.810
                                                       (1.160)             (0.827)              (0.664)                                (0.797)               (0.707)             (0.759)
Observations                                             1,462               1,462                1,462                                  1,175                 1,175              1,175
R-squared                                                0.193               0.158                0.300                                  0.226                 0.197              0.258
Mean                                                     33.31               17.91                13.62                                  17.39                 9.469              6.825
Notes: Data are from waves 2003-2017 of the ATUS. The unit of observation is an ATUS respondent. The dependent variable is measured in hours per week. The sample includes second-generation
immigrant respondents aged 18-64 who are married with a spouse aged 18-64 present in the household. Observations that fall on public holidays and same sex couples are excluded. The sample does
include individuals who work zero hours. Parent source country characteristics correspond to those of the mother if available and if she is an immigrant, and otherwise correspond to those of the father. All
regressions include controls for the respondents' age, age squared, education, and race/ethnicity, as well as fixed effects for state, survey day, survey month, and survey year. All regressions also include
children controls, which are continuous variables for the number of children in the age ranges 0-5, 6-12, and 13-17, as well as spouse demographic controls, which correspond to those used for the
respondent in addition to indicators for whether the spouse is a first- or second-generation immigrant and years since migration, years since migration squared, and immigration cohort. Regressions are
weighted using ATUS sampling weights adjusted so that each year receives the same weight. Robust standard errors clustered at the parent's birthplace level are in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1).




                                                                                                     63
Table 8: Effect of Wife Earning More Than Husband on Total Non-Market Work for Women
Panel A: All Women                                      (1)                (2)                                                      (3)
Wife Earns More                                     1.939***
                                                     (0.546)
Observations                                          27,069
R-squared                                              0.279
Mean                                                   29.60
Panel B: Native Women
Wife Earns More                                      1.528**
                                                     (0.606)
Observations                                          20,665
R-squared                                              0.261
Mean                                                   28.66
Panel C: Immigrant Women
Wife Earns More                                     4.533***           4.492***                                                    -3.137
                                                     (1.367)            (1.469)                                                   (10.39)
GGI                                                                      -12.42                                                    -15.52
                                                                        (9.925)                                                   (11.56)
Wife Earns More x GGI                                                                                                               11.48
                                                                                                                                  (15.66)
Observations                                                               4,739                       4,438                        4,438
R-squared                                                                  0.324                       0.326                        0.326
Mean                                                                       33.56                       34.00                        34.00
Panel D: Second-Generation Women
Wife Earns More                                                            0.947                        1.709                      -21.75
                                                                          (2.345)                     (3.220)                     (15.18)
Parent Source Country GGI                                                                              -1.612                      -12.61
                                                                                                      (10.22)                     (13.55)
Wife Earns More x Parent GGI                                                                                                        34.54
                                                                                                                                  (23.67)
Observations                                                               1,665                       1,420                        1,420
R-squared                                                                  0.368                       0.381                        0.382
Mean                                                                       30.02                       30.19                        30.19
Notes: Data are from waves 2003-2017 of the ATUS. The unit of observation is an ATUS respondent. The dependent variable is measured in
hours per week. The sample includes female respondents aged 18-64 who are married with a spouse aged 18-64 present in the household.
Observations that fall on public holidays and same sex couples are excluded. The sample does include individuals who work zero hours. All
regressions include controls for the wife's relative income, a cubic in the respondent's log earnings, a cubic in the spouse's log earnings, the log
of total family earnings, the respondents' age, age squared, education, and race/ethnicity, and fixed effects for state, survey day, survey month,
and survey year. Regressions also control for the number of children in the age ranges 0-5, 6-12, and 13-17, as well as for spouse demographic
controls corresponding to those used for the respondent. In Panel C, regressions control for immigration-relevant controls for both the respondent
and the spouse: years since migration, years since migration squared, and immigration cohort. Regressions in Panel C also include indicators for
whether the spouse is a first- or second-generation immigrant. In Panel D, regressions include the immigrant-relevant controls for the spouse, as
well as parent source country GDP per capita and fertility. Parent source country characteristics used in Panel D correspond to those of the
mother if available and if she is an immigrant, and otherwise correspond to those of the father. Robust standard errors are in parentheses (***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Standard errors are clustered at the birthplace level in Panel C and are clustered at the parent's birthplace level in
Panel D.




                                                                        64
Table 9: Effect of Wife Earning More Than Husband on Total Non-Market Work for Men
Panel A: All Men                                       (1)                (2)                                                       (3)
Wife Earns More                                       0.103
                                                     (0.524)
Observations                                         25,043
R-squared                                             0.134
Mean                                                  18.19
Panel B: Native Men
Wife Earns More                                       0.225
                                                     (0.593)
Observations                                         19,350
R-squared                                             0.134
Mean                                                  18.72
Panel C: Immigrant Men
Wife Earns More                                       0.654            -0.0739                                                  -30.67***
                                                     (1.695)            (1.493)                                                   (11.40)
GGI                                                                    17.97**                                                     6.489
                                                                        (8.260)                                                   (8.741)
Wife Earns More x GGI                                                                                                            45.74***
                                                                                                                                  (16.88)
Observations                                                               4,278                       3,995                       3,995
R-squared                                                                  0.171                       0.180                       0.181
Mean                                                                       15.41                       15.43                       15.43
Panel D: Second-Generation Men
Wife Earns More                                                            -2.485                    -4.699**                       10.14
                                                                          (2.279)                     (1.911)                     (14.57)
Parent Source Country GGI                                                                              -15.97                      -10.19
                                                                                                      (9.877)                     (11.92)
Wife Earns More x Parent GGI                                                                                                       -21.77
                                                                                                                                  (23.33)
Observations                                                               1,415                       1,199                        1,199
R-squared                                                                  0.192                       0.233                        0.233
Mean                                                                       19.27                       19.18                        19.18
Notes: Data are from waves 2003-2017 of the ATUS. The unit of observation is an ATUS respondent. The dependent variable is measured in
hours per week. The sample includes male respondents aged 18-64 who are married with a spouse aged 18-64 present in the household.
Observations that fall on public holidays and same sex couples are excluded. The sample does include individuals who work zero hours. All
regressions include controls for the wife's relative income, a cubic in the respondent's log earnings, a cubic in the spouse's log earnings, the log
of total family earnings, the respondents' age, age squared, education, and race/ethnicity, and fixed effects for state, survey day, survey month,
and survey year. Regressions also control for the number of children in the age ranges 0-5, 6-12, and 13-17, as well as for spouse demographic
controls corresponding to those used for the respondent. In Panel C, regressions control for immigration-relevant controls for both the respondent
and the spouse: years since migration, years since migration squared, and immigration cohort. Regressions in Panel C also include indicators for
whether the spouse is a first- or second-generation immigrant. In Panel D, regressions include the immigrant-relevant controls for the spouse, as
well as parent source country GDP per capita and fertility. Parent source country characteristics used in Panel D correspond to those of the
mother if available and if she is an immigrant, and otherwise correspond to those of the father. Robust standard errors are in parentheses (***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Standard errors are clustered at the birthplace level in Panel C and are clustered at the parent's birthplace level in
Panel D.




                                                                        65
Table A1: Effect of Years Since Migration (YSM) on Non-Market Work for Immigrant Couples Migrating Together
                      Panel A. All Women                                          Panel B. All Men

              Total Non-Market                                                                  Total Non-Market
   YSM              Work                 Housework               Childcare           YSM              Work                 Housework               Childcare

     10          -2.704           -2.045            -0.476                             10        -0.357            -0.451            0.553
                (1.860)          (1.376)           (0.717)                                      (0.925)           (0.737)           (0.663)
    20           -4.421           -3.602            -0.848                            20         -1.158            -1.273            0.936
                (3.133)          (2.280)           (1.246)                                      (1.486)           (1.175)           (1.247)
    30           -5.150           -4.671            -1.114                            30         -2.404            -2.465            1.149
                (3.993)          (2.882)           (1.652)                                      (2.064)           (1.501)           (1.812)
       Panel C. Women With at Least One Child Under 18                                   Panel D. Men With at Least One Child Under 18
          Total Non-Market                                                                Total Non-Market
   YSM            Work         Housework          Childcare                          YSM          Work          Housework          Childcare

     10               -2.866                -2.367*                -0.584              10               -0.886                 -0.118                 0.052
                     (1.949)                (1.202)               (0.986)                              (1.215)                (1.013)                (0.981)
     20             -6.536*                -5.243**                -1.412              20               -2.231                 -0.919                 0.243
                     (3.331)                (2.115)               (1.642)                              (2.031)                (1.566)                (1.876)
     30            -11.010**              -8.630***                -2.484              30               -4.034                 -2.404                 0.574
                     (4.420)                (2.989)               (2.126)                              (2.963)                (1.840)                (2.837)
Notes: Effects are based on the models in Tables 3 and 4 corresponding to Columns 2, 5, and 8 for total non-market work, housework, and child care, respectively.
Coefficients are linear combinations of the relevant respondent and spouse years since migration and years since migration squared coefficients. Appropriately
computed standard errors are in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).




                                                                                66
Table A2: Effect of Source Country Characteristics on Non-Market Work for Immigrants, GGI Subindexes
                                                    (1)               (2)                (3)             (4)                (5)                 (6)
                                          Total Non-Market                                      Total Non-Market
                                                                Housework            Childcare                         Housework            Childcare
                                                   Work                                                 Work
                                                            Panel A: All Women                                      Panel B: All Men
Index of Political Equality                        5.882            5.045               1.067           0.405              1.434              -1.340
                                                 (4.754)           (3.734)            (2.404)         (4.226)            (3.514)             (1.684)
Index of Health Equality                           44.18          62.72***             -19.24           48.22           61.72***              -19.16
                                                 (30.50)           (21.38)            (18.32)         (29.45)            (23.14)             (12.06)
Index of Economic Participation Equality          -8.173          -8.856**              1.194        8.294**               3.454            5.507***
                                                 (4.928)           (3.903)            (2.000)         (3.447)            (2.670)             (1.811)
Index of Education Equality                   -35.96***          -20.80***          -14.37***           7.962              9.428              -5.097
                                                 (7.396)           (5.975)            (4.514)         (7.673)            (5.778)             (3.607)
GDP per Capita ($1,000s)                        0.149**           0.117***            0.0223          -0.0225            -0.0544             0.0435*
                                                (0.0573)          (0.0416)           (0.0249)        (0.0510)           (0.0404)            (0.0260)
Fertility                                         0.0615            0.651            -0.589**           0.363              0.169               0.121
                                                 (0.621)           (0.533)            (0.276)         (0.495)            (0.428)             (0.184)
Observations                                       6,192            6,192               6,192           5,458              5,458               5,458
R-squared                                          0.201            0.128               0.355           0.095              0.083               0.159
Mean                                               33.56            22.77               8.719           13.30              7.847               3.945
                                              Panel C: Women With at Least One Child Under 18         Panel D: Men With at Least One Child Under 18
Index of Political Equality                        3.527            1.792               1.579          -0.982              0.263             -0.0750
                                                 (6.658)           (4.896)            (3.796)         (4.943)            (3.654)             (2.489)
Index of Health Equality                           29.91           74.51**             -29.75           17.33             45.04*             -30.50*
                                                 (48.92)           (28.76)            (33.51)         (34.29)            (26.06)             (17.12)
Index of Economic Participation Equality          -9.408          -11.22**              3.096       13.34***              5.542*            7.740***
                                                 (6.176)           (4.878)            (2.965)         (3.891)            (2.812)             (2.419)
Index of Education Equality                   -36.41***           -18.50**          -21.28***           2.691              6.830              -5.535
                                                 (11.73)           (8.749)            (7.249)         (8.245)            (5.897)             (5.422)
GDP per Capita ($1,000s)                       0.213***            0.129**            0.0542           0.0130            -0.0367             0.0669*
                                                (0.0722)          (0.0489)           (0.0372)        (0.0636)           (0.0411)            (0.0351)
Fertility                                        -0.0920            0.487            -0.884**         -0.0890             -0.227               0.242
                                                 (1.013)           (0.806)            (0.431)         (0.537)            (0.466)             (0.254)
Observations                                       4,704            4,704               4,704           4,125              4,125               4,125
R-squared                                          0.152            0.128               0.266           0.099              0.090               0.128
Mean                                               38.36            23.97               12.51           14.50              7.509               5.634
Notes: Data are from waves 2003-2017 of the ATUS. The unit of observation is an ATUS respondent. The dependent variable is measured in hours per week. The sample includes immigrant respondents
aged 18-64 who are married with a spouse aged 18-64 present in the household. Observations that fall on public holidays and same sex couples are excluded. The sample does include individuals who
work zero hours. All regressions include controls for the respondents' age, age squared, education, race/ethnicity, years since migration, years since migration squared, and immigration cohort, as well as
fixed effects for state, survey day, survey month, and survey year. Regressions also control for the number of children in the age ranges 0-5, 6-12, and 13-17, as well as for spouse demographic controls
corresponding to those used for the respondent and indicators for whether the spouse is a first- or second-generation immigrant. Regressions are weighted using ATUS sampling weights adjusted so that
each year receives the same weight. Robust standard errors clustered at the birthplace level are in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).




                                                                                                    67
Table A3: Effect of Wife Earning More Than Husband on Total Non-Market Work for Women, Dropping
Relative Earnings from 0.489 to 0.50
Panel A: All Women                                      (1)                (2)               (3)
Wife Earns More                                     1.884***
                                                     (0.585)
Observations                                         26,314
R-squared                                              0.278
Mean                                                   29.78
Panel B: Native Women
Wife Earns More                                     1.541**
                                                     (0.647)
Observations                                         20,103
R-squared                                              0.261
Mean                                                   28.81
Panel C: Immigrant Women
Wife Earns More                                     4.617***           4.512**             -2.483
                                                     (1.650)            (1.780)           (10.90)
GGI                                                                      -11.48            -14.43
                                                                        (10.32)           (12.17)
Wife Earns More x GGI                                                                       10.54
                                                                                          (16.31)
Observations                                           4,602              4,315             4,315
R-squared                                              0.322              0.323             0.323
Mean                                                   33.82              34.28             34.28
Panel D: Second-Generation Women
Wife Earns More                                       -0.436              0.321            -23.44
                                                     (2.768)            (3.749)           (15.72)
Parent Source Country GGI                                                -1.310            -12.85
                                                                        (10.65)           (14.02)
Wife Earns More x Parent GGI                                                                34.95
                                                                                          (24.79)
Observations                                           1,609              1,372             1,372
R-squared                                              0.370              0.382             0.383
Mean                                                   30.33              30.47             30.47
Notes: Data are from waves 2003-2017 of the ATUS. The unit of observation is an ATUS respondent. The dependent variable is measured in
hours per week. The sample includes female respondents aged 18-64 who are married with a spouse aged 18-64 present in the household.
Observations that fall on public holidays and same sex couples are excluded. The sample does include individuals who work zero hours. All
regressions include controls for the wife's relative income, a cubic in the respondent's log earnings, a cubic in the spouse's log earnings, the log
of total family earnings, the respondents' age, age squared, education, and race/ethnicity, and fixed effects for state, survey day, survey month,
and survey year. Regressions also control for the number of children in the age ranges 0-5, 6-12, and 13-17, as well as for spouse demographic
controls corresponding to those used for the respondent. In Panel C, regressions control for immigration-relevant controls for both the respondent
and the spouse: years since migration, years since migration squared, and immigration cohort. Regressions in Panel C also include indicators for
whether the spouse is a first- or second-generation immigrant. In Panel D, regressions include the immigrant-relevant controls for the spouse, as
well as parent source country GDP per capita and fertility. Parent source country characteristics used in Panel D correspond to those of the
mother if available and if she is an immigrant, and otherwise correspond to those of the father. Robust standard errors are in parentheses (***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Standard errors are clustered at the birthplace level in Panel C and are clustered at the parent's birthplace level in
Panel D.




                                                                        68
Table A4: Effect of Wife Earning More Than Husband on Total Non-Market Work for Men, Dropping Relative
Earnings from 0.489 to 0.50
Panel A: All Men                                       (1)                  (2)               (3)
Wife Earns More                                       0.149
                                                    (0.546)
Observations                                        24,346
R-squared                                             0.135
Mean                                                  18.20
Panel B: Native Men
Wife Earns More                                       0.383
                                                    (0.614)
Observations                                        18,817
R-squared                                             0.135
Mean                                                  18.72
Panel C: Immigrant Men
Wife Earns More                                       0.608               -0.104         -30.70***
                                                    (1.939)              (1.790)           (11.60)
GGI                                                                     18.28**              6.438
                                                                         (8.331)           (8.958)
Wife Earns More x GGI                                                                     45.73***
                                                                                           (17.10)
Observations                                          4,161                3,888             3,888
R-squared                                             0.174                0.184             0.185
Mean                                                  15.43                15.44             15.44
Panel D: Second-Generation Men
Wife Earns More                                      -3.848            -6.324***             8.092
                                                    (2.675)              (2.360)           (14.62)
Parent Source Country GGI                                                 -16.11            -10.21
                                                                         (10.18)           (12.56)
Wife Earns More x Parent GGI                                                                -21.16
                                                                                           (23.93)
Observations                                          1,368                1,157             1,157
R-squared                                             0.194                0.240             0.240
Mean                                                  19.45                19.38             19.38
Notes: Data are from waves 2003-2017 of the ATUS. The unit of observation is an ATUS respondent. The dependent variable is measured in
hours per week. The sample includes male respondents aged 18-64 who are married with a spouse aged 18-64 present in the household.
Observations that fall on public holidays and same sex couples are excluded. The sample does include individuals who work zero hours. All
regressions include controls for the wife's relative income, a cubic in the respondent's log earnings, a cubic in the spouse's log earnings, the log
of total family earnings, the respondents' age, age squared, education, and race/ethnicity, and fixed effects for state, survey day, survey month,
and survey year. Regressions also control for the number of children in the age ranges 0-5, 6-12, and 13-17, as well as for spouse demographic
controls corresponding to those used for the respondent. In Panel C, regressions control for immigration-relevant controls for both the respondent
and the spouse: years since migration, years since migration squared, and immigration cohort. Regressions in Panel C also include indicators for
whether the spouse is a first- or second-generation immigrant. In Panel D, regressions include the immigrant-relevant controls for the spouse, as
well as parent source country GDP per capita and fertility. Parent source country characteristics used in Panel D correspond to those of the
mother if available and if she is an immigrant, and otherwise correspond to those of the father. Robust standard errors are in parentheses (***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Standard errors are clustered at the birthplace level in Panel C and are clustered at the parent's birthplace level in
Panel D.




                                                                        69
