                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          DECOMPOSING THE FISCAL MULTIPLIER

                                           James S. Cloyne
                                             Òscar Jordà
                                            Alan M. Taylor

                                        Working Paper 26939
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26939


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2020




We thank Helen Irvin and Chitra Marti for excellent research assistance. We are also grateful to Alan
Auerbach, Olivier Blanchard, Roger Farmer, Emi Nakamura, Gernot Mueller and participants at the
NBER Summer Institute 2020 and the Econometric Society World Congress 2020 for very helpful
comments and suggestions. The views expressed in this paper are the sole responsibility of the authors
and to not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26939.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by James S. Cloyne, Òscar Jordà, and Alan M. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Decomposing the Fiscal Multiplier
James S. Cloyne, Òscar Jordà, and Alan M. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 26939
April 2020, Revised in September 2020
JEL No. C54,C99,E32,E62,H20,H5,N10

                                           ABSTRACT

The fiscal "multiplier" measures how many additional dollars of output are gained or lost for each
dollar of fiscal stimulus or contraction. In practice, the multiplier at any point in time depends on
the monetary policy response and existing conditions in the economy. Using the IMF fiscal
consolidations dataset for identification and a new decomposition-based approach, we show how
to quantify the importance of these monetary-fiscal interactions. In the data, the fiscal multiplier
varies considerably with monetary policy: it can be zero, or as large as 2 depending on the
monetary offset. More generally, we show how to decompose the typical macro impulse response
function by extending local projections to carry out the well-known Blinder-Oaxaca
decomposition. This provides a convenient way to evaluate the effects of policy, state-
dependence, and balance conditions for identification.

James S. Cloyne                                   Alan M. Taylor
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics and
University of California, Davis                   Graduate School of Management
One Shields Avenue                                University of California
Davis, CA 95616                                   One Shields Ave
and CEPR                                          Davis, CA 95616-8578
and also NBER                                     and CEPR
jcloyne@ucdavis.edu                               and also NBER
                                                  amtaylor@ucdavis.edu
Òscar Jordà
Economic Research, MS 1130
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
San Francisco, CA 94105
and University of California, Davis
oscar.jorda@gmail.com
                                       1.    Introduction

What is the fiscal multiplier? In principle the definition is clear: The multiplier tells us how many
extra dollars of additional economic output are gained or lost by changing government expenditure
or taxation (or a mix of the two) by one dollar. Given the turbulent economic events of the last
decade or so--and those now underway--there continues to be much interest in empirical estimates
of this object. However, there is no such thing as the fiscal multiplier. One of the most obvious
reasons is that monetary policy may not offset the effects of fiscal policy in the same way across
states of the world, countries, or time.
   This insight, of course, exists in many macroeconomic theories and has been noted in policy
debate. The fiscal multiplier in the data is not necessarily, for example, the same object as the
Keynesian multiplier found in many undergraduate textbooks. That concept, which follows from
the Keynesian Cross, usually assumes unchanged interest rates. Recent theoretical work on the Zero
Lower Bound (ZLB) on interest rates notes that when monetary policy is unable or unwilling to
offset the effects of a fiscal stimulus, fiscal multipliers can be considerably larger.1 And, more
generally, several papers using New Keynesian models note that the fiscal multiplier is sensitive to
the degree of monetary accommodation, a theoretical result that is part of our main motivation.2 To
date, however, there is relatively little evidence quantifying the importance of the "monetary offset"
empirically. As a result, much policy advice has been given using multiplier estimates that are likely
to depend on the particular average response of monetary policy in the past.
   In this paper we introduce a new empirical approach for examining this interaction of monetary
and fiscal policy. Our goal is to answer a question that has remained unresolved in the literature up
to now: Does the fiscal multiplier in the data depend on the behavior of monetary policy? And,
if so, by how much? In trying to answer these questions, we introduce a new way to deconstruct
impulse responses. We first show that the local projection (LP) approach in Jord`
                                                                                a (2005) can be
easily extended to carry out the well-known Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition (Blinder, 1973; Oaxaca,
1973). This decomposition is standard in applied microeconomics (Fortin, Lemieux, and Firpo, 2011),
but has not found equivalent acceptance in applied macroeconomics. We argue that it should.
   The Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition of an impulse response function allows us to evaluate three
separate effects following an exogenous change in fiscal policy: First, the direct effect of a fiscal
intervention on outcomes, such as GDP. This effect embeds the typical response of monetary policy
(and of other controls) in the sample. Second and most important for our purpose, the indirect
effect. Policy interventions can themselves modify how other variables influence the outcomes. This
motivates a very natural way to think about monetary-fiscal interactions: fiscal treatment may be
less effective if there is a monetary offset. Third, the composition effect. This allows us to quantify,
in an easily expressible manner, any bias due to imperfect identification. If fiscal interventions are
  1 See, e.g., Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011); Eggertsson(2011)
  2 For example, see Woodford (2011) for an analysis of this point  in the standard closed economy New
Keynesian model and Leeper, Traum, and Walker (2017) in the context of a larger medium-scale DSGE model.


                                                    1
truly exogenous, the average value of the controls should be the same whether or not there is an
exogenous fiscal intervention. In small samples, this will not be exactly true even in the ideal case,
let alone when identification fails.
   State-dependent impulse response applications are numerous (as we will discuss in more
detail momentarily). How is our analysis any different? What is gained from the Blinder-Oaxaca
decomposition? We argue that one cannot understand when are state-dependent impulse responses
correctly estimated without our conceptual framework. In particular, we highlight two features
that have been largely neglected in the literature so far. First, one requires further identification
assumptions to capture exogenous variation in the states themselves. Without it, state dependent
impulse responses cannot be causally interpreted. Second, the states themselves depend, in principle,
on the values of all other covariates in the conditional mean and not just the state variable. Thus,
separate from the state variable, and in addition to it, conditions in the economy at the time of the
intervention will determine the actual response experienced. Even if the state-dependent impulse
response is correctly characterized, the actual response experienced will depend on prevailing
factors at the time of intervention. Thus, our decomposition makes clear and measurable what are
the sources of heterogeneity.
   This paper therefore makes three main contributions. First, using our approach, we show that
fiscal multipliers are around or below 1 on average, but there is a sizable degree of heterogeneity.
Second, on the latter point, following a fiscal contraction, when the degree of monetary accommo-
dation is limited, fiscal multipliers can become large. In our policy experiments, fiscal multipliers
can be as low as zero, or as high as 2 depending on the monetary policy configuration. The latter
is similar to the original multiplier of 2.5 posited by Keynes (1936). This result also has wider
theoretical implications as an interaction effect is only present in models with nominal rigidities and
where fiscal policy, at least partly, affects GDP through aggregate demand. Third, we show how to
introduce decomposition methods in macroeconomics more generally. Our decomposition approach
turns out to be straightforward to implement and allows for a great deal of unspecified heterogeneity.
We show that a number of other state variables, such as the change in the fiscal deficit and the size
of the fiscal consolidation, do not materially affect the size of the fiscal multiplier. However, like
other papers in the literature, we confirm that fiscal multipliers are larger in slumps (cyclically-low
output states). Our approach will hopefully have practical implications for all researchers interested
in estimating the non-linear, state-dependent, or time-varying effects of policy interventions using
straightforward linear estimators.
   Although the new decomposition methods introduced here are an important refinement, in
principle they have some important limitations. As Fortin, Lemieux, and Firpo (2011) have noted, the
Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition itself follows a partial equilibrium type of approach. In particular, it is
not necessarily correct to infer how much more or less effective a policy would be if, say, GDP growth
were negative versus positive. The decomposition measures differences in fiscal policy effectiveness
by averaging across alternative historical episodes whose make-up it takes as given. The chosen
dimension of heterogeneity is, however, likely to be correlated with many other macroeconomic

                                                   2
outcomes. This insight, which clearly follows from the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition, illustrates the
issue facing almost all papers in the existing state-dependence literature. Understanding the state
dependent nature of policy interventions in a causal sense requires further identifying assumptions.
   To take the next step and address this issue, we will use cross-country panel data and exploit the
fact that different countries may have different monetary regimes with respect to accommodation.
This heterogeneity makes interest rates differentially sensitive to fiscal policy on average and
generates cross-sectional variation that is useful for identification. This differential sensitivity allows
us to construct a proxy for the monetary regime that we can vary to undertake policy experiments.3
Using this feature of the data, we show that fiscal interventions have very different effects on GDP
depending on whether the intervention occurs in a more or less accommodative monetary regime.4
Exploiting the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition, we can then quantify how the fiscal multiplier varies
with the degree of monetary accommodation.
   Naturally, this paper is related to a sizable literature on the empirical fiscal multiplier. For
example, Blanchard and Perotti (2002) and Mountford and Uhlig (2009) identify the effect of fiscal
policy by imposing restrictions in a vector autoregression (VAR) framework. Numerous applications
have followed these VAR-based approaches. Romer and Romer (2010) pioneered a "narrative"
approach which uses historical information to isolate episodes of exogenous fiscal policy changes
unrelated to current economic conditions. These methods are essentially looking for historical
natural experiments. A number of papers have applied or refined this method including Barro and
Redlick (2011), Cloyne (2013), Mertens and Ravn (2013), Guajardo, Leigh, and Pescatori (2014), Hayo
and Uhl (2014), Cloyne and Surico (2017), Gunter, Riera-Crichton, V´
                                                                   egh, and Vuletin (2018), Nguyen,
Onnis, and Rossi (2020), Hussain and Lin (2018), Cloyne, Dimsdale, and Postel-Vinay (2018).
   Following the narrative tradition, we will use an influential and established study from the IMF
which identifies periods of exogenous fiscal treatment. This study by Guajardo, Leigh, and Pescatori
(2014) employs the Romer and Romer (2010) definition of an exogenous fiscal consolidation to
identify exogenous episodes across 17 OECD countries from 1978 to 2009. There are a few key
reasons for using the Guajardo, Leigh, and Pescatori (2014) dataset. First, our contribution is not a
new identification of fiscal shocks. Rather, we take the existing Guajardo, Leigh, and Pescatori (2014)
consolidation episodes off the shelf, and then show how the fiscal multiplier varies with monetary
policy. Second, as noted above, the cross-country nature of the data allows us to exploit the panel
nature of the dataset for identification of the monetary offset. Third, studying non-linear effects and
state-dependence naturally asks more of the data and larger sample sizes are preferable.
   In considering how the effect of a fiscal intervention varies with monetary policy, we also relate
to a growing literature on the state-dependent effects of policy changes. For example, a number
of papers have examined whether the impact of fiscal policy could vary depending on economic
circumstances (Auerbach and Gorodnichenko, 2012; DeLong and Summers, 2012; Bachmann and
   3 We discuss the more detailed assumptions below.
   4 In exploiting the differential sensitivity of countries
                                                      to shocks, our method has a connection to the
approach in Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) and Guren, McKay, Nakamura, and Steinsson (2020).


                                                       3
Sims, 2012; Riera-Crichton, Vegh, and Vuletin, 2015; Jord`
                                                         a and Taylor, 2016). This literature has often
focused on a particular dimension of state dependence such as booms versus slumps, or expansions
versus recessions. Another related literature has considered whether the fiscal multiplier is larger
when there is no response of monetary policy at the Zero Lower Bound (e.g., Ramey and Zubairy,
2018; Crafts and Mills, 2013; Kato, Miyamoto, Nguyen, and Sergeyev, 2018; Miyamoto, Nguyen,
and Sergeyev, 2018). Canova and Pappa (2011) use sign-restrictions in a vector auto-regression
framework and find that imposing a no-monetary response generates a larger multiplier.
   Our findings also relate to multiplier estimates using regional variation where, among other
things, the aggregate effects of monetary policy are held constant (for examples see Acconcia,
Corsetti, and Simonelli, 2014; Nakamura and Steinsson, 2014; Corbi, Papaioannou, and Surico, 2019).
Reviewing this literature, Chodorow-Reich (2019) concludes that these "cross-sectional" multipliers
are consistent with an aggregate "no-monetary-policy-response" multiplier of 1.7 or above.5 Finally,
some papers find that the exchange rate regime affects the size of the multiplier (e.g., Corsetti, Meier,
Muller,
 ¨      and Devereux, 2012; Born, Juessen, and Muller,
                                                ¨      2013; Ilzetzki, Mendoza, and V´
                                                                                     egh, 2013),
which is obviously related to whether policymakers can use monetary tools.
   These existing papers highlight the importance of the monetary offset, but often refer to a
particular environment (e.g., the zero lower bound) and it is hard to know the right benchmark
against which to measure the "usual" monetary response. Relative to all these papers, our focus is
therefore different. We aim to directly quantify the importance of this monetary-fiscal interaction on
the aggregate fiscal multiplier more generally, and not just in certain episodes, and thus map out a
range for how the fiscal multiplier varies with the monetary offset.
   The structure of the paper is as follows. Next, in Section 2, we discuss the data and outline
the general empirical approach. Section 3 formally discusses the decomposition methods we use
and how these can be introduced into macroeconomic analysis using local projections. Section
4 applies this new method to study the interaction of monetary policy and the fiscal multiplier.
Section 5 illustrates the success of the Blinder-Oaxaca approach and our identification strategy using
simulations from a New Keynesian model where the fiscal multiplier varies with the degree of
monetary offset. Section 6 conducts a number of robustness checks. We then conclude and discuss
some policy implications.


                                 2.   Motivation and data

Our goal is to study the dynamic causal effect of changes in fiscal policy on economic activity, and
to estimate how this effect might vary with monetary policy. As mentioned in the introduction our
contribution is not about the identification of fiscal shocks. We therefore rely on an off-the-shelf
and well-established dataset of exogenous fiscal interventions: Guajardo, Leigh, and Pescatori (2014)
  5 Guajardo,   Leigh, and Pescatori (2011) also discuss how the degree of monetary accommodation might
explain differences between their estimated spending and tax multipliers but do not formally attempt to
estimate this interaction more generally.


                                                   4
construct a cross-country panel dataset of plausibly exogenous movements in government spending
and taxes that were introduced for the purpose of fiscal consolidation. The identification approaches
follows Romer and Romer (2010) and focuses on consolidations that were designed to tackle an
inherited historical budget deficit, but were not responding to current business cycle fluctuations.
    Although Guajardo, Leigh, and Pescatori (2014) use a mix of distributed lag models and vector
autoregressions for estimation, in the next section we will follow Jord`
                                                                       a and Taylor (2016) and
employ local projections to show how the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition can be tractably applied
to the estimation of impulse response functions in that framework. When we estimate these local
projections our baseline specification is

                  yi,t+h ­ yi,t­1 = µh                h       h
                                     i + (xi,t ­ xi )  + fi,t  + i,t+h        h = 0, 1, . . . , H ,        (1)

where y is a particular variable of interest, for example log GDP or the real interest rate; t refers to
the time period and i refers to the country; µi is a country fixed effect; xi,t is a vector of additional
controls, with mean xi ; and fi,t is the policy intervention or treatment, in this case the country-specific
fiscal consolidation shock. In typical empirical fiscal multiplier papers, h is the key object of interest:
the percent effect on, e.g., GDP, following a 1% of GDP fiscal consolidation.6 As additional controls
we include two lags of the deficit to GDP ratio, the change in the real interest rate and, following
    a and Taylor (2016), the output gap to control for the state of the cycle.7
Jord`
    In terms of the dependent variables, a number of variables of interest -- such as the response of
the deficit to GDP ratio -- are not available in the Guajardo, Leigh, and Pescatori (2014) dataset.
We therefore merge the Guajardo, Leigh, and Pescatori (2014) fiscal consolidation shocks with
the Jord`
        a, Schularick, and Taylor (2017) Macrohistory Database (http://www.macrohistory.net/
data/), which contains a wider array of variables that we can employ as outcomes in our local
projection analysis.
    As an empirical starting point, Figure 1 motivates our paper by showing the impulse response
functions estimated from Equation 1. The figure shows that a 1% of GDP improvement in the
government fiscal balance leads to a peak fall in GDP of around 1% over 4 years. Despite some
differences in sample and specification, Panel (a) of Figure 1 is very similar to the original results
in Guajardo, Leigh, and Pescatori (2014). The comparable IRF is shown in Figure 2 of the working
paper version, Guajardo, Leigh, and Pescatori (2011), and is very similar to Figure 1, with a peak
effect on GDP occurring 2­3 years after the shock, and between 0.5 and 1% in magnitude.8
   6 This could be interpreted as one measure of a fiscal multiplier. But later we compute cumulative
multipliers from the IRFs to explicitly take account of the full dynamic path of GDP and the fiscal variables.
   7 Including time fixed effects extends standard error bands without affecting the point estimates. Thus, to
improve the precision of the estimates in the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition discussed below, we capture a
time-varying global factor by including world real GDP growth.
   8 Guajardo, Leigh, and Pescatori (2011, 2014) estimate the following type of empirical specification:

                                                  2             2
                                yi,t = ai + t +  bi yi,t­j +  cj Fi,t­j + ei,t .
                                                 j=1           j=0



                                                       5
                         Figure 1: Effects of a 1 percentage point of GDP fiscal consolidation

                  (a) Response of GDP (%)                            (b) Response of short term real interest rate (% points)
 .5




                                                                         .5
 0




                                                                         0
 -.5




                                                                         -.5
 -1




                                                                         -1
 -1.5




                                                                         -1.5

         0                1                     2                3              0               1                     2               3
                              Horizon (Years)                                                       Horizon (Years)


Notes: Vertical axes reported in percent change with respect to the origin. One and two standard deviation confidence bands for each
coefficient estimate shown as grey areas. Local projections as specified in equation (1) using two lags of each control described therein.
Sample 1978:1­2009:4. See text.



        Looking to Panel (b) of Figure 1 highlights the main focus of our analysis. On average, real
short term interest rates fall following a fiscal consolidation. To the extent that monetary policy can
support the economy when GDP falls, the decline in the real short rate implies that the average
fiscal consolidation is associated with monetary accommodation, which is perhaps not unexpected.
The exact effect on GDP, however, will depend in the precise degree of accommodation by the
monetary authority, in other words the strength of the "monetary offset" at the time. What we see
in Figure 1 is only the effect on average. If the fall in the real rate were smaller, for example, we
might expect to see a more severe contraction in GDP. Decomposing this average, and characterizing
the heterogeneity around it, is therefore the crux of this paper.

In the published paper F is the change in the Cyclically Adjusted Primary Balance, instrumented with the
newly constructed fiscal shocks, fi,t . In the working paper version, the underlying impulse response functions
for GDP following a 1% movement in the newly constructed fiscal shock are reported. As discussed in Ramey
(2016), the 2SLS estimate of the multiplier is equivalent to computing the raw effect on the level of GDP and
dividing this by the response of the endogenous fiscal variable (e.g., the CAPB or the fiscal deficit). When we
construct fiscal multipliers below we will follow a similar approach by effectively instrumenting the deficit to
GDP ratio with the Guajardo, Leigh, and Pescatori (2014) constructed fiscal shocks.




                                                                     6
                       3.    Decomposing the fiscal multiplier

In this section we formally motivate and introduce the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition, show
how it can be applied to time-series analysis, and then use it to produce a decomposition of an
impulse response function. As a new tool in time-series analysis, some preliminary motivation
and explanation is required. In the next section we will then explicitly use this decomposition to
quantify how the fiscal multiplier may vary with monetary policy.


3.1.   Preliminary statistical discussion and intuition
When it comes to investigating causal relationships, randomized controlled trials are generally
viewed as the gold standard. We briefly discuss some basic ideas in this paradigm to motivate the
local projection decomposition that we introduce later on. Formal statements of any assumptions
needed can be found in, e.g., Wooldridge (2001) and Fortin, Lemieux, and Firpo (2011). Later on we
provide assumptions for typical macroeconomics applications. Here we focus on the intuition.
   Suppose we are interested in the response of an outcome variable, y, to a randomly assigned
intervention, f . Assume f  {0, 1} is randomly assigned, at least conditional on controls x, and the
observed data are generated by the following mixture of unobservable latent variables, y1 and y0 ,

                                  y = (1 ­ f ) y0 + f y1 = y0 + f (y1 ­ y0 ) .                         (2)

That is, the observed random variable y is either the random variable y0 , which is observed when
f = 0, or it is y1 when f = 1. Note that the observed data belong to one state or the other. One cannot
simultaneously observe both states. As is standard, we refer to y0 and y1 as potential outcomes in the
terminology of the Rubin causal model (Rubin, 1974).
    These potential outcomes are random variables yj with j  {0, 1}. Suppose they have uncon-
ditional mean E(yj ) = µj . A natural statistic of interest is E(y1 ­ y0 ) = µ1 ­ µ0 , that is, the average
difference in the unconditional mean between the treated and the control subpopulations. Although
the potential outcomes y1 and y0 cannot be simultaneously observed, their moments (under random
assignment), can be easily calculated.
   The potential outcomes approach and its notation can be somewhat new to applied macroe-
conomists. A few examples can help clarify basic notions. In a randomized controlled trial, a
common (strong) ignorability assumption is that yj  f for j = 0, 1. This assumption does not
imply that y and f are unrelated. Rather, the assumption means that the choice of intervention f
is unrelated to the potential outcomes that may happen for a given choice of f  {0, 1}. Hence
a quantity such as E(y1 | f = 0) is well defined. It refers to the expected value that the random
variable y1 -- from the treated subpopulation -- would counterfactually take had it not been exposed
to treatment and instead had been placed in the control group. We will use such counterfactual
expectations below.



                                                       7
    We might reflect on the strong ignorability condition. It is worth noting that even when this fails
in practice, a milder condition of selection on observables, that is, yj  f | x for j = 0, 1 would allow
most of the results here to carry through and would be akin to identification based on exclusion
restrictions (depending on what is included in x), using the VAR vernacular. We will expand on this
point below.


3.2.    The Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition
Without loss of generality, we can write yj = µj + vj where E(vj ) = 0, since E(yj ) = µj by definition,
with j  {0, 1}. Any heterogeneity in the treated and control subpopulations is therefore relegated
to the terms vj . Whenever covariates (explanatory variables or, simply, controls) x are available,
they are useful to characterize heterogeneity across units (and later for us, across time) and we may
assume additivity so that vj = g(x) + j . As a starting point it is natural to further assume that these
covariates enter linearly, so that vj = (x ­ E(x))j + j . We include the covariates in deviations from
their unconditional mean to ensure that E[(x ­ E(x))j ] = 0, in which case unobserved heterogeneity
is such that E( j ) = 0. If observed heterogeneity is well captured by the vector of explanatory
variables and the linearity assumption is correct, then it is also the case that E( j | xj ) = 0. That is, the
projection of yj onto xj is properly specified.
   Researchers are often interested in understanding the overall effect of the intervention on
outcomes. The Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition (Blinder, 1973; Oaxaca, 1973) is used often in applied
microeconomics for this purpose. It is worth going through its derivation here before later using
similar arguments on local projections. These derivations borrow heavily from Wooldridge (2001)
and Fortin, Lemieux, and Firpo (2011).
    The overall average treatment effect of the intervention can be written as

           E(y1 | f = 1) ­ E(y0 | f = 0)    =   E[E(y1 | x, f = 1) | f = 1] ­ E[E(y0 | x, f = 0) | s = 0]

                                            =   {µ1 + E[x ­ E(x) | f = 1]1 + E(     1|f    = 1)}
                                                                                      =0
                                                ­    {µ0 + E[x ­ E(x) | f = 0]0 + E(       0|f   = 0)} .    (3)
                                                                                            =0

Straightforwardly, by adding and subtracting E[x ­ E(x) | f = 1]0 , Equation 3 can be rearranged as

            E(y1 | f = 1) ­ E(y0 | f = 0)   =    (µ1 ­ µ0 )

                                                 +    E[x ­ E(x) | f = 1](1 ­ 0 )

                                                 +    {E[x ­ E(x) | f = 1] ­ E[x ­ E(x) | f = 0]}0 .        (4)

    Equation 4 contains three interesting terms. The first µ1 ­ µ0 is the difference in the unconditional
means of the treated and control subpopulations. We refer to it as the direct effect of an intervention.

                                                        8
   The second term E[x ­ E(x) | f = 1](1 ­ 0 ) reflects changes in how the covariates affect the
outcome due to the intervention. We will refer to this term as the indirect effect of intervention. For
example, a background in mathematics may translate into a higher salary for workers assigned
to take additional training in computer science, but may not be otherwise helpful if there is
no complementarity between both knowing mathematics and computer science. Notice that
E[x ­ E(x) | f = 1]0 explores the salary of workers with a given background in mathematics, had they
been counterfactually assigned not to take the additional training in computer science. A natural
hypothesis we will be interested in testing is H0 : 1 ­ 0 = 0. Failure to reject the null suggests that
the effect of the covariates on the outcome is not affected by the intervention. Crucially, it turns out
that, up to now, traditional estimates of impulse responses have implicitly assumed this to be the
case. Later on, we will see that such a hypothesis plays a critical role in evaluating impulse response
state-dependence. Note that, in a proper randomized control trial, the indirect effect should be zero
on average, but this does not mean that 1 ­ 0 = 0. The covariates x will still influence the way in
which treatment affects the outcomes for particular values of x.
   The final term {E[x ­ E(x) | f = 1] ­ E[x ­ E(x) | f = 0]}0 reflects how, all else equal, the effect of the
intervention may be driven simply by differences in the average value of the explanatory variables
between the treated and control subpopulations. We will call this term the composition effect. A
test of the null H0 : E[x ­ E(x) | f = 1] ­ E[x ­ E(x) | f = 0] = 0  H0 : E[x | f = 1] ­ E[x | f = 0] = 0
is useful to determine the balance of the distribution of covariates between treated and control
subpopulations. In a proper randomized control trial, there should be no differences and the null
would not be rejected. A rejection of the null instead indicates that selection into treatment could
depend on the value of the covariates and hence introduce selection bias in the estimation. Small
sample measurement of the composition effect can be used to sterilize the biased average treatment
effect estimate that would result otherwise.
   In practice, a natural way to obtain each term in the decomposition of Equation 4 in a finite
sample would be to estimate the following regression, using Equation 2 as the springboard,

                             yi = µ0 + (xi ­ x)0 + fi {  + (xi ­ x)} + i ,                                 (5)

where ^=µ    ^ 0 is an estimate of the direct effect; 
        ^1 ­ µ                                        ^=^1 ­ ^ 0 and hence (x1 ­ x)^ is an estimate of
the indirect effect. The notation x1 refers to the sample mean of the covariates for the treated units.
A test of the null H0 :  = 0 is a test of the null that the indirect effect is zero on average (although
the specific realizations may have non-zero effects, as we shall see). In that case the covariates
affect the outcomes in the same way, on average whether or not a unit is treated. Finally, the term
(x1 ­ x0 )0 is an estimate of the composition effect and a natural balance test is a test of the null
H0 : E(x | f = 1) ­ E(x | f = 0) = 0. Note that the error term is i = i,0 + fi ( 1,i ­ 0,i ). Under the
maintained assumptions, it has mean zero conditional on covariates.




                                                     9
3.3.      Decomposing local projection responses
The methods discussed in Section 3.1 and Section 3.2, while common in applied microeconomics
research, have not permeated macroeconomics as much. In this section we show that local projections
offer a natural bridge between literatures and hence offer a more detailed understanding of impulse
responses, the workhorse of applied macroeconomics research.
     In order to move from the preliminary statistical discussion to a time series setting in which
to investigate impulse responses, we define the outcome random variable observed at a horizon h
periods after the intervention as y(h), where a typical single observation from a finite sample of T
observations is denoted yt+h .
     As before, we begin with a binary policy intervention (i.e., the treatment) denoted f  {0, 1}
where a typical single observation from a finite sample is denoted ft . A vector of observable
predetermined variables is denoted x, where a typical single observation from a finite sample is
denoted xt . Note that x includes contemporaneous values and lags of a vector of variables including
the intervention, as well as lags of the (possibly transformed) outcome variable, among others.
Moreover, define y = (y(0), y(1), . . . , y(H)) or when denoting an observation from a finite sample,
yt = (yt , yt+1 , . . . yt+H ).
     A natural starting point regarding the assignment of the policy intervention is to follow Angrist,
Jord`
    a, and Kuersteiner (2018), whose selection on observables assumption we restate here for
convenience:

Assumption 1. Conditional ignorability or selection on observables.                      Let yf denote the potential
outcome that the vector y can take on impact and up to H periods after intervention f  {0, 1}. Then we say
f is randomly assigned conditional on x relative to y if:

                                  yf  f | x        for f = f (x,  ; )  {0, 1} ;    .

     The conditional ignorability assumption makes explicit that the policy intervention f is itself a
function the observables x, unobservables  , and a parameter vector . It means that yf   , that is,
the unobservables are random noise. Moreover, we assume that  is constant for the given sample
considered. In other words, we rule out variation in the rule assigning intervention.
     Although such a general statement of conditional ignorability provides a great deal of flexibility
(see Angrist et al., 2018), a simpler assumption can be made when considering a linear framework
in the analysis that follows. In particular, for our purposes, the following assumption will suffice:

Assumption 2. Conditional mean independence. Let E(yf ) = µf for f  {0, 1} so that, without loss
of generality, yf = µf + vf . As before, we now assume linearity so that vf = (x ­ E(x))f + f . Because of the
dimensions of yf , notice that f is now a matrix of coefficients with row dimension H + 1. Then,

                             E(yf | x) = µf ;   E(vf ) = 0;   E( f | x) = 0;   for f  {0, 1} .                   (6)


                                                              10
    Based on Assumption 2, local projections can be easily extended to have the same format as
expression Equation 5. Specifically,

    yt+h = µh           h      h
            0 + (xt ­ x)0 + ft  + ft (xt ­ x) 
                                              h
                                                + t+h ;                for h = 0, 1, . . . , H ; t = h, . . . , T .   (7)
              usual local projection    Blinder-Oaxaca
                                           extension

Thus, relative to the usual specification of a local projection, the only difference is the additional
Blinder-Oaxaca term, ft (xt ­ x) h . As a result of this simple extension, estimates of the components
of an impulse response at any horizon h can be calculated in parallel fashion to Section 3.2, with

                                   Direct effect:    ^h
                                                     µ   ^h
                                                       1­µ
                                                             ^h
                                                           0= ,
                                                               h   h             ^h ,
                                 Indirect effect:    (x1 ­ x)(^1 ­^0 ) = (x1 ­ x)
                                                                 h
                          Composition effect:        (x1 ­ x0 ) ^0 ,                                                  (8)

where xf refers to the sample mean of the controls in each of the subpopulations f  {0, 1}.
    In a time series context, one requires an assumption about the stationarity of the covariate
vector x. Without it, calculating means for the treated and control subpopulations would not be a
well-defined exercise. In a typical local projection it is not necessary to make such an assumption
because the parameter of interest is  ^ h and all that is required for inference is for the projection to
have a sufficiently rich lag structure to ensure that the residuals are stationary. Consequently, we
make an additional assumption here, as follows:

Assumption 3. Ergodicity. The vector of covariates xt -- which can potentially include lagged values of
the (possibly transformed) outcome variable and the treatment, as well as current and lagged values of other
variables -- is assumed to be a covariance-stationary vector process ergodic for the mean (Hamilton, 1994).

Ergodicity ensures that the sample mean converges to the population mean. Assuming covariance-
stationarity is a relatively standard way to ensure that this is the case. More general assumptions
could be made to accommodate less standard stochastic processes. However, covariance-stationarity
and ergodicity are sufficiently general to include many of the processes which are commonly
observed in practice.


3.4.    Beyond binary policy interventions
Policy interventions sometimes vary from one intervention to the next. Think of fiscal policy and
the different amounts by which taxes and spending can be raised or lowered. Call it the problem of
choosing the policy dose. When the set of alternative doses is finite and small, it is easy to extend
the analysis from the Section 3.1 by defining f  { f 0 , f 1 , . . . , f J } where f 0 refers to the benchmark
case (e.g., f 0 = 0) against which alternative treatments { f 1 , . . . , f J } are compared. An example of
such an approach in a time series setting can be found in Angrist, Jord`
                                                                       a, and Kuersteiner (2018).


                                                         11
    Investigating dose responses in this manner is advantageous. No assumption is made on possible
non-linear and non-monotonic effects of the treatment on the outcome. We know that, for example,
drugs administered in certain doses can be quite beneficial, but doubling the dose does not mean
that the benefit doubles -- in fact, most drugs become lethal at higher and higher doses!
    When doses vary continuously, say ­ <  < , extending the standard ignorability assump-
tions of the potential outcomes approach becomes impractical. There would be infinite potential
outcomes (one for each value of the dose received) and, hence, we would be unable to recover
parameters from finite samples. However, with little loss of generality, we can assume that variation
in doses affect outcomes through a policy scaling factor  = (x). The dependence of  on x captures
policy considerations and also allows for non-monotonic effects in the choice of dose.
    Under this more general form of , Equation 2 now requires a further assumption regarding the
choice of dose given policy intervention in order for us to be able to identify the policy effect. A
natural assumption is conditional mean independence of dose given assignment, stated as follows:

Assumption 4. Conditional mean independence of dose given assignment. As in Assumption 2,
let yf = µf + vf with vf = (x ­ E(x))f + f . Define the scaling factor (x). Then we assume that:

                                          E[(x)y1 | x) = (x)µ1 .

That is, E[(x) 1 ] = 0, since E[(x)(x ­ E(x))f | x] = 0.

(Notice that no further assumption is necessary regarding y0 .)
    Assumption 4 is a useful reminder of the conditions required to explore impulse responses in
general settings. Because this paper introduces several novel elements, we henceforth restrict the
analysis to the case where (x) =  and leave for a different paper a more thorough investigation of
non-monotonicities in dose assignment. This is a standard assumption in applied macroeconomics
and it simply says that doubling the dose will double the response. We think that given the typical
policy interventions observed, and given that outcomes are usually analyzed in logarithms -- so
that policy interventions have proportional effects -- this is a very reasonable starting point.
    Based on this simplifying assumption, Equation 5 can now be extended as follows,

      yt+h = µh           h     h            h
              0 + (xt ­ x)0 + t  + t (xt ­ x) + t+h ;              for h = 0, 1, . . . , H; t = h, . . . , T ,   (9)

using the convention t = 0 if ft = 0. The parameters h and h have the same interpretation as in
expression (7) in that scaling by the dosage allows one to interpret the coefficients on a per-unit-dose
basis. In the fiscal policy application, this would correspond, say, to a 1% of GDP tightening in
the fiscal balance. Dividing by, say, ­2 would then equivalently generate responses to a 0.5 % of
GDP stimulus instead. A constant scaling factor also implies symmetry of responses. Importantly,
the direct, indirect, and composition effects can be estimated using estimates from the extended
local projections in Equation 9 in the same way as in the case of a binary treatment as explained in
expression Equation 8.

                                                     12
3.5.   Blinder-Oaxaca impulse response functions
An interesting feature of the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition is that it allows us to evaluate the indirect
effect of the policy intervention at a particular value of the controls. Auerbach and Gorodnichenko
(2012) find asymmetric effects of government spending changes based on whether the economy
is in a boom or a bust. Jord`
                            a and Taylor (2016) find similar asymmetries using the Guajardo,
Leigh, and Pescatori (2014) dataset. In the monetary policy literature, for example, Angrist, Jord`
                                                                                                  a,
and Kuersteiner (2018) show that monetary policy loosening is less effective at stimulating the
economy than tightening. Tenreyro and Thwaites (2016) find asymmetric effects based on whether
the economy is in a boom or a bust. Jord`
                                        a, Schularick, and Taylor (2020), using a different approach,
find that low inflation environments and large output gaps seem to dull stimulative policy.
   We now show how these, and many other scenarios, can be easily entertained in our setup by
using the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition and the same set of parameter estimates. In particular,
notice that for a specific value of x, say, x , we have, since E( 1 | x ) = 0,

              E(y1 | x , ) ­ E(y0 | x , s = 0) = µ1 + [x ­ E(x)]1 ­ {µ0 + [x ­ E(x)]0 }
                                            =  + [x ­ E(x)] .                                        (10)

   Hence, based on the same estimates as those of the extended local projection in Equation 9,
given a specific value of x , the implied estimate of the impulse response at that value is

                                             ^ + (x ­ x)
                                                        ^,                                           (11)

and this holds for a given , since the composition effect is zero. This happens because (x ­ x) is the
same for the treated and control subpopulations. Here we rely on the residuals having zero mean
conditional on x. It is also important to note that because identification usually centers on treatment
assignment rather than identification for the controls, conditioning on certain values of x can only be
interpreted from a partial equilibrium perspective. Nevertheless, because in time series applications
lagged values of x are pre-determined with respect to the policy intervention, they are a legitimate
description of a state of the world in which we envisage conducting the counterfactual experiment.
   Several remarks are worth stating. First, although it is a convenient tool to investigate state-
dependence, given the assumptions we have made, the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition lacks enough
information to evaluate how the impulse response indirect effect would vary if, say, the control xjt
increased by one unit. The reason is that we have made no assumptions about the assignment of the
controls. We cannot infer causal effects about them without further assumptions. The measured
indirect effect for the jth control could be polluted by any correlation with other controls, for example.
This issue potentially faces all papers in the literature on state-dependence in macroeconomics.
The Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition allows for a more systematic analysis of state dependence and
clarifies how these identification issues arise. In the next section we will introduce an approach to
explicitly address this issue in the context of monetary-fiscal interactions.

                                                   13
   Second, several hypotheses of interest underlie Equation 8. Absence of direct effects can be
assessed by evaluating H0 : h = 0; absence of indirect effects with H0 : h = 0; and absence of
                              h = 0. All of these null hypotheses only require standard Wald tests
composition effects with H0 : 0
directly obtainable from standard regression output given our maintained assumptions. Thus formal
tests of economically meaningful hypotheses are easily reported as we now show in an application.


   4.    How does the fiscal multiplier depend on monetary policy?

In the previous section we have shown that the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition of an impulse
response function implies an indirect effect from a policy treatment if the intervention affects how
other variables influence outcomes. In this section we apply this logic to examine how the effects
of a fiscal policy intervention are influenced by monetary policy. As noted in the introduction,
empirical fiscal multipliers are typically average treatment effects. At any point in time, the specific
impact of a fiscal intervention may, however, depend on monetary policy. Instead, the average effect
estimated in the existing literature reflects the average response of monetary policy, as illustrated
in Figure 1. The Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition suggests a way to decompose these effects. To
make this idea concrete, we sketch a simple motivating framework for thinking about the indirect
effect and the identification issues noted in Section 3. In the previous section we gave the example
where a background in mathematics may translate into a higher salary for workers assigned to
take additional training in computer science. In our current context, the idea is that a less activist
monetary regime may translate into a larger recession following fiscal treatment.


4.1.    Motivating example and identification
To formalize the interaction we have in mind consider the following, stylized, setup. In Section 5, we
will confirm that this approach works well using simulations from a standard New Keynesian DSGE
model. Let some outcome yi,t , e.g., GDP growth in country i at time t, depend on fiscal treatment
fi,t and the choice of the real interest rate ri,t . All variables as expressed relative to their means.
Furthermore, suppose the interest rate is set by a monetary authority following a rule. Interest rates
are set to offset the negative effects of shocks to GDP, including changes in fiscal policy. Specifically,

                                                             y
                                 yi,t = f fi,t + r ri,t + ui,t ,                                     (12)
                                          f         f              y
                                  ri,t =  fi,t + i fi,t + y ui,t + ur
                                                                    i,t ,                            (13)

where f measures the fiscal multiplier holding interest rates constant. In the data this cannot
typically be estimated because interest rates are likely to endogenously respond to fiscal treatment, as
is the case in Equation 13. This equation says that monetary policy responds to fiscal interventions
but, in the way this rule is written, the degree of monetary accommodation could vary across
             f                                                              f
countries.  reflects the average response across all countries and i is the idiosyncratic component.


                                                        14
                                                                                                          y
Monetary policy also potentially responds to other economic shocks, captured by the term ui,t .
Combining Equation 12 and Equation 13 yields

                                         f           f                              y
                       yi,t = (f + r  ) fi,t + r i fi,t + r ur            y
                                                             i,t + (1 + r  ) ui,t .                     (14)

    On the assumption that treatment fi,t is randomly assigned (as should be the case if the fiscal
shocks are exogenous), the first term illustrates that the reduced-form estimate of the fiscal multiplier
                                                                  f
depends on the average monetary response in the data, r  . In other words, f , r and f are not
separately identified using the fiscal shock alone. The second term captures heterogeneity in the
interest rate response. Note that Equation 14 has the form of the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition in
Equation 7. In this simple case without any other controls, f (the policy treatment) in Section 3.2
                                             f                                  f
corresponds to fi,t here and (xi,t ­ x) = i . The indirect effect is then r i . Since the total response
(ignoring the composition effect) is simply the direct effect plus the indirect effect, we can consider
experiments around the average effect by arbitrarily varying the indirect effect.
    The decomposition in Section 3 shows that, without further assumptions, we cannot interpret
the coefficients on the x variables as causal. This, of course, has implications for all existing papers
studying state dependence. Following the Blinder-Oaxaca intuition, our idea is that the strength
of the monetary offset varies with the monetary regime: fiscal stimulus may be less effective if the
monetary policymaker is a hawk. To implement this we need a proxy for the monetary regime, i.e.,
                       f
here the parameter i , that can be used for identification of the monetary offset. We take inspiration
from Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) and Guren, McKay, Nakamura, and Steinsson (2020), who use
the differential sensitivity of regions to more aggregate fluctuations as an identification strategy. In
our approach, we use the differential sensitivity of interest rates to fiscal treatment across countries.9
Our strategy will therefore exploit the panel dimension of the dataset and, more specifically, cross-
                           f
country variation in i to trace out the importance of the monetary offset.10 The first step is to
estimate a variant of Equation 13 allowing the coefficient on the fiscal shock to vary by country. The
                 f
cross-country i can then be used as a state variable in the estimation of equation 14.11
    The identification assumption underlying this approach is that there is variation in the average
response of monetary policy to shocks across countries but that this variation is not, on average,
correlated with other factors that make the economy more sensitive to fiscal policy. In Section 5
we will show, using a relatively standard New Keynesian model, that this approach successfully
recovers the strength of the monetary offset where the main degree of heterogeneity across country
is variation in the monetary regime.
   9 We are therefore using cross-country heterogeneity in the country interest rate response to identified
country-level shocks. This differs from Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) and Guren, McKay, Nakamura, and
Steinsson (2020) who exploit differential local sensitivity to common aggregate or regional fluctuations.
  10 More generally we could exploit the responsiveness of interest rates to the economy, as we will discuss
further in Sections 5 and 6.
  11 Note that in our application, f , should be thought of as a random time-country disturbance. Because
                                    i,t
this should be uncorrelated with other shocks -- at any spatial level -- there is no issue omitting the other
                                                        f
terms from equation 13 when estimating the proxy i .


                                                     15
   An important issue is that, to use the notation above for illustration, f might vary across
countries for other reasons and this might be responsible for the apparent sensitivity of interest
rates to fiscal policy. More generally, this would be the case if there is heterogeneity in the multiplier
on average across countries for non-monetary reasons, and if monetary policy responds to fiscal
treatment indirectly.
    Three remarks should be made about this. First, this issue would tend to attenuate the strength
of the monetary offset, so at a very minimum, our results can be seen as a lower bound. This
is because larger contractionary forces would typically be associated with bigger -- not smaller
movements -- in interest rates. In other words, a seemingly weak monetary policy response would
be the result of a smaller underlying fiscal multiplier. Instead, we find that a less activist monetary
regime is associated with much larger fiscal multipliers. Second, in the practical application of
the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition we will also allow for a sizable degree of unspecified state-
dependence by admitting indirect effects via each of the controls already included in Section 2.
Finally, two generalizations of our approach can be used to explicitly deal with this concern. The
first relies on estimating a more generic Taylor Rule, rather than the response of the economy
to fiscal treatment directly. In Section 6 we show that, even in the presence of heterogeneity in
the multiplier, this works well and produces empirical estimates that are similar to our baseline
findings. The drawback of this approach is complexity and having to take a stand on the form of the
Taylor Rule. We therefore still favor our main specification. The second generalization introduces
controls for other cross-country time-invariant factors that might be correlated with the average
sensitivity of interest rates to fiscal policy. In our context, it might be that some countries use a
different tax/spending mix when implementing a consolidation. To the extent that tax and spending
multipliers differ, this could be influencing our results. Section 6 shows how to explicitly control for
this, and that the main findings are robust.


4.2.    The fiscal-monetary multiplier
By applying the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition, and using the motivating logic from the previous
subsection, we now examine how the fiscal multiplier varies with monetary policy. For exposition,
we repeat -- and augment -- the main regression specification here,

                                                                                   f
                 yi,t+h = µh                h        h                    h            h
                           0 + (xi,t ­ xi ) 0 + fi,t  + fi,t (xi,t ­ xi ) x + fi,t i,h f + i,t+h ,             (15)

where fi,t is the policy treatment, in our case the fiscal shocks identified by Guajardo, Leigh, and
Pescatori (2014). The outcome variable yi,t+h will either be the cumulative percentage change in GDP,
i.e. yi,t+h = (GDPi,t+h ­ GDPi,t­1 )/GDPi,t­1 , or the cumulative change in the deficit (D) relative to initial GDP,
yi,t+h = (Di,t+h ­ Di,t­1 )/GDPi,t­1 .12 The h coefficients estimate the conventional impulse response function
for the percentage change in the level of GDP or the deficit relative to GDP.
  12 This   ensures the ratio of these two IRFs can be interpreted as a multiplier, as discussed below.


                                                        16
      By estimating this sequence of local projections we can estimate the direct, indirect, and com-
position effects. Unlike in Section 3.2, however, our goal is to conduct experiments where we vary
the indirect effect coming from monetary policy. In the full specification, x includes all the controls
from Section 2: two lags of the growth rate of GDP, the deficit to GDP ratio, the change in the real
interest rate and, following Jord`
                                 a and Taylor (2016), the output gap. To capture global time-varying
factors, we include world GDP growth as discussed earlier.
                                                                                            f
   To obtain a cross-country proxy for the monetary regime, we estimate i,h by regressing the
change in the nominal policy interest rate from t ­ 1 to t + h on the fiscal consolidation variable fi,t ,
allowing the coefficient to vary by country.13 This gives a country specific sensitivity of nominal
policy rates to fiscal policy. In the second stage regression, in keeping with the Blinder-Oaxaca
                                    f
decomposition, the variable i,h refers to these coefficients relative to the average.14 Armed with
this proxy for the monetary regime, Equation 15 is then used to study the response of GDP but
              f
including i,h as an additional state variable.15
    Figure 2 reports the main results from this exercise. Panel (a) shows the percentage response of
GDP following a 1% of GDP fiscal consolidation (as measured by Guajardo, Leigh, and Pescatori,
2014). The central blue line in the fan reports the direct effect which, roughly, should be compared
to the results from the linear model is Figure 1. As in Figure 1, GDP falls by around 1% over
the course of 2­3 years. To examine how the effect varies with monetary policy, the gray lines
then conduct experiments where we vary the indirect effect estimated using the Blinder-Oaxaca
decomposition from Equation 15. In particular, Figure 2 shows a range of scenarios where we vary
  f
i,h , the sensitivity of interest rates to fiscal policy. In keeping with the Blinder-Oaxaca formulation
  f
i,h -- like all state variables -- is expressed relative to its mean. The results therefore consider
how the multiplier varies as we change the degree of monetary offset relative to the average degree
of accommodation in the sample (captured in the direct effect). In Figure 2 the size of the circular
                                                                                                f
marker indicates a tighter/more contractionary monetary policy. We vary i,h by one standard
deviation, which produces real interest rate variation of the order of 100bps on average over the
period (see Appendix 7). In the face of a fiscal consolidation (a negative shock to GDP), this means a
  13 We   also include the lagged change in the policy rate to capture persistence in the policy rate and include
country fixed effects. For the baseline results we keep this specification parsimonious, which helps improve the
precision of the estimates. We have also reproduced the main results considering more elaborate specifications
with further controls. The results for how the multiplier varies with monetary policy are very similar, so
we maintain the parsimonious specification for the baseline results. Part of the reason for this robustness is
that we are constructing a proxy for the sensitivity of interest rates to shocks rather than trying to precisely
identify the coefficients of the Taylor Rule.
   14 This ensures that our experiments below are relative to the "typical" average response of policy rates
in the sample. The average of the coefficients from the first stage regression also accords with conventional
wisdom about how monetary policy tends to loosen following a fiscal consolidation on average. For example,
in years 0, 1, 2 and 3 the average value of the country level coefficients is -0.3, -0.6, -0.7 and -0.5 respectively.
   15 Since we are interested in the dynamic causal effect via impulse response functions, this step is run
                                                                              f
for each h. The right hand side of Equation 15 therefore contains fi,t i,h fh . This is like interacting fiscal
                                                                                                f
treatment at time t with the predicted subsequent response of the real interest rate: fi,t i,h is the fitted value
for the future interest rate response from the preliminary regression.



                                                        17
                        Figure 2: Policy experiments varying the response of monetary policy

                   (a) GDP Response (%)                                             (b) Indirect Effect for GDP h = 3
   .5




                                                                         2
   0




                                                                         1
   -.5




                                                                         0
   -1
   -1.5




                                                                         -1
   -2




                                                                         -2
          0                1                     2              3             -.5   -.375 -.25 -.125    0    .125       .25    .375    .5
                               Horizon (Years)                                                 Standard deviations

Notes: Panel (a) shows how the response of GDP varies with the degree of monetary policy accommodation. The blue lines report the
direct effect, which should be compared to the average effect in Figure 1. The gray lines consider experiments which vary the degree
of monetary accommodation. A larger marker indicates a tighter monetary policy scenario. Panel (b) plots the indirect effect on GDP
for the peak effect at h = 3. The figure illustrates the effect of the monetary-fiscal interaction relative to the average multiplier in the
full sample. This also allows us to formally test whether the indirect effect is statistically significant. The light and dark gray areas
refers to a confidence interval of two and one standard deviations.



less activist monetary policy which does not cut the policy rate as aggressively. This should increase
the multiplier and this is indeed what is shown in Figure 2. As monetary policy becomes less
accommodative, the multiplier becomes larger. Appendix Figure A.4 reports the associated figure
for the response of the real interest rate. As expected tighter monetary policy is associated with
less accommodation in terms of the real interest rate. In fact, at the extreme, for regimes where the
nominal rate is least responsive, the response of the real rate can even become positive.
     Panel (b) of Figure 2 shows the indirect effect on GDP for the peak effect at h = 3 and the
standard errors. This figure therefore shows the effect of the monetary-fiscal interaction relative to
the average multiplier in the full sample (the central blue line in Panel (a)). This also allows us to
formally test whether the indirect effect is statistically significant. The light and dark gray areas
refer to a confidence interval of two and one standard deviations. As shown in the figure, for less
accommodative monetary policy regimes, the negative effect on GDP is nearly 1% larger than in
the baseline and this effect is statistically significant. In Appendix Table A.1 we report the precise
coefficient estimates for h (the direct effect), fh (the strength of the indirect effect) and the standard
errors at all horizons.16
  16 Forpresentational reasons, panel (a) of Figure 2 does not display the standard errors but Appendix Figure
A.3 also visually shows that the direct effect (the blue line) is statistically significant.



                                                                    18
                             Figure 3: Cumulative fiscal multiplier by monetary response




                                      2
                                      1
                                      0
                                      -1




                                            -.5 -.375 -.25 -.125 0 .125 .25           .375    .5
                                                          Standard deviations

                                                       h=0               h=2                 h=3



Notes: This chart shows the cumulative fiscal multiplier from each scenario in Figure 2. This is computed as the cumulative sum of the
GDP response relative to the cumulative deficit to GDP response (based on Appendix Figure A.2). Each line refers to a different horizon,
h. As in Figure 2, h goes from the current year h = 0 to the third year after the shock h = 3. h = 1 is omitted to avoid overcrowding the
figure.



     Although these responses for GDP can be roughly interpreted as a measure of the fiscal multiplier,
the fi,t shocks may be noisy measures of the true policy change (see, e.g., Mertens and Ravn, 2013).
As a statistic, the fiscal multiplier is typically defined as the $ movement in GDP for a one $ change
in fiscal policy. Following Ramey (2016), this object can be computed empirically be estimating the
effect on GDP and dividing by the associated change in the deficit relative to GDP. It is therefore
instructive to also consider what happens to the deficit to GDP ratio to get a sense of the magnitude
of the fiscal intervention in the data. The response of the deficit may also vary with the behavior
of monetary policy, for example higher interest rates and lower demand could make it harder to
reduce the deficit. The response of the deficit relative to GDP is shown in Appendix Figure A.2. A
1% fiscal consolidation (as measured by Guajardo, Leigh, and Pescatori (2014)) takes some time to
have its full effect. The deficit to GDP ratio moves by around 0.5% in the current year, and is around
1% lower from the next year onwards. This path also depends on monetary policy, although in these
experiments, there is not much state-dependence in the deficit to GDP ratio until the later years.
     Dividing the results in Figure 2 Panel (a) by the associated change in the deficit is also equivalent
to the 2SLS estimate of the multiplier using the Guajardo, Leigh, and Pescatori (2014) shocks
as instruments for the deficit to GDP ratio. In our case this is a useful way of representing the
multiplier because different experiments produce different paths of the deficit. This approach
therefore harmonizes the policy interventions across the scenarios. In computing the multiplier, we



                                                                  19
would also like to consider the differential effect on the deficit and GDP at all horizons. Since GDP
is a flow, one can think of the cumulative lost GDP in dollars relative to the cumulative improvement
in the deficit, also in dollars. This measure, known as the cumulative, integral, or present-value
multiplier, is increasingly seen in the literature, as recommended by Uhlig (2010) and Ramey (2016) .
    Figure 3 converts the state-dependent IRFs from Figure 2 and Figure A.2 into cumulative
multipliers at different horizons. The cumulative multiplier is reported on the y-axis. As before, on
                      f
the x-axis we vary i,h from -0.5 to +0.5 standard deviations. The three lines report the multiplier at
different horizons in the impulse response function. Note that the 0 point on the x-axis corresponds
to the average treatment effect usually estimated in linear models. Interestingly, this is around or
below 1 at all horizons. As monetary policy becomes more inert (rates are cut less aggressively in
the face of falling demand), the multiplier rises. In these experiments the multiplier varies from
around zero to nearly 2. Thus, in any fiscal intervention, the fiscal multiplier crucially depends on
the monetary response. Interestingly, magnitudes around 2 are close to Keynes' original prediction
of 2.5 (Keynes, 1936).
    Before concluding this section it is worth making a few remarks about the flexibility of this
approach. Note that, in principle, by allowing fiscal policy interventions to have different marginal
effects depending on the whole set of controls x, we can handle state-dependence in a very flexible
and multivariate manner. This also has important implications for the existing literature which has
typically studied the effects of one dimension in isolation (or one at a time).


                                  5.    Theoretical analysis

In this section we show how our empirical approach and findings can be rationalized in a simple
theoretical macro framework. In particular, we do two things. First, we show how variation in the
monetary policy rule affects the fiscal multiplier in the model. This is, of course, already known in
the theoretical literature but motivates the exercise we have in mind. Second, we simulate data from
the model for a hypothetical set of "countries" where each country differs in how monetary policy
responds to inflation.17 This environment theoretically captures the identification assumptions
made in the previous section.
    To illustrate the usefulness of the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition, we simulate data from the
theoretical model for our hypothetical set of countries and run exactly the same empirical estimation
approach used in the previous section on data simulated from the model. We show that the Blinder-
Oaxaca decomposition performs notably well at capturing how the fiscal multiplier varies with the
degree of monetary accommodation.18
  17 We use the term "country" loosely here. In this simple example these are simply cross sectional units
with different degrees of monetary accommodation.
  18 Our goal is to illustrate how the Blinder-Oaxaca approach identifies the importance of monetary-fiscal
interactions for the size of the fiscal multiplier. This section does not develop a theoretical framework to
quantitatively rationalize the magnitudes found in the previous section.



                                                    20
   The results in the previous section already have some important theoretical implications. For
monetary policy to affect the fiscal multiplier, the model needs some form of nominal rigidity. This
motivates our focus on the New Keynesian class of models. Second, to generate a wider range of
multipliers the model needs to have some other rigidities beyond the simple textbook model. For
simplicity, we follow Gal´i, Lopez-Salido,
                              ´            and Vall´
                                                   es (2007) and Leeper, Traum, and Walker (2017)
and include two types of households, one group who fully optimize and another group who act in
a rule of thumb manner.19 In the presence of nominal rigidities, this allows the model to produce a
range of different results for the multiplier, some of which are larger than 1 (see Leeper, Traum, and
Walker, 2017). To keep the model simple, a contractionary fiscal policy is modeled as a persistent
cut in government spending. We will assume the savings from this policy experiment are rebated
lump-sum back to the saver households.20


5.1.    Model environment
In this subsection we sketch the main, and very standard, features of the model we use. More details
are provided in the Appendix.
   The economy is populated by a continuum of households. A share 1 ­ µ of the households can
save (or borrow) freely and fully optimize their intertemporal consumption/savings choices. These
households choose consumption, hours worked, and bond holdings to maximize expected lifetime
utility subject to their budget constraint.
   We refer to these households as saver households, and their choices with a superscript S. In
linearized form, the saver household's first order conditions can be re-arranged. First, the change in
consumption can be written as
                                                  1 ^
                                        ^S
                                     Et c t+1 =     it ­ Et ^ t+1   ,
                                                  
which is the standard Euler from the representative agent model, where     ^ t is the log change in the
                                       ^
price of the consumption good Pt and it is the policy interest rate, both in deviations from steady
       ^S
state. c t is consumption of the saver household in percentage deviations from steady state. The
labor supply condition is
                                                   ^S
                                              ^t = c
                                              w         ^S
                                                     t +nt ,

                               ^S
      ^ t is the real wage and n
where w                         t is hours worked, both in percentage deviations from steady state.
The inverse Frisch elasticity is .
   We assume that the remaining share µ of households are rule-of-thumb decision-makers in the
sense that they have no access to bonds B and consume all their labor income. We refer to these
  19 Again, this is purely expositional and, as discussed in Leeper, Traum, and Walker (2017), a number
of modeling devices can be used to generate positive consumption effects that produce larger multipliers
following a fiscal stimulus.
  20 Alternatively we could have assumed that the government repays debt owned by the saver households
but, because saver households finance the government, a form of Ricardian equivalence applies here and
there is no need to model debt explicitly.


                                                    21
households a non-saver households, and denote their choices with a superscript N.21 Thus,

                                                 CN       N
                                                  t = wt Nt .


Total consumption in this economy is therefore equal to

                                            Ct = µCN           S
                                                   t + (1 ­ µ)Ct .


    To rationalize price stickiness, there are two types of firms. An intermediate good yt (j) is
produced using a constant returns to scale production technology yt (j) = Ant (j) under imperfect
competition. We normalize TFP, A, to 1. Intermediate goods are turned into final goods Yt by
                                                                                                 ­1
competitive final goods firms using the standard CES production function Yt = ( 0 yt (j) dj) /( ­1) .
                                                                                          1

Final goods are either purchased by households or government, i.e. Yt = Ct + Gt where Gt is
government consumption expenditure. All varieties of intermediate good are substitutable with
one another with an elasticity of demand             and the demand curve for variety yt (j) is given by
           pt (j) ­
yt (j) =    Pt        Yt , which the intermediate goods firm takes as given.
    Intermediate goods firms set prices and choose labor demand to minimize costs. The representa-
tive firm's decision problem is standard in the New Keynesian literature so we only report this in the
appendix. With probability  a firm is unable to change its price and maintains the same price as it
had in t ­ 1. With probability 1 ­  the firm is able to fully reset its price. The equilibrium conditions
from the firm side lead to a standard dynamic pricing relationship. In linearized form this is the
familiar New Keynesian Phillips Curve where inflation depends on expected future inflation and
real marginal cost (which is closely related to the output gap),

                                            ^ t =  Et 
                                                      ^ t+1 + ~ mct ,                                   (16)

where  ~=1  (1 ­  )(1 ­  ),  is the probability of having a fixed price, and  is the household's
discount factor. mct is real marginal cost in percentage deviations from steady state.
    Fiscal policy is simply described by an exogenous, persistent stream of government purchases.
Written in percentage deviations from steady state,

                                               ^ t = g g
                                               g       ^ t­1 + et .

The government redistributes the savings from lower government spending back to the saver
households in a lump sum manner. The government budget constraint is simply Gt = Tt but similar
results would be obtained if we formally allowed for government debt (owned by the savers).
    Monetary policy follows a simple Taylor Rule. The nominal interest rate ^
                                                                            it , written in deviations
from steady state, is set relative to inflation. Importantly, we will think of this rule as varying across
  21 Thesehouseholds still make an intratemporal consumption and labor choice. The intratemporal labor
supply equation is the same as for the saver household and, given the competitive nature of the labor market,
both types of household face the same real wage.

                                                       22
                      Figure 4: Theoretical state dependence versus Blinder-Oaxaca estimates




                                       2
                                       1
                                       0
                                       -1




                                            -2   -1.5   -1     -.5    0    .5    1      1.5      2
                                                             Standard deviations

                                                         Theoretical                 Estimated



Notes: This chart shows how the peak cumulative fiscal multiplier varies with the monetary policy response both in the theoretical
model and when the effect is estimated on simulated data. The red circles show the true theoretical variation in the simulated dataset.
The blue squares show the empirical estimates obtained by using our Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition estimates on data simulated from
the model. We simulate the model for 2000 periods, discarding the first 10%.



country but where each country operates as a closed economy. The policy rule is therefore

                                                 ^       it­1 + (1 ­ i ) c 
                                                 it =  i ^                 ^t ,                                                  (17)

where c denotes the "country" of interest and the policy rules therefore allows for different countries
to have different monetary responses to fiscal consolidation attempts.


5.2.      The Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition
The model is solved using standard linearization-based methods. We calibrate  = 1.7, implying
a Frisch elasticity of around 0.6. The probability of having a fixed price is set to  = 0.85. The
household's discount factor  = 0.99. The persistence of government spending g = 2/3 and interest
smoothing i = 0.75. We set the share of hand to mouth households µ to 30%. Following Leeper,
Plante, and Traum (2010), we set the government consumption share to 8%.
     We then simulate data from the model for different values of c , starting at 1 (so monetary policy
satisfies the Howitt-Taylor Principle). To relate the model experiment to the empirical set-up in the
previous section, we regard each simulation as data for a different country (each a closed economy
for simplicity). We then estimate the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition on the simulated model data.
The results are show in Figure 4.


                                                                  23
   Figure 4 shows two lines. The red line with circles shows how the peak cumulative fiscal
multiplier -- computed exactly as in the data -- varies with c . The blue line with squares shows
the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition-implied fiscal multiplier. As in the previous section, the response
of interest rates to the fiscal shock is estimated by country and this coefficient is used as a state
variable in the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition. The horizontal axis refers to standard deviations
of this object.22 The figure shows that the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition captures the monetary
interaction in the simulated data very well.23
   Two important results flow from this exercise. First, it shows that the identification approach
outlined in the previous section, using differential sensitivity of interest rates to fiscal shocks across
countries to identify how the fiscal multiplier varies with the systematic part of monetary policy,
works well. Second, the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition is a very effective way of isolating state-
dependence in the fiscal multiplier. Finally note that, although the model is deliberately simple,
more elaborate features and/or changes to the calibration would simply change the quantitative
magnitudes in Figure 4, not the two main results mentioned here.


                             6.    Robustness and extensions

In this section we subject our approach to several robustness checks and extensions.


6.1.    An alternative proxy for the monetary regime
As discussed above, our baseline strategy works well to quantify the importance of the monetary
offset when variations in the monetary regime are the main source of heterogeneity in the fiscal
multiplier across countries. In this section, we relax this assumption using an alternative approach
to proxy for the monetary regime. Rather than constructing a proxy by regressing policy rates on
the fiscal shock directly, this section makes use of a more conventional Taylor Rule-type approach.
   To fix ideas, consider the policy rule from the model,

                                       ^       it­1 + (1 ­ i ) c 
                                       it =  i ^                 ^t ,                                (18)

Note that we are not necessarily trying to identify the specific parameters of the Taylor Rule. Rather,
we are trying to obtain a proxy for the sensitivity of interest rates to the economy. We can therefore
estimate a more reduced form expression:

                                          ^       it­1 + c
                                          it =  i ^        ^t ,                                      (19)

where there is a monotonic mapping between the cross-country variation in c and c
                                                                                .
  22 Note that, Blinder-Oaxaca indirect effect captures a non-linear function of the model's parameters so
there is monotonic but not one-to-one mapping between c and the indirect effect estimated in the data.
  23 The only discrepancy is that the model's solution is slightly non-linear in c .




                                                    24
    In Appendix Figure A.5 we verify this approach using the model. In particular, we introduce
a second source of cross-country heterogeneity in the multiplier by allowing the share of hand
to mouth households to vary from 25% to 35%.24 To estimate equation 19 we regress nominal
policy rates on their lag and inflation, but where we instrument inflation with its lag.25 This
instrumentation step is not important in this specific example, but we could imagine a more general
rule that contains monetary policy shocks (as could be the case in the real world). Appendix Figure
A.5 shows that, even in the presence of additional multiplier heterogeneity, this strategy recovers
the underlying importance of monetary offset in the model.
    Appendix Figure A.6 now conducts the same experiment in the data. The difference with the
baseline results is that we regress policy rates on lagged policy rates and inflation (instrumented),
rather than the simpler specification using the fiscal shock. The results are broadly similar to the
baseline findings. The drawback of this approach is that it requires making assumptions about the
arguments of the Taylor Rule, so it not as transparent or easy to implement. Still, we see this as an
important robustness check.26


6.2.    Tax- versus spending-led consolidations
It is possible that countries differ in the composition of the fiscal consolidation. For example, some
countries may rely more on tax increases than spending cuts. The fiscal multiplier literature has
often noted differences in spending versus tax multipliers. Furthermore, Guajardo, Leigh, and
Pescatori (2014) find that tax-based consolidations are more contractionary.
    This could affect our results in the following way. Suppose, for example, that tax multipliers
are larger than those for spending (for reasons unrelated to monetary policy, as is the case in some
macro models). Different policies might then induce different relative movements in GDP and
interest rates. If countries differ in their average reliance on tax increases versus spending cuts, this
                                             f
could conceivably be captured in the i in our baseline approach.
   The flexibility of the Blinder-Oaxaca specification allows us to investigate and control for this
effect. Specifically, we construct a country-specific measure of the average propensity to use tax
increases versus spending cuts.27 We then interact this cross-country characteristic with the fiscal
treatment fi,t , essentially adding it as an additional Blinder-Oaxaca state variable. The residual
                f
variation in i is then being used to examine the monetary offset.28
  24 This is simply an illustration, this exercise could also be done for other structural parameters such as the
Frisch elasticity, the degree of price stickiness etc.
  25 A step that is relatively common in the estimation of Taylor Rules.
  26 As an extension we considered a factor approach where inflation above is replaced by the first principal
component of inflation and the output gap. This is one way to incorporate more arguments in the rule but
estimate a single parameter to act as the proxy for the monetary regime. The results are very similar.
  27 In particular, we calculate the share of consolidation episodes that are tax-led by country.
  28 Guren, McKay, Nakamura, and Steinsson (2020) follow a similar logic to focus on residual variation in
their sensitivity instrument, albeit in a different setting where the variation of concern is a time-region effect.
The strategy used above could also be applied to rule out other cross-country concerns, although these types


                                                       25
                                      Figure 5: Policy experiments: time fixed effects

                  (a) Response of GDP (%)                         (b) Cumulative fiscal multiplier by monetary response
   .5




                                                                       2
   0
   -.5




                                                                       1
   -1




                                                                       0
   -1.5




                                                                       -1
   -2




                                                                             -.5 -.375 -.25 -.125 0 .125 .25         .375    .5
                                                                                           Standard deviations
          0              1                     2             3
                             Horizon (Years)                                           h=0               h=2                h=3


Notes: Panel (a) shows how the response of GDP varies with the degree of monetary policy accommodation. The blue lines report
the direct effect. The gray lines consider experiments which vary the degree of monetary accommodation. A larger marker indicates
a tighter monetary policy scenario. Panel (b) reports the associated cumulative fiscal multiplier. Relative to baseline Figure 2 and
Figure 3, the specification in these figures include time fixed effects rather than world GDP growth.



     The results of this exercise are shown in Appendix Figure A.7. The estimated monetary offset is
very similar to the baseline case.


6.3.          Global factors
In the baseline specification we included world GDP growth to capture time varying global factors
that might account for the timing of particular fiscal consolidations. In the original Guajardo, Leigh,
and Pescatori (2014) paper, the authors use time fixed effects as a more general way of capturing
global factors. Earlier we noted that this seems to come at the cost of precision in our specification,
but in this section we re-estimate our main results for the monetary-fiscal multiplier using time
fixed effects rather than world GDP growth.
     The results are shown in Figure 5. These figures are very similar to the baseline specification in
Figures 2 and 3. Our use of world GDP growth does not, therefore, affect our main results.

of issues are also dealt with in a more general sense in the previous subsection using a different approach.




                                                                 26
                                    Figure 6: Policy experiments: longer lag structure

                  (a) Response of GDP (%)                         (b) Cumulative fiscal multiplier by monetary response
   .5




                                                                       2
   0
   -.5




                                                                       1
   -1




                                                                       0
   -1.5




                                                                       -1
                                                                             -.5 -.375 -.25 -.125 0 .125 .25         .375    .5
   -2




                                                                                           Standard deviations
          0              1                     2             3
                             Horizon (Years)                                           h=0               h=2                h=3


Notes: Panel (a) shows how the response of GDP varies with the degree of monetary policy accommodation. The blue lines report
the direct effect. The gray lines consider experiments which vary the degree of monetary accommodation. A larger marker indicates
a tighter monetary policy scenario. Panel (b) reports the associated cumulative fiscal multiplier. Relative to baseline Figure 2 and
Figure 3, the specification in these figures include 3 lags of all controls in x.



6.4.          Lag structure
If the fiscal shocks reflect purely random variation, the choice of additional controls should not
affect the main set of estimates. In small samples however, serial correlation could potentially be
an issue. As a further robustness check we show that the main results are not overturned by using
a slightly longer lag structure for the controls. In the baseline results we chose two years of lags.
Note that, relative to standard empirical papers using quarterly data, this is already controls for a
reasonable degree of persistence. We also face a trade-off in that longer lag structures lead to loss of
data and more parameters to be estimated.
     That said, we re-run our main results using three years of lags (equivalent, of course, to 12
quarters of lags in typical macro papers). Figure 6 shows that the results are very similar to the
baseline findings in Figures 2 and 3.


6.5.          Monetary-fiscal interactions using shocks
To further corroborate the magnitudes found above, in this section, we consider a different approach
to studying monetary-fiscal interactions. Instead of relying on variation in the response of interest
rates to fiscal policy across countries, this section uses an approach based on monetary policy
shocks.

                                                                 27
   To motivate the approach consider the following modified version of the motivating example
presented in Section 4.1,

                                                                 y
                                   yi,t = f fi,t + r ri,t + ui,t ,                                (20)
                                   ri,t = y yi,t + f fi,t yi,t + ur
                                                                  i,t .                           (21)

  For simplicity, assume the fiscal intervention is binary and fi,t  [0, 1]. Relative to the earlier
motivating example, the main difference is the specification of the policy rule. The sensitivity of
interest rates to fiscal policy does not vary across country, but it does vary with the type of shock.
During episodes of fiscal treatment, the monetary authority may respond to output fluctuations
differently than in other periods. In the formulation above, this is captured by the f term, which is
only relevant in periods of fiscal treatment. Note that, when there is no fiscal treatment, fi,t = 0.
   We can, again, combine these expressions to create a reduced form equation. Given the binary
nature of this example, we can then inspect the reduced form in the case of treatment, fi,t = 1 and no
treatment, fi,t = 0. The resulting equation for estimation can be written as:

                                                                           y
                               yi,t =  f fi,t +  r ur          r
                                                    i,t +  rf ui,t fi,t + ui,t ,                  (22)

where

                                                  r
                                      r =             ,
                                              1 ­ r y
                                                    f
                                      f =                         ,
                                              1 ­ r (y + f )
                                                     r
                                      rf =                   ­ r .
                                              1 ­ r (y + f )

The third term on the right hand side of Equation 22 captures the indirect effect from the interaction
of monetary and fiscal policy. The amount of accommodative monetary policy is captured by the size
of the monetary shocks ur
                        i,t (since these capture the policy stance relative to what would have been
expected given the rule). The indirect effect captures the fact that, less accommodative monetary
policy may translate into a larger recession during periods of fiscal treatment.
   In estimating Equation 22 the technical challenge is that we do not observe ur     i,t directly and
                                  r
commonly constructed proxies for ui,t are usually only available for countries like the United States.
To our knowledge, there is no consistent cross-country dataset of monetary policy shocks. In this
section, as a robustness check, we therefore rely on a simple approach to validate the results in the
previous section.
   First, using a panel ordered probit, we predict the probability of observing an interest rate
change based on two lags of GDP growth, inflation, the lagged change in the policy rate, and world
GDP growth. We are implicitly assuming a common policy rule across countries. Monetary policy



                                                     28
                                    Figure 7: Policy experiments: an alternative approach

                   (a) Response of GDP (%)                        (b) Cumulative fiscal multiplier by monetary response
   .5




                                                                       2
   0




                                                                       1
   -.5
   -1




                                                                       0
   -1.5




                                                                       -1
                                                                            -1.5     -1         -.5      0       .5   1     1.5
   -2




                                                                                                Standard deviations
            0              1                     2           3
                               Horizon (Years)                                            h=0               h=2           h=3


Notes: Panel (a) shows how the response of GDP varies with the degree of monetary policy accommodation. The blue lines report
the direct effect. The gray lines consider experiments which vary the degree of monetary accommodation. A larger marker indicates
a tighter monetary policy scenario. Panel (b) reports the associated cumulative fiscal multiplier. Relative to baseline Figure 2 and
Figure 3, this figure is produced using an alternative approach to monetary-fiscal interactions, as discussed in the text.



shocks are then constructed as follows,

                                           ur
                                            i,t = it ­ (p­1 × ­1 + p0 × 0 + p+1 × 1) ,


where it is the nominal policy rate and the p terms are the predicted probabilities of a rate cut, no
change or an increase. This approach therefore attempts to remove the predictable component of
monetary policy. As in the previous section, the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition is estimated from
the following regression,

          yi,t+h = µh                h      r     h          h                    h         r     h
                    0 + (xi,t ­ xi ) 0,x + ui,t+h 0,r + fi,t  + fi,t (xi,t ­ xi ) x + fi,t ui,t+h r + i,t+h ,                   (23)

The main difference from the previous section is that the future stance of monetary policy during
the consolidation episode is captured by the deviation of the policy from what was expected, i.e.,
the shock term ur
                i,t+h .
     Figure 7 shows the results. Once again, the first panel shows the effect on GDP on average (blue
line), and for tighter and looser monetary policy during the consolidation episode (gray lines). We
consider experiments from -1.5 standard deviation shocks to +1.5 standard deviation shocks. We use
a wider range for this experiment as a one-standard deviation shock produces smaller variations in
interest rates. Episodes with tighter monetary policy are associated with a much larger fall in GDP.


                                                                 29
In Figure A.8, the deficit to GDP ratio also improves by less in these more contractionary episodes.
In Figure 7 Panel (b), we therefore report the cumulative fiscal multiplier. The multiplier rises to
nearly 2 when monetary conditions are tight.


6.6.    Other forms of state-dependence
Our regressions contain a number of other state variables and the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition
allows us to consider how the fiscal multiplier varies along each of these dimensions while controlling
for the other states. In the literature, state dependence is often investigated by considering one
dimension at a time, although typical macro variables that are often used to define the state are
likely to be highly correlated. For example, boom periods are likely to be correlated with periods of
high inflation, high house prices, and potentially high private credit growth.
    Figure 8 shows how the multiplier varies according to each of the other macro controls in our
regressions, holding the other variables constant. The other variables are the output gap, the change
in the fiscal deficit to GDP ratio, World GDP growth and the size of the fiscal consolidation.29
    Figure 8 shows that along each of these dimensions, once we control for the other variables
simultaneously, there is only sizable state dependence by the size of the output gap. This confirms
results in the existing literature, such as Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012) and Jord`
                                                                                      a and Taylor
(2016), that fiscal multipliers tend to be larger in periods of low aggregate demand. To the extent
that a large change in the deficit to GDP ratio is associated with fiscal stress, our results do not
suggest a smaller multipliers in these states. Further, the multiplier does not seem to be smaller for
larger consolidations, which was one regularity considered in the expansionary fiscal consolidations
literature.


                     7.    Conclusion and policy implications

This paper has shown that using the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition from applied microeconomics
in a local projections framework, the impulse response can be decomposed into (1) the direct effect
of the intervention on the outcome; (2) the indirect effect due to changes in how other covariates
affect the outcome when there is an intervention; and (3) a composition effect due to differences in
covariates between treated and control subpopulations. This decomposition provides convenient
way to evaluate the effects of policy, state-dependence, and balance conditions for identification.
    A natural application of this logic is in the area of monetary-fiscal interactions. The fiscal
multiplier is a key statistic for understanding how fiscal policy changes might stimulate or contract
the macroeconomy. The size of the multiplier has been a subject of intensive debate since the
Global Financial Crisis in 2008. But, despite the importance of this object, there is still much
disagreement about existing empirical estimates. A large literature has focused on tackling the
  29 Ourmain regression also includes GDP growth. The results are very similar to those using the output
gap and are thus omitted for brevity.


                                                  30
                            Figure 8: Other forms of state dependence in the fiscal multiplier

                        (a) Output gap                                           (b) Change in the debt to GDP Ratio
   2




                                                                            2
   1




                                                                            1
   0




                                                                            0
   -1




          -.5 -.375 -.25 -.125 0 .125 .25             .375        .5        -1   -.5 -.375 -.25 -.125 0 .125 .25            .375        .5
                        Standard deviations                                                    Standard deviations

                     h=0                h=2                  h=3                           h=0                h=2                  h=3




                (c) Size of the consolidation                                           (d) World GDP growth
     2




                                                                            2
     1




                                                                            1
     0




                                                                            0
     -1




                                                                            -1




          -.5 -.375 -.25 -.125 0 .125 .25            .375    .5                  -.5 -.375 -.25 -.125 0 .125 .25          .375     .5
                        Standard deviations                                                    Standard deviations

                      h=0               h=2                 h=3                            h=0               h=2                 h=3


Notes: This chart shows how the cumulative fiscal multiplier varies with the other state variables in our regressions. As before, the
multiplier is computed as the cumulative sum of the GDP response relative to the cumulative deficit to GDP response. Each line refers
to a different horizon, h. As in Figure 2, h goes from the current year h = 0 to the third year after the shock h = 3. h = 1 is omitted to
avoid overcrowding the figure. Panel (a) shows variation in the multiplier depending on the size of the (lagged) output gap, Panel (b)
is for difference changes in the (lagged) deficit to GDP ratio, Panel (c) varies the size of the fiscal consolidation and Panel (d) varies
World GDP growth.



                                                                       31
inherent identification issues that researchers face in this area. Our paper tackles a more conceptual
problem: there is no such thing as the fiscal multiplier in the data. One of the most obvious reasons
is that monetary policy may not offset the effects of fiscal policy in the same way across time or
across countries. We show that the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition provides a natural way to try to
disentangle these effects.
   Our main result is that fiscal multipliers can be large when monetary policy is less activist. This
accords with conventional wisdom and the mechanism can be found in many models. To date,
despite the key policy relevance of the issue, empirical evidence on the magnitude of this important
interaction remains somewhat limited. In our experiments, fiscal multipliers can be as low zero or
as high as 2 and above, depending on the actions of the monetary authority. This has important
implications for measuring "the multiplier" and for evaluating and predicting the likely effects of
particular macro-policy interventions.
   The Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition we propose also has wider implications for measuring
the effects of all kinds of policy treatments in macroeconomics, and will allow control for many
other possible dimensions of heterogeneity in a very flexible way. Using our decomposition
approach, the tasks of estimation and inference can be easily undertaken by using standard linear
regression methods while still being sufficiently general to allow for a great deal of unspecified
state dependence. We therefore hope these techniques will be of use to all researchers interested
in the study of state-dependent, non-linear, and time-varying effects of policy interventions more
generally.




                                                 32
                                         References
Acconcia, Antonio, Giancarlo Corsetti, and Saverio Simonelli. 2014. Mafia and Public Spending:
  Evidence on the Fiscal Multiplier from a Quasi-experiment. American Economic Review 104(7):
  2185­2209.
                    `
Angrist, Joshua D., Oscar Jord`
                              a, and Guido M. Kuersteiner. 2018. Semiparametric Estimates of
 Monetary Policy Effects: String Theory Revisited. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 36(3):
 371­387.

Auerbach, Alan J., and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2012. Measuring the Output Responses to Fiscal
  Policy. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4(2): 1­27.

Bachmann, Rudiger,
             ¨       and Eric R. Sims. 2012. Confidence and the transmission of government
  spending shocks. Journal of Monetary Economics 59(3): 235 ­ 249.

Barro, Robert J., and Charles J. Redlick. 2011. Macroeconomic Effects From Government Purchases
  and Taxes. Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(1): 51­102.

Blanchard, Olivier, and Roberto Perotti. 2002. An Empirical Characterization of the Dynamic Effects
  of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(4):
  1329­1368.

Blinder, Alan S. 1973. Wage Discrimination: Reduced Form and Structural Estimates. Journal of
  Human Resources 8(4): 436­455.

Born, Benjamin, Falko Juessen, and Gernot J. Muller.
                                                   ¨     2013. Exchange rate regimes and fiscal
  multipliers. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 37(2): 446­465.

Canova, Fabio, and Evi Pappa. 2011. Fiscal Policy, Pricing Frictions and Monetary Accommodation.
  Economic Policy 26(1): 555­598.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel. 2019. Geographic Cross-Sectional Fiscal Spending Multipliers: What
  Have We Learned? American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 11(2): 1­34.

Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 2011. When is the government
  spending multiplier large? Journal of Political Economy 119(1): 78­121.

Cloyne, James. 2013. Discretionary Tax Changes and the Macroeconomy: New Narrative Evidence
  from the United Kingdom. American Economic Review 103(4): 1507­1528.

Cloyne, James, Nicholas Dimsdale, and Natacha Postel-Vinay. 2018. Taxes and Growth: New
  Narrative Evidence from Interwar Britain. NBER Working Paper 24659.

Cloyne, James S., and Paolo Surico. 2017. Household Debt and the Dynamic Effects of Income Tax
  Changes. Review of Economic Studies 84(1): 45­81.

Corbi, Raphael, Elias Papaioannou, and Paolo Surico. 2019. Regional Transfer Multipliers. Review of
  Economic Studies 86(5): 1901­1934.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Andr´
                         e Meier, Gernot J. Muller,
                                             ¨      and Michael B. Devereux. 2012. What determines
  government spending multipliers? Economic Policy 27(72): 521­565.


                                                33
Crafts, Nicholas, and Terence C. Mills. 2013. Rearmament to the Rescue? New Estimates of the
  Impact of "Keynesian" Policies in 1930s' Britain. Journal of Economic History 73(4): 1077­1104.

DeLong, J Bradford, and Lawrence H Summers. 2012. Fiscal Policy in a Depressed Economy.
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2012(1): 233­297.

Eggertsson, Gauti B. 2011. What Fiscal Policy is Effective at Zero Interest Rates? In NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual 2010, edited by Acemoglu, Daron, and Michael Woodford, volume 25,
  59­112. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Fortin, Nicole, Thomas Lemieux, and Sergio Firpo. 2011. Decomposition Methods in Economics. In
  Handbook of Labor Economics, edited by Ashenfelter, O., and D. Card, volume 4, chapter 1, 1­102.
  Amsterdam: Elsevier.

   i, Jordi. 2015. Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New Keynesian
Gal´
  Framework and Its Applications. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2nd edition.

Gal´
   i, Jordi, J. David Lopez-Salido,
                       ´            and Javier Vall´
                                                   es. 2007. Understanding the Effects of Government
  Spending on Consumption. Journal of the European Economic Association 5(1): 227­270.

Guajardo, Jaime, Daniel Leigh, and Andrea Pescatori. 2011. Expansionary Austerity: New Interna-
  tional Evidence. IMF Working Paper WP/11/158.

Guajardo, Jaime, Daniel Leigh, and Andrea Pescatori. 2014. Expansionary Austerity? International
  Evidence. Journal of the European Economic Association 12(4): 949­968.

Gunter, Samara, Daniel Riera-Crichton, Carlos V´
                                               egh, and Guillermo Vuletin. 2018. Non-Linear
 Effects of Tax Changes on Output: The Role of the Initial Level of Taxation. World Bank Policy
 Research Working Paper 8668.

Guren, Adam M., Alisdair McKay, Emi Nakamura, and Jon
                                                    ´ Steinsson. 2020. Housing Wealth Effects:
 The Long View. Review of Economic Studies Forthcoming.

Hamilton, James D. 1994. Time Series Analysis. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Hayo, Bernd, and Matthias Uhl. 2014. The Macroeconomic Effects of Legislated Tax Changes in
 Germany. Oxford Economic Papers 66(2): 397­418.

Hussain, Syed M., and Liu Lin. 2018. Comparing the Effects of Discretionary Tax Changes between
 the US and the UK. The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics 18(1): 1­17.

Ilzetzki, Ethan, Enrique G. Mendoza, and Carlos A. V´     egh. 2013. How big (small?) are fiscal
   multipliers? Journal of Monetary Economics 60(2): 239­254.

Jord`  `
    a, Oscar. 2005. Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections. American
  Economic Review 95(1): 161­182.

Jord`  `
    a, Oscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2017. Macrofinancial History and the New
  Business Cycle Facts. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 31(1): 213­263.

Jord`  `
    a, Oscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2020. The effects of quasi-random monetary
  experiments. Journal of Monetary Economics 112: 22­40.


                                                    34
Jord`  `
    a, Oscar, and Alan M. Taylor. 2016. The Time for Austerity: Estimating the Average Treatment
  Effect of Fiscal Policy. Economic Journal 126(590): 219­255.

Kato, Akihisa, Wataru Miyamoto, Thuy Lan Nguyen, and Dmitriy Sergeyev. 2018. The Effects of Tax
  Changes at the Zero Lower Bound: Evidence from Japan. AEA Papers and Proceedings 108: 513­18.

Keynes, John Maynard. 1936. The Marginal Propensity to Consume and the Multiplier. In The
  General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money, chapter 10. London: Macmillan.

Leeper, Eric M., Michael Plante, and Nora Traum. 2010. Dynamics of fiscal financing in the United
  States. Journal of Econometrics 156(2): 304­321.

Leeper, Eric M, Nora Traum, and Todd B. Walker. 2017. Clearing Up the Fiscal Multiplier Morass.
  American Economic Review 107(8): 2409­54.

Mertens, Karel, and Morten O. Ravn. 2013. The Dynamic Effects of Personal and Corporate Income
 Tax Changes in the United States. American Economic Review 103(4): 1212­1247.

Miyamoto, Wataru, Thuy Lan Nguyen, and Dmitriy Sergeyev. 2018. Government Spending Multipli-
  ers under the Zero Lower Bound: Evidence from Japan. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
 10(3): 247­77.

Mountford, Andrew, and Harald Uhlig. 2009. What are the Effects of Fiscal Policy Shocks. Journal of
 Applied Econometrics 24(6): 960­992.

Nakamura, Emi, and Jon
                    ´ Steinsson. 2014. Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from US
 Regions. American Economic Review 104(3): 753­92.

Nguyen, Anh D. M., Luisanna Onnis, and Raffaele Rossi. 2020. The Macroeconomic Effects of
 Income and Consumption Tax Changes. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy. Forthcoming.

Oaxaca, Ronald. 1973. Male-Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labor Markets. International
 Economic Review 14(3): 693­709.

Ramey, Valerie A. 2016. Macroeconomic Shocks and Their Propagation. In Handbook of Macroeco-
  nomics, edited by Taylor, John B., and Harald Uhlig, volume 2, chapter 2, 71­162. Amsterdam:
  Elsevier.

Ramey, Valerie A., and Sarah Zubairy. 2018. Government Spending Multipliers in Good Times and
  in Bad: Evidence from US Historical Data. Journal of Political Economy 126(2): 850­901.

Riera-Crichton, Daniel, Carlos A. Vegh, and Guillermo Vuletin. 2015. Procyclical and countercyclical
  fiscal multipliers: Evidence from OECD countries. Journal of International Money and Finance 52:
  15­31.

Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2010. The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes:
  Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks. American Economic Review 100(3): 763­801.

Rubin, Donald B. 1974. Estimating Causal Effects of Treatments in Randomized and Nonrandomized
  Studies. Journal of Educational Psychology 66(5): 688­701.

Tenreyro, Silvana, and Gregory Thwaites. 2016. Pushing on a String: US Monetary Policy Is Less
  Powerful in Recessions. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 8(4): 43­74.

                                                35
Uhlig, Harald. 2010. Some Fiscal Calculus. American Economic Review 100(2): 30­34.

Woodford, Michael. 2011. Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier. American
 Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3(1): 1­35.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2001. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cambridge, Mass.:
 MIT Press.




                                                36
                                                       ONLINE APPENDIX

     A: Original Guajardo, Leigh, and Pescatori (2014) specification

                   Figure A.1: Effects of a 1% of GDP fiscal consolidation: original IMF specification

                       (a) % response of GDP                             (b) Response of the short term real interest rate
            .5




                                                                                 .5
            0




                                                                                 0
            -.5




                                                                                 -.5
            -1




                                                                                 -1
            -1.5




                                                                                 -1.5
                   0         1                     2      3                             0         1                     2   3
                                 Horizon (Years)                                                      Horizon (Years)



Notes: Vertical axes reported in percent change with respect to the origin. One and two standard deviation confidence bands for each
coefficient estimate shown as grey areas. Local projections as specified in equation (1) using two lags of each control described therein.
Sample 1978:1­2009:4. This specification uses the original control set from Guajardo, Leigh, and Pescatori (2014). See text for details.




                                                                  A1
B. Variation in the deficit to GDP ratio by monetary policy response

                                 Figure A.2: Deficit/GDP ratio ((Dt+h ­ Dt­1 )/Yt­1 )




                                     .5
                                     0
                                     -.5
                                     -1
                                     -1.5
                                     -2




                                            0             1                     2          3
                                                              Horizon (Years)



Notes: This Figure shows how the response of the deficit to GDP ratio varies with the degree of monetary policy accommodation. The
blue lines report the direct effect. The gray lines consider experiments which vary the degree of monetary accommodation. A larger
marker indicates a tighter monetary policy scenario.




                                                                 A2
                                C. Significance of the direct effect

              Figure A.3: Direct effect: response of GDP (%) to a 1% of GDP fiscal consolidation




                                      0
                                      -.5
                                      -1
                                      -1.5
                                      -2
                                      -2.5




                                             0             1                     2           3
                                                               Horizon (Years)



Notes: This Figure shows how the response GDP (%) following a 1% of GDP fiscal consolidation. The blue lines report the direct effect
estimated from the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition together with the one and two standard deviation error bands.




                                                                  A3
                                            D. Coefficient estimates

                           Table A.1: Coefficient estimates for the direct and indirect effects

                                              Horizon (Years)             h          fh

                                                         0               -0.03     -0.50
                                                                        (0.10)     (0.43)
                                                         1               -0.58     -0.60
                                                                        (0.19)     (0.29)
                                                         2               -0.82     -0.71
                                                                        (0.34)     (0.15)
                                                         3               -1.10     -1.25
                                                                        (0.60)     (0.16)

Notes: This table reports coefficient estimates based on equation 15. h is the impulse response function for the direct effect and
therefore corresponds to the Figure A.3. fh governs the strength of the indirect effect. A negative value implies that, following a fiscal
consolidation, real GDP is more negative when monetary policy is less accommodative. Standard errors are reported in parenthesis.




                                                                  A4
                                             E. Response of the real rate

                           Figure A.4: Response of the real interest rate by monetary regime




                                      .5
                                      0
                                      -.5
                                      -1
                                      -1.5
                                      -2




                                              0               1                     2               3
                                                                  Horizon (Years)


Notes: This Figure shows the response of the real interest rate to a 1% of GDP fiscal consolidation. The blue lines report the direct effect.
The gray lines consider experiments which vary the degree of monetary accommodation. A larger marker indicates a tighter monetary
policy scenario.




                                                                     A5
                      F: Alternative proxy for the monetary regime

                     Figure A.5: Theoretical state dependence versus Blinder-Oaxaca estimates




                                      2
                                      1
                                      0
                                      -1




                                           -2    -1.5   -1     -.5    0    .5    1      1.5      2
                                                             Standard deviations

                                                         Theoretical                 Estimated



Notes: This chart shows how the peak cumulative fiscal multiplier varies with the monetary policy response both in theory and when
the effect is estimated on simulated data. The red circles show the true theoretical variation in the simulated dataset. The blue squares
show the empirical estimates obtained by using our Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition estimated on data simulated from the model. This
figure is produced using an extended version of the model where the multiplier also varies with the share of hand to mouth households.
The monetary regime is then estimates from a Taylor Rule regression. See main text for details.




                                                                  A6
                           Figure A.6: Cumulative fiscal multiplier by monetary response




                                    2
                                    1
                                    0
                                    -1




                                         -1.25 -1 -.75 -.5 -.25 0 .25 .5           .75   1 1.25
                                                         Standard deviations

                                                      h=0                h=2                h=3


Notes: This chart shows the cumulative fiscal multiplier varying the degree of monetary offset. This is computed as the cumulative
sum of the GDP response relative to the cumulative deficit to GDP response. Each line refers to a different horizon, h. As in Figure 2,
h goes from the current year h = 0 to the third year after the shock h = 3. h = 1 is omitted to avoid overcrowding the figure. Relative
to the baseline figure in the main text, this is produced using the alternative monetary regime proxy as discussed in Section 6. Note
that the standard deviation of the two proxies (the new proxy and the baseline method) are different. The experiment here is therefore
calibrated so the real interest rate varies on impact by a similar amount to the baseline figure.




                                                                 A7
                             G. Controlling for fiscal composition

                            Figure A.7: Cumulative fiscal multiplier by monetary response




                                     2
                                     1
                                     0
                                     -1




                                           -.5 -.375 -.25 -.125 0 .125 .25              .375    .5
                                                         Standard deviations

                                                       h=0                h=2                  h=3


Notes: This chart shows the cumulative fiscal multiplier varying the degree of monetary offset. This is computed as the cumulative sum
of the GDP response relative to the cumulative deficit to GDP response. Each line refers to a different horizon, h. As in Figure 2, h goes
from the current year h = 0 to the third year after the shock h = 3. h = 1 is omitted to avoid overcrowding the figure. Relative to the
baseline figure in the main text, this is produced controlling for the cross-country propensity to use taxes versus spending instruments,
as discussed in Section 6.




                                                                  A8
                         H. Robustness exercises: deficit/GDP ratio

                      Figure A.8: Robustness exercises: deficit/GDP ratio ((Dt+h ­ Dt­1 )/Yt­1 )

                      (a) Time fixed effects                                          (b) Longer lag structure
   .5




                                                                       .5
   0




                                                                       0
   -.5




                                                                       -.5
   -1




                                                                       -1
   -1.5




                                                                       -1.5
   -2




                                                                       -2




          0               1                     2             3               0              1                     2             3
                              Horizon (Years)                                                    Horizon (Years)

              (c) Alternative interactions approach
   .5
   0
   -.5
   -1
   -1.5
   -2




          0               1                     2             3
                              Horizon (Years)




Notes: This Figure shows how the deficit to GDP ratio varies with the degree of monetary policy accommodation in each of the
robustness exercises covered in Section 6. The blue lines report the direct effect. The gray lines consider experiments which vary the
degree of monetary accommodation. A larger marker indicates a tighter monetary policy scenario.



                                                                  A9
                           I: Further details on the model
The model is a simple variant of the textbook 3-equation New Keynesian model (e.g., as in Gal´i,
2015) with optimizing and hand-to-mouth households as in Gal´i, Lopez-Salido,
                                                                 ´            and Vall´
                                                                                      es (2007).
The details below are therefore very standard.


Households
Savers The economy is populated by 1 ­ µ saver/optimizing households:
                                                                        1+
                                                                    N
                                    max E0              t
                                                            log Ct ­ t        ,               (24)
                                   Ct ,Nt ,Bt     t=0               1+

subject to
                                Pt Ct + Qt Bt = Bt­1 + Wt Nt + Dt ­ Tt .                      (25)
Which leads to the following set of first order conditions:

                                                 (Ct ) : t = C­ 
                                                              t ,                             (26)


                                                            Wt    
                                                (Nt ) : t      = Nt ,                         (27)
                                                            Pt
                                                                     P
                            (Bt ) : Qt = 1/Rt = 1/(1 + it ) = Et t+1 t ,                      (28)
                                                                 t Pt+1
where saver households own firms and receive any profits Dt lump sum. These households also
finance government activities via a lump sum tax Tt .
    In linearized form these equilibrium conditions can be written as:

                                                       ^S
                                                  ^t = c
                                                  w          ^S
                                                         t + nt ,

                                                        1 ^
                                           ^S
                                        Et c t+1 =        it ­ Et ^ t+1   .
                                                        

Non-savers Non-saver rule of thumb households simply consume their entire labor income.

                                                   CN       N
                                                    t = wt Nt .
    They also, in principle, have an intratemporal labor supply condition which comes from solving
the same optimization problem as above for C and N but where B = D = T = 0.

                                                  Wt       N
                                                     = CN
                                                        t Nt .                                (29)
                                                  Pt
   Total consumption is given by:

                                            Ct = µ CN           S
                                                    t + (1 ­ µ)Ct .
   In linearized form these are:



                                                        A10
                                                       ^N
                                                  ^t = c
                                                  w          ^N
                                                         t + nt ,


                                                   ^N
                                                   c       ^N
                                                        ^t+n
                                                     t =w   t ,


                                                  CN N            CS S
                                        ^t = µ
                                        c            ^ t + (1 ­ µ) c
                                                     c              ^ .
                                                   C              C t

Firms
Final goods firms Different varieties of goods y(j)t are aggregated by the final goods firm:

                                                          1               ­1        ( ­1)
                                         Yt =                    yt (j)        dj           ,                  (30)
                                                         0

where is price elasticity of demand for good j. Final goods firms choose intermediate inputs to
maximize profit:
                                           1             ­1           ( ­1)          1
                           max Pt               yt (j)           dj            ­          pt (j)yt (j)dj   .   (31)
                            yt (j)         0                                        0

   Which yields the following demand curve and aggregate price index

                                                                  pt (j) ­
                                               yt (j) =                    Yt ,                                (32)
                                                                   Pt
                                                                                      1
                                                             1                       1­
                                                                          1­
                                         Pt =                    pt (j)        dj           .                  (33)
                                                         0


Intermediate goods firms Intermediate goods firms solve a static labor demand problem and an
intertemporal pricing problem subject to Calvo pricing frictions. Each period firms can re-optimize
labor demand.
    The firm minimizes labor costs by choosing n(j)t to minimize the following Lagrangian:

                                            Wt
                                     min       nt (j) + mct (yt (j) ­ Ant (j)) ,                               (34)
                                     nt (j) Pt

where mct is real marginal cost. The first order condition is:

                                                mct = (Wt /Pt )/A .                                            (35)

   When the firm is able to re optimize, they choose pt (j) to maximize expected profits:
                                                              pt (j)
                           Et   s       s t+s                        yt+s (j) ­ mct+s yt+s (j) ,               (36)
                               s=0        t                   Pt+s

subject to
                                                                  pt (j) ­
                                               yt (j) =                    Yt ,                                (37)
                                                                   Pt


                                                                 A11
which yields:
                                                
                                               pt
                          s Et    s t+s
                                    t         Pt+s
                                                   yt+s (j) ­
                                                              ­1
                                                                 mct+s yt+s (j)   = 0.                 (38)
                        s=0
    Linearization of equation 38 and the price index 31 yields the New Keynesian Phillips Curve
given in the text.


Policy
As mentioned in the main text, government consumption is simply a persistent exogenous stream of
purchases funded with lump sum taxes on savers. The budget constraint is therefore:

                                                  Gt = Tt .

    In linearized form, government spending evolves as follows:

                                              ^ t = g g
                                              g       ^ t­1 + et ,

where et is a mean zero i.i.d. shock.
   Monetary policy follows a simple Taylor Rule. The nominal interest rate ^      it , written in deviations
from steady state, is set relative to inflation. Importantly, we will think of this rule as varying across
country, c, but where each country operates as a closed economy. The policy rule is therefore:

                                         ^       it­1 + (1 ­ i )c 
                                         it =  i ^                ^t ,                                 (39)




                                                     A12
