                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE MURDER-SUICIDE OF THE RENTIER:
                      POPULATION AGING AND THE RISK PREMIUM

                                          Joseph Kopecky
                                          Alan M. Taylor

                                        Working Paper 26943
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26943


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26943.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Joseph Kopecky and Alan M. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Murder-Suicide of the Rentier: Population Aging and the Risk Premium
Joseph Kopecky and Alan M. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 26943
April 2020, July 2020
JEL No. E21,E43,G11,J11

                                          ABSTRACT

Population aging has been linked to global declines in real interest rates. A similar trend is seen
for equity risk premia, which are on the rise. An existing literature can explain part of the
declining trend in safe rates using demographics, but has no mechanism to speak to trends in
relative returns on different assets. We calibrate a heterogeneous agent life-cycle model with
equity markets and aggregate risk, and we show that aging demographics can simultaneously
account for both the majority of a downward trend in the risk free rate, while also increasing the
return premium attached to risky assets. This is because the life-cycle savings dynamics that have
been well documented exert less pressure on risky assets as older households shift away from
risk. Under reasonable calibrations we find declines in the safe rate that are considerably larger
than most existing estimates between the years 1990 and 2017. We are also able to account for
most of the rise in the equity risk premium. Projecting forward to 2050 we show that persistent
demographic forces will continue push the risk free rate further into negative territory, while the
equity risk premium remains elevated.


Joseph Kopecky
Department of Economics
Room 3014 Arts Building
Trinity College
Dublin
Ireland
jkopecky@tcd.ie

Alan M. Taylor
Department of Economics and
Graduate School of Management
University of California
One Shields Ave
Davis, CA 95616-8578
and CEPR
and also NBER
amtaylor@ucdavis.edu
                                         1.    Introduction

Essential contrasts between different classes of investors and investments have played
an important role over the long sweep of macroeconomic thought. In the 19th century, a
distinction between a coupon-clipping rentier, vested in fixed-income bonds and debentures,
and a risk-taking re-investing capitalist owning mostly private equity, was a crucial one for
Marx. Subsequently, in the interwar years of the 20th century Keynes sensed a tectonic shift
in the ownership, control, and financing of business, as inflation wracked the traditional
rentier class, and a more distributed-ownership public equity model took shape.1 Looking
to the future, and anticipating exogenous technological and political pressures which would
force lower real rates of return, Keynes then famously spoke of "the euthanasia of the
rentier, of the functionless investor" and thought that, in parallel, even risky returns be
would be destined to fall, pari passu, except for some premium "to cover risk and the
exercise of skill and judgment."2 Yet this is not exactly the future that came to pass, either
in Keynes's time or our own, even if low real interest rates on safe assets then and now
suggest common trends of secular stagnation (Hansen, 1939; Summers, 2014).
    The theme of this paper is subtly different and focuses on divergent rates of return.
In the last thirty years, real safe rates have indeed fallen, so the classic coupon-clipping
rentiers may be seen to have suffered. However, at the same time, returns to risky capital
have not fallen as much, if at all. This constitutes a puzzle, and is by definition beyond the
scope of standard macroeconomic models with only one type of capital. We introduce an
overlapping generations (OLG) model with both safe and risky assets, with labor income
and saving for retirement. We study this model under exogenously changing mortality and
age structure in recent decades, and look forward to 2050 according to current projections.
We have two main findings. First, consistent with current research, our model can generate
a decline in the safe rate due to population aging; however, the impact in our model is
much larger than the existing literature. Second, we can also match the rise in the risk
premium seen in the data, that is, our model also generates a risky return where the change
over time is much flatter, resolving the puzzle.
    The key mechanism driving our results is endogenous age-specific portfolio choices:
workers initially accumulate mainly risky assets ("equity"), but then move to a portfolio
with a greater allocation to safe assets ("bonds") as they approach and enter retirement.
The model is calibrated to resemble observed patterns in wealth accumulation and portfolio
   1 The  idea of the rentier appears in, e.g., Marx (1844 [1932]), Keynes (1936). For critical discussion, see
Crotty (1990), and McKibbin (2013). On the evolution of financial systems in those eras see Kindleberger
(1984).
    2 The quotes are taken from Chapter 24 of Keynes (1936).




                                                      1
choice in the data. Given this setup, exogenous demographic changes like those seen in the
last 30 years produce a growing mass of traditional rentier types in older age cohorts (i.e.,
boomers) who compete with each other to demand safe assets for their retirement in ever
larger numbers, killing the safe rate of return. We therefore describe a phenomenon which
is not an exogenous euthansia, but rather an endoegnous murder-suicide of the rentier.
   Our work ties in to multiple, large literatures. The past decade has seen advanced
economies face a period of unprecedented low real interest rates, stable inflation, and
lackluster growth. Recognizing the apparent persistence of these trends, much has been
written concerning the secular stagnation hypothesis, repopularized in Summers (2014)
and most recently explored in Eggertsson, Lancastre, and Summers (2019a). Indeed a large
number of recent works has shown that aging, both through falling fertility rates and rising
life expectancy is a significant factor in the long run decline in real rates since as early as the
1980s. One important mechanism linking these demographics to asset prices is the buildup
of savings over the course of the lifecycle. This savings glut results from a concentration of
population into older, higher saving, age groups, as well as increasing life expectancy.
   Taking the logic of a savings glut further, one might assume that aging populations have
a similar effects on all assets, yet equity returns have stabilized or even risen since 2000.
This, coupled with a well documented decline in the risk free rate, has driven a substantial
increase in the equity risk premium. We first document this phenomenon empirically,
noting that it exists in multiple measurements of the risk premium. We then calibrate
a heterogeneous-agent life-cycle model to match the U.S. under different demographic
structures, showing that the downward pressure of old age saving on returns is not only
weaker on risky assets than on safe assets, but that the effect is quantitatively large.
   The literature linking demographic forces to macroeconomic trends has grown substan-
tially in recent years. In their work studying the effect of population aging on real interest
rates in the United States, Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016) find that, since 1980,
population aging can account for a 125 basis point fall in the long run real interest rates
and economic growth. Carvalho, Ferrero, and Nechio (2016) find larger effects, suggesting
that the decline may be as high as 200 basis points. They also investigate the strengths
of each potential demographic channel and suggest that most of this decline comes from
rising life expectancy. While both models differ in some important ways from ours, one
of our key mechanisms will be the same. Lisack, Sajedi, and Thwaites (2017) argue that
demographic forces can account for roughly half of the roughly 450 basis global real interest
rates since 1980 documented in Rachel and Smith (2015), while also accounting for a large
fraction of the simultaneous rise in housing prices and debt. Eggertsson, Mehrotra, Singh,
and Summers (2016) extend the idea to an open-economy setting showing that global


                                                2
capital markets can act as a transmission mechanism for low natural rates and potential
policy spillovers. Recently Eggertsson, Lancastre, and Summers (2019a) show that there are
important implications for aging on economic growth and welfare. Cooley and Henriksen
(2018) suggest that increasing life expectancies and shifts in cohort distributions can lead
to substantially lower growth through decreased labor supply as well as TFP growth. In
one of the only other papers to study aging and relative asset prices, Geppert, Ludwig,
and Abiry (2016) take a similar modeling approach, but with a focus on projecting forward
rather than documenting historical effects. They find much smaller effects on asset prices
and our results suggest that much of the important demographic forces on relative asset
prices are operating just before the horizon they study.3
    Empirical work by Daly (2016) suggests that the equity risk premium has risen steadily
since the turn of the century. Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2017) document this for the
U.S., finding that from 1980 to 2000, the expected rate of return on equities fell in tandem
with risk free rates, at which point equity returns stabilized while safe rates continued
to fall and the ERP began to rise. Their conclusion identified the global savings glut as
a potential explanation, with a rise in reserve accumulation in emerging markets driving
up demand for safe assets relative to risky. Greenwood and Vissing-Jorgensen (2018) find
evidence that the size of pension systems, growing with population aging, have driven
demand for long term government debt. A relative growth in "risk-averse wealth" is a
broader point emphasized by Hall (2016), and it aligns with the mechanism we explore.
    We offer a complementary explanation that links this timing seen in the data with the
aging of the baby boomers, who in 2000 were 46 to 66 years old. At precisely this time
the U.S. workforce began a dramatic shift as this large cohort approached retirement. This
trend is also observed in Rachel and Smith (2015), who discuss the growing spread between
IMF measures of global real interest rates and their global measure of return on capital.
    Our work relates to other research which has identified robust returns or profits in a
broader portfolio including risky assets, including observations on flows in the national
accounts (Ravikumar, Rupert, and Gomme, 2015) and inferences drawn from summary
measures such as r - g (Piketty, 2014). Daly (2016) finds that much of the decline in global
bond yields from 1985 to 2000 were driven by this savings channel, but suggests that the
majority of subsequent declines come from "equity risk premium shocks." He proposes
population aging as a potentially important channel.
   3 Their model includes a few features that ours does not like human capital, but lacks limited participation
in asset markets or multiple agent "types" which provide more realistic population asset holdings and wealth.
They also project the effects of demographics on growth and safe and risky assets from 2010 to 2050, finding
a 0.65 and 0.47 percentage point decline in each respectively. This is smaller than the effect that we find on
each asset (2.87 and 3.28 declines), but somewhat similar in the implied ERP change over that period.



                                                      3
   The contribution of our work will be to quantitatively examine the effects of aging in
a financial model of life-cycle portfolio allocation. Such models have their roots in the
seminal work of Bodie, Merton, and Samuelson (1992). They show that agents in a life-cycle
model of portfolio choice will rebalance their assets away from risky equity towards safer
bonds as they age. The mechanism that is operative in their work, which will be crucial to
ours, is that the present value of labor income acts as a relatively safe asset. As individuals
age this safe asset shrinks, giving them incentive to move their financial wealth away from
risk to keep their overall risk constant. Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (2005) build on this
result and find that the utility costs of failing to balance portfolio to account for declining
human capital assets is potentially quite large. In related work, Benzoni, Collin-Dufresne,
and Goldstein (2007) show that equity dividends are cointegrated with the labor markets.
The implication of their work is that the expected portfolio shifting takes a hump shape
over the life cycle as the human capital aspect of labor income acts as a "stock-like" asset
for young investors and a "bond-like" asset for those nearer retirement.


 2.   The Equity Risk Premium: Recent Trends and Related Evidence

It is useful to define what is meant by the term equity risk premium or ERP. In practice there
are many ways in which this can be measured and the results are often strikingly different.
A useful discussion is presented by Damodaran (2013). Rather than reinvent the wheel, we
seek to report a variety of standard estimates which reveal a common underlying pattern.
Any measure of the ERP is an attempt to measure the difference between the expected
return on a risky asset ( R) and the known return on a risk-free asset ( R f ), expressed as:

                                                           f
                                 RPt (k ) = Et [ Rt+k ] - Rt+k .

   Five broad methods of estimating this object, explained in detail by Duarte and Rosa
(2015), are: historical means, dividend discount models, cross-sectional regressions, time-
series regressions, and surveys of investors. Among these approaches, the crucial differences
largely stem from how expectations are formed, and the specification of equity returns.
   Seeking consensus estimates, we follow Duarte and Rosa (2015), and their later updates.
They estimated the U.S. equity risk premium for 20 commonly used models over a period
from 1960 to 2015. In doing so they both document a wide degree of variance among
measures as well as the convergence of those measures over time. Moreover, they conduct
a principal component analysis, seeking to extract the common trend in these measures.
   In Figure 1a we see that this ensemble model-averaging approach produces an average
annual equity risk premium which declines from near 9% in the 1970s to a low close to

                                               4
                                                     Figure 1: The Fall and Rise of the US Equity Risk Premium

                                     (a) Ensemble principal component                                                         (b) Free-cash-flow-to-equity model
                                          (Duarte and Rosa, 2015)                                                                    (Damodaran, 2013)
                12




                                                                                                          12
                                             Data:            ERP (Duarte & Rosa)                                                       Data:              ERP (Damodaran)
                11




                                                                                                          11
                                                                               10.05
                            9 10




                                                                                                                      9 10
 Equity risk premium (%, annual)




                                                                                           Equity risk premium (%, annual)
                                      8.81
                       8




                                                                                                                 8
                   7




                                                                                                             7
                                                 6.27
                                                                     5.81
                6




                                                                                                          6
                                                                                                                                                                        5.58
           5




                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                4.59      4.38                4.13
      4




                                                                                                4
                                                           3.14                                                                                     3.12
  3




                                                                                            3
                2




                                                                                                          2
                1




                                                                                                          1
                0




                                                                                                          0
                                   1970­79   1980­89    1990­99   2000­09   2010­19                                          1970­79   1980­89   1990­99   2000­09   2010­19




3% in the 1990s, reversing course to rise back to about 10% in the 2010, a swing of roughly
600­700 bps in each direction (95% confidence intervals for each decade are shown).
               As there is a great variance in measures of the ERP, we note that similar trends can be
found in Figure 1b using the widely-used estimates of Damodaran (2013), and later updates.
These are based on a free-cash-flow-to-equity (FCFE) estimation approach: this measure
incorporates not only dividends paid, but also the cash left over after taxes, reinvestment,
and debt repayments in calculating equity returns. Since only half of this cash has been
paid out as dividends over the last decade, and much is used to finance stock buybacks,
this measure gives a broad estimate of the return to equity, and could potentially be quite
different from the results of some dividend-only models. We see that this model produces
a time series for the equity risk premium which declines from near 4.5% in the 1970s to a
low close to 3% in the 1990s, then reversing course to rise back to about 5.5% in the 2010.
               Qualitatively this again reveals a U-shaped path over time, as in the ensemble model;
but quantitatively the variation is smaller, and the amplitude of the swings here are less
pronounced, around 150­250 bps rather than 600­700 bps. Given the amplitude of the
changes seen, we treat the ensemble model principal component as a "high" estimate of
the decadal ERP variation to be explained, and the FCFE model as a "low" estimate.
               Next, we present a compromise "medium" estimate of decadal ERP changes in Figure
2. We plot ten year averages for the expected real return on equity, the real safe rate,


                                                                                       5
Figure 2: Safe rate, expected equity return, and risk premium using Shiller E/P and 1-year treasury yield
                10
                                                        9.62
                                                                                           Data:
                                                                                           Safe real rate
                9



                                          8.10
                                                                                           ERP (EP minus 1Y)
   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8




                                                        4.51                               Expected real equity return
 Equity risk premium (%, annual)




                                          6.82                        4.49
                                                                                                      4.05
                                                                                    3.82
                                                                      2.19

                                                 5.12
                                                                                    3.46

                                                               2.31
                                                                                                      6.25
                                   1.27
                                                                             0.36
                0




                                                                                              -2.19
                -1
                -2




                                    1970­79       1980­89       1990­99       2000­09           2010­19




and the implied equity risk premium. Here the expected return on equity is the inverse
Shiller price-earnings ratios and the safe rate is the 1-year treasury bill yield. Expected
inflation uses the Michigan survey, or when that is not available, lagged moving-average
CPI inflation.
               Looking at this picture, the average expected equity return was elevated in the 1970s
and 1980s, but relatively stable since the 1990s at around 400 bps, and the slight dip seen in
the 2000s is in line with the findings of Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2017) and others.
On the other hand, the average real safe rate shows the steady downtrend from 500 bps
in the 1980s to near zero as is well known from the natural rate and secular stagnation
literatures (Holston, Laubach, and Williams, 2017; Summers and Rachel, 2019). Thus, the
average risk premium fell from high levels of 450­680 bps in the 1970s and 1980s, to a low
of near 220 bps in the 1990s, only to widen back to near 350 bps in the 2000s and 625 bps
by the 2010s.
               Summing up, by any measure the risk premium fell from the 1970s to the 1990s, then
rebounded substantially over the last 20­30 years, as seen in the last two sets of estimates.
This is qualitatively in line with the trends that Duarte and Rosa (2015) derive from 20
different measures of the ERP, so this stylized fact is not an artifact of one choice of
measurement of equity returns. Since it represents a "medium" amplitude estimate of
low-frequency decadal ERP variations, we treat Figure 2 as our explicandum for the rest of
this paper. Can a macroeconomic model explain a meaningful share of these patterns?
               Our model builds on demographic change. The United States is still in the midst of a

                                                                6
                               Figure 3: U.S. changing age cohort sizes


               > 80                                                                     1990
                                                                                        2020
              75­79
                                                                                        2050
              70­74
              65­69
              60­64
              55­59
              50­54
  Age group




              45­49
              40­44
              35­39
              30­34
              25­29
              20­24
              15­19
              10­14

                      .02        .04                  .06                 .08              .1
                                                Population share




long trend in population aging. Figure 3 shows five year cohort shares of overall population
in 1990, 2020, and then projections for 2050. There has been a striking change in the age
structure of the population since 1990 with no end in sight. Any demographic headwinds
or tailwinds acting on asset prices will be with us for a long time.
       Our model then adds endogenous asset allocation over the course of working life and
retirement. As noted, standard life-cycle models of portfolio allocation find that households
will rebalance their financial portfolios away from risk as they approach retirement. In
much of the literature, this hypothesis has found mixed empirical support. However, in
work with relatively complete administrative data on asset holdings such as Fagereng,
Gottlieb, and Guiso (2017) it seems true that households significantly draw down equity
assets as they age. They show that around retirement households not only reduce their
portfolio share of equity, but also start to leave the stock market altogether. They show
that to achieve change on both of these margins in a partial equilibrium life-cycle model of
portfolio choice there must be a participation cost as well as large downside risk that forces
households out of the market under certain wealth thresholds.
       To explore this idea in a U.S. context, Figure 4 shows shares of wealth by five year age


                                                  7
                                   Figure 4: U.S. Survey of Consumer Finances: Equity portfolio share by age
             .15
                                       (a) Full sample                                                      (b) Stock market participants




                                                                                        .4         .3
                       .1
  Equity Share of Wealth




                                                                            Equity Share of Wealth
                                                                                  .2
             .05




                                                                                        .1
             0




                                                                                        0




                            20­24 30­34 40­44 50­54 60­64 70­74 80­84                                   20­24 30­34 40­44 50­54 60­64 70­74 80­84
                               25­29 35­39 45­49 55­59 65­69 75­79                                         25­29 35­39 45­49 55­59 65­69 75­79




groups for the U.S. from the 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). To generate these
figures we first add up all financial wealth of a household and take the ratio of equity
holdings to the total portfolio. This requires a few assumptions. We assumed that stocks
comprise 60% of "combination" funds and ETFs in the SCF. This choice has little effect on
the overall estimates. Second, we include the value of pension and social security income
as an asset for retired households. To do this we use existing data on pensions and social
security benefits and assume a discount factor of 0.97. Using this, along with a household's
remaining years of life expectancy we calculate the net present value of pensions and social
security assets and include them in this measure of financial wealth. Adjusting wealth in
this way is important to consider because these social security payments will be important
for the financial decisions made in the model.
         We will not try to calibrate with the goal of matching these portfolio shares (a tall order
in such models). Like any typical macro life-cycle models we will also find it hard to
avoid counterfactually high equity participation, particularly for early age groups where
it is challenging to make them hold less than 100% equity. However, the measure we
construct here is, we feel, a more apt comparison to our model outcomes which we hope to

                                                                        8
qualitatively match and illustrates motivation that the life-cycle mechanisms driving our
results are substantial in the data.


                                        3.   Model

3.1.   Environment
Our model closely resembles Gomes and Michaelides (2008). They are one of a small,
but growing, literature that allows for aggregate risk in an incomplete market life-cycle
framework.
   In particular, to understand the role of demographics on relative asset prices we need:
equity portfolio choice, life-cycle structure, and household heterogeneity. Households have
finite lives that are divided exogenously between working life and retirement. We focus
our current analysis on stationary equilibria under various demographic structures.
   It would be ideal rather to study the transition of this model economy from one
demographic structure to another. However, this would require aggregate uncertainty along
this transition path which would be computationally challenging. Much of the literature
that studies life-cycle transitions in this context rely on perfect foresight equilibriums to
make this problem tractable.
   In their working life, households earn wage income that is subject to idiosyncratic
shocks. These households have access to two investment assets. The first is a riskless
government bond, and the second is an equity asset that taking the form of claims on a
risky capital stock. In addition, we follow both Gomes and Michaelides (2008), as well
as Fagereng, Gottlieb, and Guiso (2017), in requiring that households must pay a fixed
participation cost in order to be able to participate in these equity markets. For simplicity
we require that this cost only be paid once upon the first access to these markets. The
retirement age is exogenously fixed at R = 65.
   Perfectly competitive firms produce the consumption good using capital and labor in
a constant returns to scale technology. There is a government sector that runs a social
security scheme that is financed through taxes on wages, while also financing government
expenditures and debt interest payments through taxes on capital gains.


3.2.   Production
Technology is characterized by a Cobb-Douglas production function with total output at
time t given by:
                                                 1- 
                                       Yt = Zt Kt Lt ,


                                             9
where K is the total capital stock in the economy, Lt is the total labor supply, and Zt a
stochastic productivity shock, which follows the following process:

                                       Zt = Gt Ut ,
                                       Gt =(1 + g)t .

   The variable Ut represents productivity shocks that follow a two-state Markov chain
and matches the average business-cycle duration. Exogenous secular growth is determined
by g. After observing the aggregate shock, firms make decisions. With  the depreciation
rate of capital, factor prices can be determined by the firms profit maximization problem as:

                                                  Kt 
                               Wt = (1 - ) Zt         ,
                                                  Lt
                                                  (1-  )
                                K            Lt
                               Rt   =  Zt                  - t .
                                             Kt

   To help generate return volatility we also include a stochastic depreciation rate. This
allows us to generate similar effects to adjustment costs while sidestepping complications
that would arise in an incomplete markets model. This is used extensively in this literature
and is given by:
                                       t =  + t ,

where t is a standard normal shock and  is a scaling parameter. This depreciation shock
is uncorrelated with our productivity shocks.


3.3.   Government
Social security is commonly used in life-cycle models as a means of generating realistic
labor income processes. In our case it is also crucial in that it has meaningful impacts on
the stockpiling, and drawing down, of wealth as households age.
   A specification of this model without social security payments would have the effect of
increasing the age-specific risk households are exposed to and exaggerate the mechanism
that delivers our results. The government is also responsible for supplying the risk free
assets to households. We will follow Gomes and Michaelides (2008) and model the
government sector as supplying a positive net supply of bonds. It would be difficult
to match portfolios found in data if the government is restricted to a zero net supply
of bonds in a way that is more common in the life-cycle literature, while modeling an
endogenous government supply is beyond the scope of our work and might muddy the
effect of demographics.

                                             10
   We assume
                           pay           B                         rev
                         SSt     + Gt + Rt Bt = Bt+1 - Bt + Tt + SSt   ,                   (1)

where G is government consumption, B government debt, R B the interest rate on govern-
ment bonds, T tax revenues from non social security taxes, and the social security payments
and revenues are given by the SS terms, which are separated here because the system is
always in balance and they drop out of this budget constraint. The social security system is
funded through taxes on labor income, ss , and payments to retired individuals are given
as a fraction of their lifetime earnings, ss .
   Note that our model will abstract from problems of social security imbalance that are
both critical to the actual situation of the United States, and also possibly a channel that
                                                                                
could be important to the long run implications of the model. Kitao (2014) and Imrohoro  glu
                                                                                         
and Kitao (2009) provide an excellent reference for how social security operates in life-cycle
models in general, the former giving an in depth exploration of the various mechanisms
that can solve these imbalances.


3.4.    Financial markets
Households have access to two financial assets, a one-period riskless asset and a risky
investment opportunity. Agents buy the risk-free asset for price Ptb , which returns one unit
of the consumption good in the following period. Thus,

                                                  1
                                         Rb
                                          t =           -1.
                                                 PtB
                                                   -1

                                             K . Additionally, investors must pay a one time
The return on the risky asset is denoted by Rt
fixed cost, F the first time they invest in equity markets.


3.5.    Households
3.5.1   Preferences and Labor

The household sector is populated by ex-ante identical individuals, facing finite and
uncertain lives. In order to generate sufficiently large risk premiums, we adopt dynamic
preferences developed by Epstein and Zin (2013). Given that i is the coefficient of relative
risk aversion (CRRA), i is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS), and  is the




                                                 11
discount factor, these preferences at age, a, can be defined as:

                                                                                    1
                                           1                             1-1/i    1-1/i
                                        1-                         1-     1-  i
                    Va =     (1 -    ) Ca i        +  Ea s a,i Va+1 i                     .


There are two agent types, differing based on both their relative risk aversion i as well as
their EIS, i . With heterogeneity in both their risk aversion and willingness to substitute
consumption inter-temporally. In our baseline specification of the model conditional annual
survival probabilities, s a,i will be uniform across these two types such that the demographic
forces act equally on both groups.
   In the baseline specification all households supply labor inelastically. The labor income
of individual, i, follows a stocastic process such that their labor income is given by Wt          a,t .
Where Wt is the aggregate wage and                    a,t   is the idiosyncratic and permanent random
components to their wages:
                                               i
                                                   = exp  ia Na
                                                              i
                                                                .                                 (2)
          i represents the household's permanent idiosyncratic wage shock, which
The term Na
contains a deterministic age-specific trend n a , and  i
                                                       a is a transitory shock. The two shocks
can be described as follows.

                  i    i
                 Na = Na -1 exp ( n a  a ) ;       ln  a  N (0, 2 ) ;     ln  i        2
                                                                              a  N (0,  ) .       (3)

3.5.2   Demographics

Individuals live for a maximum of N periods, with conditional survival probability for
individuals aged a in period t given by: s a,t . This is the probability that an individual lives
to age a+1 conditional on having reached age a. Thus 1 - s a represents the probability that
an individual will die before moving to the next period. If life expectancy falls this will
appear in the conditional mortality and individuals will more heavily discount the future
retirement due to the lowered expectations that they will survive to enjoy consumption in
later periods.
   In addition fertility rates change every year, and the fertility of an age group. The
relative size of cohorts are a function of both the fertility rates of the cohort as well as
survival probabilities. Simply put each cohort is born a certain size and dies off at a certain
rate. In the present specification of the model not only are demographics exogenous, but
since we run simulations for households in a fixed demographic period without simulating
the transition we do not actually simulate a change in the underlying population, rather
keeping population weights fixed in their respective years.


                                                            12
   The Human Mortality Database (2019), provide information both on age-specific mortal-
ity as well as information to calculate age-specific population weights. For future population
projections we use five year United Nations population projection data to generate these
weights. We denote cohort sizes in a given period as t , which is a vector containing
individuals of every age group at time t.

3.5.3   Household Wealth

Total liquid wealth can be consumed or invested in these two assets. Denote household
wealth as cash-on-hand Xa,t and an indicator I p to denote as 1 if the individual has not
yet paid the participation cost and zero otherwise. Then denote the wealth of a working
individual age a and time t as:

               i        i                  K      i                  B       i
              Xa ,t = K a,t (1 + (1 - K ) Rt ) + Ba,t (1 + (1 - K ) Rt ) +   a,t Wt   - Ii F .          (4)

   After retirement, individuals wage income is replaced by the social security income,
given by a fraction of their wage income at retirement. Additionally households are not
able to borrow against future labor income, and cannot short any asset. During retirement
years ( a > R), household's cash-on-hand is given by:

         i        i                  K      i                  B          i
        Xa ,t = K a,t (1 + (1 - K ) Rt ) + Ba,t (1 + (1 - K ) Rt ) + ss   a, R (1 - ss )Wt   - Ii F .   (5)

   Inability to borrow against future income or short assets are represented with the
following constraints:
                                         i                 i
                                        Ba ,t  0 ,        Ka ,t  0 .



3.6.    Individual Optimization
Households take prices as given and maximize utility of consumption and leisure given
expectations about future aggregate wages and asset returns. A rational expectations
equilibrium requires that agents accurately predict the values for wages and rental rates. In
heterogeneous models without aggregate risk of the type of Aiyagari (1994) this is not a
problem as mean zero idiosyncratic risk does not affect aggregate wages and rental rates.
Since labor supply and capital stock are endogenous to household investment decisions in
the presence of risky equity, we must an algorithm similar to Krusell and Smith (1998).
   The household optimization problem needs to include state variables that allow agents
to forecast values for Kt and PtB . While doing so exactly requires the infinite-dimensional
wealth distribution, Krusell and Smith (1998) show that it is possible to approximate this


                                                     13
with a small set of moments. This can be accomplished in this context using lagged values
of aggregate variables Kt and PtB
                                +1 as well as realizations of the aggregate shock, Ut and the
stochastic depreciation t . These variables must now be state variables in the household
value function:

                                                   Kt+1 = K (Kt , PtB , Ut , t+1 ) ,
                                                                                                                           (6)
                                                    PtB    L        B
                                                      +1 =  ( Kt , Pt , Ut , t+1 ) .


3.7.       Solving the household's problem
The individual's problem is solved for a stationary equilibrium where individual variables
                                                                                                                     1
are normalized to the permanent component of household labor income Na ( G 1- ) and
                                                                                                          1
aggregate variables normalized by aggregate productivity growth ( Gt1- ). Normalized
variables are denoted by lowercase letters. The problem is:

Va xi       i                    B
    a,t , I p ; k t , lt , Ut , Pt =
                                                                            1
                                                            i
                             u a (c a , h a ) + si Ea,t (( Na       i      1- )) -1 V      i           i
          max                                                 +1 / Na )( G           a+1 x a+1,t+1 , I p ; k t+1 , lt+1 , Ut+1   ,
    cia ,hia ,kia+1 ,bi
                      a +1




               subject to:


                         kia+1,t+1  0 ,
                         bi
                          a+1,t+1  0 ,
                                 xi      i           i           i
                                  a,t = k a+1,t+1 + ba+1,t+1 + c a,t ,
                                          kia+1,t+1 (1 + Rt
                                                          K ) + bi
                                                            +1
                                                                               B
                                                                 a+1,t+1 (1 + Rt+1 )
                        xi
                         a+1,t+1      =                                  1
                                                                                             + wt e   i      i
                                                                                                          - Ip F,
                                                           i / N i )( G 1-
                                                        ( Na               )
                                                             +1 a
                                K
                               Rt +1 = R ( k t+1 , Ut+1 ) ,
                               wt+1 = W (k t+1 , Ut+1 ) ,
                                k t+1 = K (k t , PtB , Ut , t ) ,
                                PtB    L         B
                                  +1 =  ( k t , Pt , Ut , t ) .
                                                                                                                           (7)




                                                                    14
3.8.    Equilibrium
A steady-state equilibrium is a set of endogenously determined prices, value functions, and
policy rules that are specific to age cohorts, and rational expectations by individual agents
over the evolution of all endogenously determined variables. We then have:

                                                                                      N
Households Optimize: Households follow cohort specific policy rules: {Va , ba , k a } a =1 are
consistent with their dynamic programming problem given by Equation 7.

Firm Optimize: Firms maximize profits by setting their MPK and MPL equal to their
marginal costs Rt and Wt .

Markets Clear: Such that aggregates are equal to the sum of individual decisions:

                    Kt =               Na-1 kia,t i da di ,
                             i    a

                    Bt =               Na-1 bi
                                             a,t i da di ,
                             i    a
                                              i                                                                        (8)
                    Lt =               Na-1   a,t   i da di ,
                             i  a
                              G
                             Ct                         1
                  1-                                                                               i i
             Ut Kt Lt =           1
                                        + ( 1 + g ) 1-  K t - ( 1 -  ) K t +                      Pa c a,t i da di .
                                 1-                                                       i   a
                            Gt

Government Balances: Both its own budget constraint each period, maintaining a given
level of debt to GDP, as well the social security system at all times:

                            a= R                                     a= N
                                          i                                                                            (9)
                                      ss la i da di =                       ss   R,t Wt   i da di .
                      i    a =0                             i    a= R

Prices: Are verified in equilibrium.
   Analytical solutions are not possible in in this model. In the following section we sketch
the solution method to solve for a stationary equilibrium computationally in this model.


3.9.    Solution Method
                                                                 B
  1. Specify forecasting equations: K and  P .

  2. Solve the household's decisions problem taking prices as given and using forecasting
       equations to form expectations. All state variables are mapped into a discrete state
       space and optimal policy rules are solved by backwards induction from the final year
       of life.

                                                            15
  3. Given policy functions in part 2, simulate the model (2000 periods). Check market
        clearing conditions.

  4. Use the simulated time series to update forecasting equations

  5. Repeat 2­4 until convergence:

          · Markets must clear within tolerance;
          · Stable coefficients in the forecasting equations;
          · Forecasting with regression R2 above 99%.


3.10.     Simulation
Realizations of the aggregate random shock are drawn from its two state Markov distribu-
tion and individual agents decisions are simulated conditional on their individual draws
from the log-normal productivity shock.
   For each time period household behavior is simulated for every possible bond price.
Then individual demands are aggregated and linear interpolation is used to determine
the market clearing bond price. This determines simulated state variables for next period
decisions and the process is repeated. We simulate the long run steady state of the economy
under each demographic regime. While this abstracts from the real world transition
dynamics allows for comparison of demographic effects in a way that is computationally
much less burdensome.


3.11.     Updating the forecasting equations
Using the simulated time series, forecasting equations are estimated using OLS regre-
sions. For each realization of the productivity shock, Ut and given known change in the
employment population ratio, t+1 we simulate the following:


                               ln(k t+1 ) =  1,0 +  1,1 ln(k t ) ,
                                                                                       (10)
                               ln( PtB                                     B
                                     +1 ) =  2,0 +  2,1 ln ( k t ) +  2,2 Pt .

   Which for the baseline specification yields eight equations with separate coefficients
to be estimated. Convergence of our simulation requires both that the R2 of each of these
forecasting equations is greater than 99% under each set of aggregate states and that all
coefficients converge.


                                                     16
                                                                  4.   Calibration

4.1.                                       Demographics
Our key dimension of analysis is changing population structure. We take retirement age
as exogenous, fixed at R = 65. Annual conditional mortality rates used in our model are
shown in Figure 5. Conditional annual survival probabilities could be calculated using the
method described in Henriksen (2015) in 2050, while those for 1990 and 2017 come from the
Human Mortality Database (2019), henceforth HMD. For demographic weights we use the
HMD for 1990 and 2017 while using the United Nations data from Figure 3 interpolated to
annual frequency.
           For our quantitative estimation we calculate the general equilibrium conditional on the
demographic state in a given year as if it were fixed permanently. Implicitly this assumes
that individuals in our economy believe that the current demographic structure, and any
impact it has on prices, will persist into the future. Given that we are interested in long run
effects, and that expectations by investors regarding the effect of demographics on prices in
the future should be a second order effect we think it is reasonably harmless to make this
simplification. Quantitatively estimating the model along the entire transition path would
be computationally burdensome and pose a set of challenges without, in our estimation,

                                                           Figure 5: Survival probabilities by age
                     1




                                                                                                          1990
                                                                                                          2017
  Probability of survival to a given age




                                                                                                          2050
            .8       .7     .9




                                           20             40                    60                   80   100
                                                                               Age




                                                                             17
providing particularly insightful results relative to our current approach.
   We will show results for the model calibrated to five "steady state" demographic
structures in: 1970, 1990, 2010, 2017, and 2050. These reflect the age structure and life
expectancy (through age specific mortality) in these years. The results in 1970 provide
something of a pre-boomer baseline as the oldest members of that cohort will be 24 and
relatively small players in asset markets. Our focus will be on results from 1990 to 2017, as
well as forecasts to 2050. These three are particularly important because 1990 represents an
early year where the entire baby boomer cohort is participating in the labor force (at this
point the youngest boomer is 26 years old). In 2017 boomers were at peak savings age with
the youngest at age 53 and the oldest 71. By 2050 the age range of baby boomers is 86­104,
almost completely aged out of the model, and the relatively "flat" age structure in Figure 3
should not see dramatic change.
   We next describe the household, production and government calibration, with details
shown in Table 1.


4.2.   Household Variables
There are two agent types in the economy who differ along two dimensions. The first type
has low risk aversion, with CRRA  A = 1.1 and low elasticity of inter-temporal substitution,
with EIS  A = 0.0833. The second agent has higher CRRA, with  B = 5, as well as
higher EIS, with B = 0.3. Both agents have the same discount factor  = 0.99. Giving
type A agents low risk aversion causes a reduction in early life savings due to lowered
precautionary motive. A low EIS also limits life-cycle savings to smooth consumption.
They thus accumulate relatively less in mid-life in preparation for retirement. These effects
induce them to endogenously accumulate little in the way of savings, with the poorer
members of this type being completely "hand-to-mouth". For those with savings a fixed
participation cost induces them to rarely hold equity. Type B agents will endogenously act
as the major participants in both asset markets and, in most specifications, are the only
holders of equity. We assume an equal share of these agent types for simplicity.
   We believe these are reasonable parameters. Guvenen (2006) shows that limited stock
market participation along with EZ preferences can reconcile disagreement with the macro
literature on EIS parameters. This disagreement stems from micro consumption data often
implying EIS close to zero and macro correlations implying a value close to 1. Models with
limited participation can remedy this by separating the effect of the average consumer from
that of the average investor. Both of our preference parameters for the EIS (0.0833 and
0.3) can be reasonably supported in the empirical literature. In their study of preferred
consumption paths Barsky, Juster, Kimball, and Shapiro (1997) find a lower bound of the

                                             18
                                     Table 1: Calibration

Household
                Time discount rate                                            0.99
  A             Risk aversion type-A                                           1.1
  B             Risk aversion type-B                                            5
  A             EIS type-A                                                   0.0833
  B             EIS type-B                                                    0.30
  na            Age-specific trend parameters                     { 0.174 , -0.237 , 0.00611 }
  si            Age-specific mortality rate                          HMD or UN Forecasts
  i             Cohort size                                          HMD or UN Forecasts
Production
                Capital share                                                0.36
                Depreciation                                                 0.10
  U             Volatility of aggregate productivity                         0.01
                Depreciation shock (scaling std. normal)                     0.15

                                                                           2/3 1/3
                Aggregate shock process
                                                                           1/3 2/3

Government
  BS            Supply of government bonds, fraction of output               0.30
  ss            Social security replacement rate                             0.40



EIS of close to zero and an average upper bound of roughly 0.36 with a mean of 0.18.
The average in our economy under our preferred specification is 0.19. In their estimation
of risk parameters they find a mean risk tolerance of 0.24. The reciprocal of this, 4.2 is
the harmonic mean risk aversion in their sample. They find the arithmetic mean is quite
different at 12.1. We think our choice of  B = 5 for stockholders is a reasonable one given
this. As our average across all households of roughly 3 is closer to the micro evidence than
those commonly used in macro modeling.
   The household earnings process has an age-specific trend, n a , which is calibrated to
match the average for the PSID similar to Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (2005), Huggett
and Kaplan (2016), and others. We fit a third order polynomial on the life-cycle income
process with year fixed effects. Figure 6 shows both the sample mean of log earnings over
the working life as well as our fitted model. The volatility of idiosyncratic income shocks
are set to 10% per year, in line with estimates used in Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (2005).
   The fixed cost of participation is set such that it corresponds to 7.5% the household's
expected annual income. Moskowitz and Vissing-Jørgensen (2002) suggests a per-period
costs that are approximately $75­$200 each year. While this one time fixed cost is quite

                                                19
                                                 Figure 6: Age-specific wage calibration

                         (a) Earnings over working life                                      (b) Fitted model

                                                                                                            (1)
             11



                                                                                                       log earnings
                                                                               age                       0.174
                                                                                                         (0.0141)
             10.5




                                                                               age2
  Log earnings




                                                                               100                       -0.237
                                                                                                          (0.0359)

                                                                               age3
                                                                                                         0.00611
             10




                                                                               1000
                                                                                                         (0.00291)
                                                                               Year FE                       no
                                               Mean log earnings by age
                                               Fitted model                    R2                          0.103
             9.5




                                                                               N                           80273
                    20       30        40          50          60
                                         Age                                    Standard errors in parentheses
                                                                                 p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001




large, it is similar to those and other estimates of participation costs in present value terms.
It can be adjusted, or even set to zero with little affect on overall results if the relative
preference parameters of the two agent types are adjusted accordingly.


4.3.                Aggregate and government variables
In order to match a business cycle duration that is on average six years, the two state
Markov process for aggregate productivity is given by

                                                                      2/3 1/3
                                                           =                             .                            (11)
                                                                      1/3 2/3

The volatility of aggregate productivity, (u ), is set at 1%. Capital's share of output is set to
36%, and depreciation is 10%. The volatility of asset returns is predominantly determined
by , which is set at 15%.
          We set the net positive supply of government bonds to be a constant share of GDP. While
government debt has risen substantially between over the period of study, the share held by
the domestic non-bank public has remained relatively low and has seen substantially less
variation. We calibrate this using Treasury debt held by the domestic non-bank investors
using data from the Federal Reserve, Financial Accounts of the United States. We sum all
debt held by: households, government retirement accounts, private pension funds, money
market funds, mutual funds, ETFs, and closed end funds.

                                                                          20
                                   Figure 7: Government debt to GDP
         1

                                                              Treasury debt to GDP
                                                              Domestic non-bank treasury debt to GDP
         .8
 Debt to GDP ratio
    .4   .2
         0  .6




                     1950   1960    1970        1980       1990            2000              2010      2020




        These are graphed in Figure 7 along with the overall level of treasury debt to GDP. The
larger trend in debt comes mainly from holdings by the central bank, financial institutions,
and foreign holders. For our benchmark model we set this at 30% of equilibrium GDP, and
hold it constant over time. While a fixed bond supply is a strong assumption, we feel it
is the only way to understand the impact of demographics directly. There will be some
movement in bond supply, but only through demographic effects on output.
        The retirement social security transfer: ss is set at 0.4 using the same parameter as
the benchmark model in Kitao (2014) roughly the average benefits over average earnings.
The social security tax is set to clear the governments requirement to balance the social
security budget. This comes to about 15%, but increases as the employment population
ratio shrinks. If we instead allowed the government to issue more debt to finance social
security into the future without fully funding it our results would likely be amplified due
to an increased supply of the safe asset. We abstract from bequests by assuming that the
government taxes assets at 100% upon death.


                                           5.   Results

We now describe the results that come from this model. We solve and simulate the model
under a number of different demographic structures. As mentioned these represent a
steady state where the demographic structure is stable. This is an abstraction from the
reality in a potentially problematic way, but solving this model for transition dynamics
between two steady states is computationally intractable. However, we find it useful to see


                                                  21
the degree to which the risk premium is altered in these different steady states.
   In Figure 8, show the average cash-on-hand wealth in the model simulations under the
1990 and 2017 demographic structures. We see that overall households are saving more
as life expectancies are rising, with some slight change in the curvature. This is because
there are significant increases in some of the survival probabilities for retirement aged
individuals between these two periods, so the draw down of wealth is smoothed relative to
the 1990 case. The general "hump" shape reflects the accumulation of wealth as individuals
both buffer against idiosyncratic shocks, as well as building up savings that can then be
drawn down in retirement.
   Figure 9 shows a striking result. Average stock and bond holdings across ages differ
dramatically between these two demographic structures. The life-cycle preference to hold
more safe assets is quite strong in the periods just before, and in, retirement. We see that
older age households now hold fewer safe assets relative to equity in 2017. This should work
against our expected effect of rising equity risk premia, but is also not terribly surprising.
As the safe rate is driven down (as we shall see), with large fractions of households in old
age, general equilibrium effects will cause households to endogenously choose to hold
higher fractions of relatively more attractive equity. Given we don't change the riskiness of
equity between the two periods, it is natural that these equilibrium forces would work in
this direction. Rising life expectancy likely mutes some of this effect as households desire to
self-finance part of their retirement income, a longer expected period in 2017 than in 1990.
   Figure 10 shows the share of equity in the financial wealth of individuals. To improve
readability we omit the first five years of working life where these start at zero and then
rapidly increase, as well as the last possible year of life where death is certain and remaining

                                         Figure 8: Financial wealth in the model: total wealth by age
                      15




                                                                                                        1990
                                                                                                        2017
           Total financial wealth
            5         0      10




                                    20               40                 60                 80             100
                                                                       Age




                                                                     22
                                     Figure 9: Financial wealth in the model: equity and bond holdings by age

                                                                                                                 1990


                 10
                                                                                                                 2017
                 8
 Equity holdings
  4         6    2
                 0




                                     20                   40                 60                 80                  100
                                                                            Age
             4




                                                                                                                 1990
                                                                                                                 2017
             3
Bond holdings
      2      1
             0




                                     20                   40                 60                80                  100
                                                                            Age




                                          Figure 10: Financial wealth in the model: equity share wealth by age
                 1




                                                                                                                 1990
                                                                                                                 2017
                                .9
 Equity share of financial wealth
  .6        .7   .5   .8




                                     20                   40                 60                 80                  100
                                                                            Age




                                                                          23
                        Table 2: Returns and risk premiums in the model


                                                            Model
                                1970        1990         2010        2017    2050 (projected)
Equity return, mean     ¯e
                        r      6.94%       7.11%        5.07%       4.26%        2.20 %
  s.d.                  e      15.22%      15.33%      15.17%       15.15%       15.12 %
Safe return, mean       ¯f
                        r      2.90%       4.53%        0.5%        -0.58%       -2.78%
  s.d.                  f      4.80%       3.90%        4.92%       5.05%         4.59%
ERP                     rp      4.05        2.58         4.57         4.84         4.98



assets are consumed. As with all of our financial wealth dynamics, these patters are strongly
dominated by the type B agents who are endogenously the only (with brief exception)
holders of equity, and who have considerably more asset wealth than type A agents.
This is extremely high in early years as individuals have relatively small wealth and are
accumulating large amounts of equity. This is a common drawback of such models where
we capture counterfactually high equity market holdings for participants.
   This share falls somewhat dramatically as retirement approaches with a brief reversal
driven by the peak in bond holdings seen in Figure 10. After closer inspection this seems to
be due to the resolution of labor income uncertainty, which becomes a certain social security
payment upon retirement. All precautionary savings motives against labor income risk
disappear and households reallocate accordingly. After this households resume drawing
down their share of equity, though at a faster rate in 1990. In 2017 this is more pronounced
due to both general equilibrium forces discussed above and the fact that lower mortality
increases the net present value of this stream of social security payments substantially
making a household's average future income relatively "safer". Once again this would
work against our expected result encouraging a relatively slower draw-down of risky asset
holdings. If we saw this share fixed at 1990s level our effects on the ERP and safe rates
would be amplified.
   In Table 2 and Figures 11, we present the baseline results from our model simulations.
The figures report mean levels, and table reports the mean and standard deviation of equity
return and the risk free rate in each simulated economy under four past demographic
conditions and also under projected population demographics in 2050. In Figure 12 we
compare the model output to the data. Recall that the aim is for the model to match the U.S.
data on returns and risk premiums seen earlier. The model is quite successful, and also
makes some interesting predictions based on UN forecast demographic trends out to 2050.
   The model clearly replicates the U-shaped path of the equity risk premium seen in the
data. From a level of 405 bps in the 1970 calibration, the ERP falls to 258 bps under 1990

                                              24
                                                       Figure 11: Returns and risk premiums in the model
                 8




                                                                              7.11
                                                                                                                               Model:
                                                      6.94
                                                                                                                               real safe rate
                 7




                                                                                                                               equity risk premium
                                                                              2.58
                                 6




                                                                                                                               expected real equity return
  Equity risk premium (%, annual)




                                                                                                   5.07
                                                      4.05
                            5




                                                                                                                        4.26
                    3   4




                                                                                                   4.57
                                                                4.53                                                                         2.20
                                                                                                                        4.84
                2




                                        2.90
           1




                                                                                     0.50
-1 0




                                                                                                             -0.58                           4.98

                                                                                                                                  -2.78
                 -2
                 -3




                                               1970                    1990                 2010                 2017                 2050




                                                        Figure 12: Risk premiums in the model versus data
                 10




                                                                                                                                              Model:
                                                                                                                                              Basline
                                                                                                                                              Data:
                                                                                                                                              Duarte & Rosa
Equity risk premium (%, annual)
                           8




                                                                                                                                              Damodaran
                                                                                                                                              E/P minus 1Y
  4            6 2




                                     1970­1979          1980­1989       1990­1999    2000­2009            2010­2019                       2050­2059




                                                                                     25
demographics, then rises to 484 bps in the 2017 model. In 1970 the model's safe real rate is
290 bps, rising to 453 bps in 1990. But after 1990 our baseline calibration then finds a large
decline in the equilibrium safe real rate, with even a negative value of ­58 bps under 2017
demographics.
   This decline in equilibrium safe interest rates is substantially higher than is found
in much of the research documenting the effect of demographics and secular stagnation
on equilibrium interest rates, suggesting that including a richer pool of assets may be
important for fully understanding the implications for that question. We also find a
downward pressure on the expected return to equity, but it is substantially less than that
on safe interest rates.
   Summing up, Figure 12 shows that between 1990 and 2017 our model can account
for: roughly all of the fall and rise in the ERP "low" amplitude estimate (Damodaran);
roughly half of the fall and rise in the ERP "mid" amplitude estimate (our estimate using
the E/P ratio and 1-year yields); or roughly one third of the fall and rise in the ERP "high"
amplitude estimate (Duarte and Rosa).
   Looking to the future, the model predicts a continued fall in the risk free rate to ­278
bps by 2050 with the ERP roughly stable at 498 bps. The expected return to equity therefore
continues to fall to just 220 bps as demographic shifts continue to relentlessly boost the
demand for all assets, but espeically safe assets.
   We emphasize that these results represent steady state values calculated as if the
empirical demographics in each year were permanent. Calculating the transition path
of our model might yield slightly different results at any point in time, but the overall
picture would likely be similar and such an exercise would represent a challenge that is
computationally extreme for what we believe would be little added insight.


5.1.   Model without aggregate risk
Our results are quite striking, particularly in the context of a large and growing literature
on falling natural rates which finds much smaller impacts than ours for safe rates. To
draw a comparison between our findings and that literature, we show the impact that
shutting down aggregate risk has in our model. To do this, we eliminate the safe asset,
BS = 0, and remove all risk in capital markets. Most of the existing literature documenting
a demographic channel for safe rates study some comparable measure of r  . Here, we
find an estimate for r  of 4.87 under 1990 demographics and 2.13 in 2017. This change of
213 basis points over the period is much closer to the literature. In Table 3 we show our
baseline results as well as results from this "risk free" change relative to some of the existing



                                               26
                      Table 3: Falling safe real rates: model and literature versus data


                                                               Period             Change in real safe rate
Model
                             ¯f
  Baseline model: safe rate, r                               1990­2017                      -5.11
  Risk free model: natural rate, r  = r
                                      ¯e                     1990­2017                      -2.13
  Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016)                 1980­2016                      -1.25
  Carvalho, Ferrero, and Nechio (2016)                       1990­2014                      -2 
  Lisack, Sajedi, and Thwaites (2017)                        1980­2015                      -1.60
  Eggertsson, Mehrotra, and Robbins (2019b)                  1970­2015                      -4.02
  Summers and Rachel (2019)                                  1970­2019                      -1.70
Data
  Rachel and Smith (2015)                                    1990­2015                       -4.50

Notes: See text.  Measure that includes social security.  Their transition dynamics show much of this fall
happening from the late 1980s/early 1990s.  They find a 700 basis point decline in the "private" neutral rate
as counterbalancing public programs have offset much of the demographic declines.


literature.4 We report the period studied as well as the baseline effect unless otherwise
noted. In general most studies find steeper declines post-1990, in line with our results.
    This exercise tells us two things. The first is that our calibration has not relied on
any extreme parametric choices relative to the literature to generate such dramatic results.
Our decline is of a similar magnitude, and by our reading fits in sensibly when doing an
apples-to-apples comparison with similar work. The second is that the introduction of both
risky and safe assets to this class of models can have qualitatively large impacts on the
magnitude of declines in safe rates.
    This latter point is mentioned in Eggertsson, Mehrotra, and Robbins (2019b) who discuss
it as one possible response to the claim that safe rates cannot be negative in equilibrium.5
Abel, Mankiw, Summers, and Zeckhauser (1989) show that a safe interest rate below the
rate of economic growth is not sufficient in creating dynamic inefficiency. The inclusion
aggregate risk can lead to an equilibrium negative risk-free interest rate as it does in our
benchmark model. By including aggregate risks along with the safe rate we are able to
open this channel for negative interest rates that is not possible for Gagnon, Johannsen,
and Lopez-Salido (2016). Our work suggests that not only are demographics quantitatively
important for understanding the risk premium, but that accounting for risk will be a crucial
part of understanding the role that demographics may play in secular stagnation and the
long run trend in the natural rate.
   4 By "risk free" we mean that there is still idiosyncratic risk, on labor earnings in this model as well as
mortality risk, just no aggregate uncertainty.
   5 The other, which their paper addresses directly, is monopoly rents




                                                     27
                          Table 4: Results under changing Type-B preferences


                                             B = 5                                  B = 10
                                 B = 0.2     B = 0.3      B = 0.4     B = 0.2      B = 0.3      B = 0.4
1990
 Equity return, mean      ¯e
                          r      12.21%       7.11%       5.67%        7.44%        5.39%        4.81%
 Safe return, mean        ¯f
                          r       9.75%       4.53%       2.01%        2.78%        1.30%       -0.40%
 ERP                      rp       2.46        2.58        3.66         4.66         4.09         5.21
2017
 Equity return, mean      ¯e
                          r      5.94%        4.26%        3.75%        3.35%       3.32%       3.09%
 Safe return, mean        ¯f
                          r      1.65%       -0.58%       -1.18%       -2.88%      -2.86%       -3.17%
 ERP                      rp      4.29         4.84         4.93         6.23        6.18         6.26
ERP (1990­2017)                   1.83         2.26         1.27         1.57        2.09         1.05

Notes: All other parameters identical to baseline specification, in particular those of type-A agents are:
 A = 1.1 and  A = 0.0833.


5.2.   Results under different preference parameters
The two preference parameters for each agent type have strong impact on model results and
if changed can generate larger/smaller equity risk premia under any calibration. We show
that the primary results of our model remain under a range of preference specifications, with
the effects of demographics quantitatively large. As long as type-A agents endogenously
choose to remain out of equity markets, changing their preference parameters has little
impact on these results. For this reason we keep these fixed at their baseline levels,  A = 1.1
and  A = 0.0833, though there are a wide range of specifications that could allow a limited
participation equilibrium, and their participation in equity markets would not likely reverse
the effect of demographics.
   In Table 4 we estimate this model under six different preferences for stock market
participants, with the second column being our baseline specification. We report the for
equity return, the risk free rate, and their difference (the equity risk premium) under
both 1990 demographics and 2017 demographics with the difference between the two risk
premia in the final row. These show that while these preferences have a large effect on
the relative return on equity and risk free bonds in these models, the effect that changing
demographics has on both risk free rates and the equity risk premium is consistent within
some reasonable parameters. One caveat will be if we were to lower the EIS further to the
point where all agents endogenously choose to not engage in equity markets, something
that would happen if we lower type-B EIS to around 0.1 while keeping all other model
parameters constant.



                                                   28
                                     6.   Conclusion

Population aging has a role to play in explaining a large number of long run macroeconomic
trends. Daly (2016) suggests that global equity risk premium has risen by 2.5 percentage
points since the year 2000. Similar trends can be observed in the United States, with an
equity premium in 2015 that is between two and five percentage points higher than it was
in the late 1990s (pre-tech bubble crisis).
   In the face of this evidence for a rising equity risk premium, we show that there is a
plausible demographic channel that may be driving this trend. Aging households, the
boomers, are responsible for a savings glut which has helped to drive down real interest
rates on safe assets, but they have relatively lower shares of their portfolio in equity. As a
result, the shifting population weight moving toward these households does not have the
same effect on equity returns that it has been shown to have on risk free assets.
   While our work takes a simplified approach to the role of aging, the results suggest that
studying the demographic channel is a fruitful approach to understanding the drivers of
long-run trends in the equity premium. Not only can aging operate through the effect of
changing cohort sizes, as with the aging of the baby boomer generation in the United States,
but also through rising life expectancies, which can decrease individuals' willingness to
take on risky assets as they age, an amplifying mechanism.
   It is crucial to better understand the extent and channels through which demographics
affect asset prices since the advanced economies will continue to face aging populations for
the foreseeable future, and to study what, if any, policy options may be placed on the table.




                                              29
                                           References
Abel, Andrew B., N. Gregory Mankiw, Lawrence H. Summers, and Richard J. Zeckhauser. 1989.
 Assessing dynamic efficiency: Theory and evidence. Review of Economic Studies 56(1): 1­19.
Aiyagari, S. Rao. 1994. Uninsured idiosyncratic risk and aggregate saving. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 109(3): 659­684.
Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro. 1997. Preference
  parameters and behavioral heterogeneity: An experimental approach in the health and retirement
  study. Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(2): 537­579.
Benzoni, Luca, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, and Robert S. Goldstein. 2007. Portfolio Choice over the
  Life-Cycle when the Stock and Labor Markets Are Cointegrated. Journal of Finance 62(5): 2123­2167.
Bodie, Zvi, Robert C. Merton, and William F. Samuelson. 1992. Labor Supply Flexibility and Portfolio
  Choice in a Life-Cycle Model. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 16(3­4): 427­449.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. 2017. Rents, technical change,
  and risk premia accounting for secular trends in interest rates, returns on capital, earning yields,
  and factor shares. American Economic Review 107(5): 614­20.
Carvalho, Carlos, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio. 2016. Demographics and real interest rates:
  Inspecting the mechanism. European Economic Review 88(C): 208­226.
Cocco, Joao F., Francisco J. Gomes, and Pascal J. Maenhout. 2005. Consumption and portfolio choice
  over the life cycle. Review of Financial Studies 18(2): 491­533.
Cooley, Thomas, and Espen Henriksen. 2018. The demographic deficit. Journal of Monetary Economics
  93: 45­62.
Crotty, J. R. 1990. Keynes on the Stages of Development of the Capitalist Economy: The Institution-
  alist Foundation of Keynes's Methodology. Journal of Economic Issues 24(3): 761­80.
Daly, Kevin. 2016. A secular increase in the equity risk premium. International Finance 19(2): 179­200.
Damodaran, Aswath. 2013. Equity Risk Premiums (ERP): Determinants, Estimation and Implications
 -- The 2012 Edition. In Managing and Measuring Risk Emerging Global Standards and Regulations
  After the Financial Crisis, edited by Roggi, Oliviero, and Edward I. Altman, 343­455. Singapore:
  World Scientific.
Duarte, Fernando, and Carlo Rosa. 2015. The equity risk premium: a review of models. Economic
 Policy Review (2): 39­57.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., Manuel Lancastre, and Lawrence H. Summers. 2019a. Aging, Output Per
  Capita, and Secular Stagnation. American Economic Review: Insights 1(3): 325­42.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., Neil R. Mehrotra, and Jacob A. Robbins. 2019b. A model of secular stagnation:
  Theory and quantitative evaluation. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 11(1): 1­48.
Eggertsson, Gauti B, Neil R Mehrotra, Sanjay R Singh, and Lawrence H Summers. 2016. A contagious
  malady? Open economy dimensions of secular stagnation. IMF Economic Review 64(4): 581­634.
Epstein, Larry G., and Stanley E. Zin. 2013. Substitution, risk aversion and the temporal behavior
  of consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework. In Handbook of the Fundamentals of
  Financial Decision Making: Part I, 207­239. Singapore: World Scientific.
Fagereng, Andreas, Charles Gottlieb, and Luigi Guiso. 2017. Asset Market Participation and Portfolio
  Choice over the Life-Cycle. Journal of Finance 72(2): 705­750.
Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and J. David Lopez-Salido. 2016. Understanding the New


                                                  30
  Normal: The Role of Demographics. Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080, Board of
  Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Geppert, Christian, Alexander Ludwig, and Raphael Abiry. 2016. Secular stagnation? Growth, asset
  returns and welfare in the next decades: First results. Growth, Asset Returns and Welfare in the
  Next Decades: First Results (September 28, 2016). Max Planck Institute for Social Law and Social Policy
  Discussion Paper (05-2016).
Gomes, Francisco, and Alexander Michaelides. 2008. Asset pricing with limited risk sharing and
  heterogeneous agents. The Review of Financial Studies 21(1): 415­448.
Greenwood, Robin M, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2018. The impact of pensions and insurance
  on global yield curves. Harvard Business School Finance Working Paper (18-109).
Guvenen, Fatih. 2006. Reconciling conflicting evidence on the elasticity of intertemporal substitution:
 A macroeconomic perspective. Journal of Monetary Economics 53(7): 1451­1472.
Hall, Robert E. 2016. The Role of the Growth of Risk-Averse Wealth in the Decline of the Safe Real
 Interest Rate. NBER Working Paper 22196.
Hansen, Alvin H. 1939. Economic Progress and Declining Population Growth. American Economic
 Review 29(1): 1­15.
Henriksen, Espen. 2015. Representative Annual Survival Probabilities for Heterogenous-Agent
 Economies. Unpublished.
Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C Williams. 2017. Measuring the natural rate of
 interest: International trends and determinants. Journal of International Economics 108: S59­S75.
Huggett, Mark, and Greg Kaplan. 2016. How large is the stock component of human capital? Review
 of Economic Dynamics 22: 21­51.
Human Mortality Database. 2019. University of California Berkeley, and Max Planck Institute for
  Demographic Research. https://www.mortality.org.
Imrohoro  glu,
               Selahattin, and Sagiri Kitao. 2009. Labor supply elasticity and social security reform.
  Journal of Public Economics 93(7): 867­878.
Keynes, J. M. 1936. The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. Macmillan. 14th edition,
  1973.
Kindleberger, Charles P. 1984. A Financial History of Western Europe. London: George Allen and
  Unwin.
Kitao, Sagiri. 2014. Sustainable social security: Four options. Review of Economic Dynamics 17(4):
  756­779.
Krusell, Per, and Anthony A. Smith, Jr. 1998. Income and wealth heterogeneity in the macroeconomy.
  Journal of Political Economy 106(5): 867­896.
Lisack, No¨
          emie, Rana Sajedi, and Gregory Thwaites. 2017. Demographic trends and the real interest
  rate .
Marx, Karl. 1844 [1932]. The Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts. Institute of Marxism­Leninism
 in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
McKibbin, Ross. 2013. Political Sociology in the Guise of Economics: J. M. Keynes and the Rentier.
 English Historical Review 128(530): 78­106.
Moskowitz, Tobias J., and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen. 2002. The returns to entrepreneurial invest-
 ment: A private equity premium puzzle? American Economic Review 92(4): 745­778.



                                                   31
Piketty, Thomas. 2014. Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
  Press.
Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas Smith. 2015. Secular drivers of the global real interest rate. Bank of
  England Staff Working Paper 571.
Ravikumar, B., Peter Rupert, and Paul Gomme. 2015. Secular Stagnation and Returns on Capital.
  Economic Synopses, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (19).
Summers, Laurence H. 2014. Reflections on the `new secular stagnation hypothesis'. In Secular
  stagnation: Facts, causes and cures, edited by Teulings, Coen, and Richard Baldwin, 27­38. London:
  CEPR Press.
Summers, Lawrence H, and Lukasz Rachel. 2019. On Secular Stagnation in the Industrialized World.
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1): 1­54.




                                                32
