                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    INDEBTED DEMAND

                                         Atif R. Mian
                                        Ludwig Straub
                                          Amir Sufi

                                      Working Paper 26940
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26940


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2020




We thank George-Marios Angeletos, Heather Boushey, Fatih Guvenen, Gerhard Illing, Ernest
Liu, Fabrizio Perri, Andrei Shleifer, Alp Simsek, Jeremy Stein, Larry Summers, and Ivan
Werning as well as seminar participants at Harvard, Princeton, Chicago Booth, Stanford, UCLA,
Bocconi, LMU, ECB, and Banque de France for numerous useful comments. Sebastian Hanson,
Bianca He, Julio Roll, and Ian Sapollnik provided excellent research assistance. Straub
appreciates support from the Molly and Domenic Ferrante Award. Contact info: Mian: (609) 258
6718, atif@princeton.edu; Straub: (617) 496 9188, ludwigstraub@fas.harvard.edu; Sufi: (773)
702 6148, amir.sufi@chicagobooth.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Atif R. Mian, Ludwig Straub, and Amir Sufi. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Indebted Demand
Atif R. Mian, Ludwig Straub, and Amir Sufi
NBER Working Paper No. 26940
April 2020
JEL No. D31,E21,E32,E43,E44,E52,E62,G51

                                         ABSTRACT

We propose a theory of indebted demand, capturing the idea that large debt burdens by
households and governments lower aggregate demand, and thus natural interest rates. At the core
of the theory is the simple yet under-appreciated observation that borrowers and savers differ in
their marginal propensities to save out of permanent income. Embedding this insight in a two-
agent overlapping-generations model, we find that recent trends in income inequality and
financial liberalization lead to indebted household demand, pushing down natural interest rates.
Moreover, popular expansionary policies--such as accommodative monetary policy and deficit
spending--generate a debt-financed short-run boom at the expense of indebted demand in the
future. When demand is sufficiently indebted, the economy gets stuck in a debt-driven liquidity
trap, or debt trap. Escaping a debt trap requires consideration of less standard macroeconomic
policies, such as those focused on redistribution or those reducing the structural sources of high
inequality.

Atif R. Mian                                    Amir Sufi
Princeton University                            University of Chicago
Bendheim Center For Finance                     Booth School of Business
26 Prospect Avenue                              5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540                             Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                        and NBER
atif@princeton.edu                              amir.sufi@chicagobooth.edu

Ludwig Straub
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer 211
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
ludwigstraub@fas.harvard.edu
1    Introduction
Rising debt and falling interest rates have characterized advanced economies over the past 40
years. The average real interest rate dropped from 6% in 1980 to less than zero in 2019 (Rachel
and Summers 2019), and the average debt to GDP ratio almost doubled from 139% in 1980 to over
270% (Figure 1 below). The economic fallout of the COVID-19 health crisis is likely to accelerate
these patterns going forward, as governments pursue aggressive debt-financed stimulus policies.
    This situation raises critical research questions: How did the twin phenomena of high debt lev-
els and low interest rates come to be? Should there be a reconsideration of the standard macroeco-
nomic toolkit of monetary and fiscal policy given the challenging environment of high debt levels
and low interest rates? Is there a more prominent role for policies focused on redistribution?
    This study develops a new framework to tackle these difficult questions. The framework
shows how rising income inequality and the liberalization of the financial sector can push economies
into a low interest rate-high debt environment. Traditional macroeconomic policies such as mon-
etary and fiscal policy turn out to be less effective over the long term in such an environment. On
the other hand, less standard policies such as macro-prudential regulation, redistribution policy,
and policies addressing the structural sources of high inequality are more powerful and long-
lasting.
    The model introduces non-homothetic consumption-saving behavior (e.g. Carroll 2000, De Nardi
2004, Straub 2019) into an otherwise conventional, deterministic two-agent endowment economy.
The assumption of non-homotheticity implies that the saver in the model saves a larger fraction of
lifetime income than the borrower. This is not a new idea in economics. In fact, it is pervasive in
                                                                ¨
the work of luminaries such as John Atkinson Hobson, Eugen von Bohm-Bawerk, Irving Fisher,
and John Maynard Keynes, and empirically supported by recent work (e.g., Dynan, Skinner, and
Zeldes 2004, Straub 2019, and Fagereng, Holm, Moll, and Natvik 2019). In the model, the wealthy
lend to the rest of the population, which makes household debt an important financial asset in the
portfolio of the wealthy.1
    The assumption of non-homotheticity in our model generates the crucial property that large
debt levels weigh negatively on aggregate demand: as borrowers reduce their spending to make
debt payments to savers, the latter, having greater saving rates, only imperfectly offset the shortfall
in borrowers' spending. We refer to a situation in which demand is depressed due to elevated debt
levels as indebted demand.
    The concept of indebted demand has broad implications for understanding what has led to
the current high debt and low interest rate environment, and for evaluating what policies can
potentially help advanced economies escape this equilibrium. An overarching theme of the model
is that shifts or policies that boost demand today through debt accumulation necessarily reduce
demand going forward by shifting resources from borrowers to savers; therefore, such shifts or
policies actually contribute to persistently low interest rates.
  1 This implication of the model fits the data, as shown in Mian, Straub, and Sufi (2019); a substantial fraction of

household debt in the United States reflects the top 10% of the wealth distribution lending to the bottom 90%.


                                                         2
    The indebted demand framework predicts a number of patterns found in the data that models
without non-homotheticity in the consumption-saving behavior of agents have a difficult time
explaining. For example, since the 1980s, many advanced economies have experienced a large
rise in top income shares (Katz and Murphy 1992, Piketty and Saez 2003, Piketty 2014, Piketty,
Saez, and Zucman 2017), in conjunction with a substantial decline in interest rates and increases
in household and government debt. The model predicts exactly such an outcome: a rise in top
income shares in the model shifts resources from borrowers to savers, pushing down interest rates
due to savers' greater desire to save. Lower interest rates stimulate more debt, causing indebted
demand--as debt is nothing other than an additional shift of resources in the form of debt service
payments from borrowers to savers.
    The framework also predicts that financial liberalization, which has been a prominent feature
of advanced economies since the 1980s, leads to a decline in interest rates, a result that is difficult to
generate in most macroeconomic models (e.g., Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti 2017). In the
indebted demand model, financial liberalization increases the amount of debt taken on by borrow-
ers, which redistributes resources to savers. For the goods markets to clear, such a redistribution
requires interest rates to fall given that savers have a lower marginal propensity to consume out
of these larger debt payments.
    More generally, the model offers a different perspective on the growth in the size of the finan-
cial sector since the 1980s. Traditional models in which the financial sector enables firms to borrow
from households cannot explain the global rise in debt to GDP ratios, which has been concentrated
in household and government debt. Furthermore, investment to GDP ratios and business produc-
tivity growth have actually fallen during this period. In contrast, the indebted demand model
focuses on how secular forces such as rising inequality and financial liberalization can foster a
large rise in households borrowing from other households. In both the model and the data, the
household sector is crucial for understanding why debt levels have increased.
    The concept of indebted demand also provides insight into discussions of monetary and fiscal
policy. For example, deficit-financed fiscal policy in the model is associated with a short run rise
in natural interest rates, which reverses into a reduction in interest rates in the long-run, as the
government needs to raise taxes or cut spending in order to finance the greater government debt
burden.2 As long as some of the taxes are ultimately imposed on borrowers, deficit-financed gov-
ernment spending is similar to any policy which attempts to boost demand through debt accumu-
lation. Ultimately, such a policy shifts resources from borrowers to savers, depressing aggregate
demand and therefore interest rates in the long run.
    A similar argument applies to monetary policy, for which we extend our model to include
nominal rigidities. Empirical evidence suggests that an important channel of accommodative
monetary policy operates through an increase in debt accumulation (e.g., Bhutta and Keys 2016,
Di Maggio, Kermani, Keys, Piskorski, Ramcharan, Seru, and Yao 2017, Beraja, Fuster, Hurst, and
   2 As we discuss below, we find that a similar result holds up in the presence of spreads between government bond

yields and the returns on other assets.



                                                        3
Vavra 2018, Di Maggio, Kermani, and Palmer 2019, Cloyne, Ferreira, and Surico 2019). This chan-
nel is also active in our model, boosting demand in the short-run. However, this boost reverses as
monetary stimulus fades and debt needs to be serviced, beginning to drag on demand. Due to the
presence of indebted demand, this drag can cause a persistent shift in natural interest rates after
temporary monetary policy interventions. It is for this reason that monetary policy has limited
ammunition in the model: successive monetary policy interventions build up debt levels, thereby
lowering natural rates. This forces policy rates to keep falling with them to avoid a recession, thus
approaching the effective lower bound.
    When savers command sufficient resources in our economy, for instance due to high income
inequality and large debt levels, the natural rate in our economy can be persistently below its
effective lower bound. At that point, our economy is in a debt-driven liquidity trap, or debt trap,
which is a well-defined stable steady state of our economy.
    The most striking aspect of this state is that it acts as a kind of "black hole". Conventional
policies that are based on debt accumulation, such as deficit spending, only work in the short
run. Eventually, the economy is "pulled back" into the debt trap. Certain unconventional policies,
however, can facilitate an escape from the debt trap. For example, redistributive tax policies,
such as wealth taxes, or structural policies that are geared towards reducing income inequality
generate a sustainable increase in demand, persistently raising natural interest rates away from
their effective lower bound. One-time debt forgiveness policies can also lift the economy out of the
debt trap, but need to be combined with other policies, such as macroprudential ones, to prevent
a return to the debt trap over time.
    The idea of indebted demand helps explain the predicament faced by the world's leading
central bankers, especially the absence of interest rate normalization. For example, a recent Wall
Street Journal article cites monetary authorities worldwide in asserting that "borrowing helped
pull countries out of recession but made it harder for policy makers to raise rates." Mark Carney,
Governor of the Bank of England observed that "the sustainability of debt burdens depends on
interest rates remaining low." Philip Lowe, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia has warned
that "if interest rates were to rise . . . many consumers might have to severely curtail their spending
to keep up their repayments."3 This paper formalizes these intuitions.


Literature.    Our paper is part of a burgeoning literature on the causes of the recent fall in nat-
ural interest rates, referred to as "secular stagnation" by Summers (2014). Among the existing
explanations are population aging (Eggertsson, Mehrotra, and Robbins 2019), income risk and in-
come inequality (Auclert and Rognlie 2018, Straub 2019), the global saving glut (Bernanke 2005,
Coeurdacier, Guibaud, and Jin 2015) and a shortage of safe assets (Caballero and Farhi 2017).4 Our
theory suggests a new force for reduced natural interest rates, namely indebted demand. It can act
both as an amplifier of existing explanations--as we demonstrate for rising income inequality--or
  3 See also Borio and White (2004), Koo (2008), Borio and Disyatat (2014), Lo and Rogoff (2015), Turner (2015) and

Dalio (2018) for similar ideas.
  4 For an overview of multiple forces see Rachel and Summers (2019).




                                                        4
give rise to new explanations, as we demonstrate for financial liberalization, which is commonly
thought to be a force against low interest rates.5
    The central element of our theory is the assumption of non-homothetic preferences, generating
heterogeneous saving rates out of permanent income transfers.6 As we mentioned above, such
heterogeneity was an important aspect of many early studies of (non-optimizing) consumption
behavior. Among the more recent papers in this tradition are Stiglitz (1969), Von Schlicht (1975),
and Bourguignon (1981), who study the implications of such behavior on inequality. The earliest
models of optimal consumption behavior that we know of and that allow for such preferences
are Strotz (1956), Koopmans (1960) and Uzawa (1968). More recently, Carroll (2000), De Nardi
(2004), and Benhabib, Bisin, and Luo (2019) argue that non-homothetic preferences are important
to understand wealth inequality, and Straub (2019) studies their implications for a rise in income
inequality.
    Our implications for monetary policy are related to the debate around "leaning vs. cleaning"
(Bernanke and Gertler 2001, Stein 2013, Svensson 2018) and to the nascent academic literature
surrounding the idea that monetary policy might have limited ammunition. McKay and Wieland
(2019) explore this idea in a model of durables spending, Caballero and Simsek (2019) in a model
with asset price crashes.
    The closest antecedents to our paper are Kumhof, Ranci`                           ´ and Sim
                                                          ere, and Winant (2015), Cairo
(2018) and Rannenberg (2019). Kumhof, Ranci`
                                           ere, and Winant (2015) study a two-agent endow-
ment economy, where savers are more patient than borrowers and savers have non-homothetic
preferences. They find that a rise in income inequality leads to greater debt levels and a greater
likelihood of a financial crisis due to endogenous default, but no change in long-run interest rates.
The driving force behind this result is the specific structure and heterogeneity of preferences. It
generates a higher saving rate of savers out of labor income, compared to borrowers, but a lower
saving rate out of financial income. This is why the model does not feature indebted demand: in
fact, an increase in debt raises aggregate demand in the model and thus dampens the effects of
                                    ´ and Sim (2018) builds on Kumhof, Ranci`
income inequality. The model in Cairo                                       ere, and Winant
(2015) and studies implications for a richer set of shocks and for the conduct of monetary pol-
icy. The recent paper by Rannenberg (2019) also builds on Kumhof, Ranci`
                                                                       ere, and Winant (2015)
but shows that income inequality can also reduce natural interest rates in addition to generating
greater debt.
    Finally, as a paper about household and government debt, it relates to a vast empirical and
theoretical literature on the origins and consequences of high debt levels. Among the empirical
papers, Schularick and Taylor (2012) document the well known "financial hockey stick" behavior
of private debt; Mian and Sufi (2015), Jord`
                                           a, Schularick, and Taylor (2016), Mian, Sufi, and Verner
(2017) document that expansions in household debt predict weak future economic growth; Rein-
hart and Rogoff (2010) assess the consequences of large government debt. Among the theoretical
   5 For   a notable exception, see Iachan, Nenov, and Simsek (2015).
   6 This is not to be confused with heterogeneity in marginal propensities to consume out of transitory income transfers,

which, as we explain below, are not sufficient to generate indebted demand.


                                                             5
papers, Eggertsson and Krugman (2012) and Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2017) study the effects of
debt deleveraging on the economy. Our model emphasizes that even without deleveraging, debt
reduces aggregate demand. This aspect is shared with Illing, Ono, and Schlegl (2018), who show
that debt can lead to persistent stagnation in the context of insatiable preferences for money.


Layout. Section 2 presents motivating facts for our model, which we introduce in Section 3. Sec-
tion 4 studies steady states and transitional dynamics in our model, introducing the concept of
indebted demand. In Section 5, we feed trends in income inequality and financial liberalization
into the model. Next, we study the implications of fiscal policy (Section 6) and monetary policy
(Section 7), and what indebted demand means for an economy in a liquidity trap (Section 8). Sec-
tion 9 provides several extensions, and Section 10 offers a simple "sufficient statistic" perspective
on our theory. Our conclusion is in Section 11.


2     Motivating Facts
2.1    High debt and low interest rates

A defining feature of advanced economies over the past decade has been the simultaneous pres-
ence of historically high debt burdens and historically low interest rates. The massive debt-
financed government fiscal programs being discussed in response to the COVID-19 health crisis
will likely accelerate this trend.
      The left panel of Figure 1 plots the average debt to GDP ratio across 14 mostly advanced
economies, where debt includes all borrowing by households, governments, and non-financial
businesses. Both the high level of debt in recent years and its rapid ascent since 1980 are notable.




                                                  6
                                                                      Figure 1: Debt and interest rates.

                             300
                                                                                                8




                             250
                                                                                                6
       Total Credit to GDP




                             200                                                                4




                                                                                                2
                             150



                                                                                                           World real interest rate, King and Low, weighted by GDP

                                                                                                0          10 year treasury rate, US, real
                                                                                                           30 year fixed mortgage rate, US, real
                             100
                                   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990    2000   2010   2020           1970     1980               1990               2000              2010   2020



Left panel shows cross-country average total debt to GDP, weighted by real GDP in 1970. Total debt is the sum of
credit to households, government and non-financial corporations. The countries in the sample are Australia, Canada,
Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United States and United
Kingdom. Data come from the IMF Global Debt Database, the Jorda-Schularick-Taylor Macrohistory Database and the
New Zealand Treasury. Right panel shows evolution of real interest rates. The real interest rate data start in the early
1980s given that information on inflation expectations prior to 1980 is difficult to obtain. For more details on the data
sources, see text.



    The right panel shows the evolution of real interest rates from 1980 onward. The global interest
rate is an estimate of the real rate of interest for 10-year inflation-protected government bonds from
King and Low (2014). The right panel also shows the real interest rate on 10-year U.S. Treasuries,
and an estimate of the real rate of interest for 30-year fixed rate mortgages in the United States.
Measures of inflation expectations are taken from the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland (available
since 1980). All three series show a substantial decline from 1980 onward.




                                                                                            7
                     Figure 2: Households and governments drove the increase in debt.


                          200



                          150



                          100



                           50



                             0
                                 1950   1960    1970   1980   1990    2000    2010    2020

                                               Corporate debt to GDP
                                               Household & government debt to GDP

Series are cross-country average debt to GDP, for non-financial corporations and for households and governments
together, weighted by real GDP in 1970. The countries in the sample are Australia, Canada, Finland, France, Germany,
Italy, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United States and United Kingdom. Data come from the
IMF Global Debt Database, the Jorda-Schularick-Taylor Macrohistory Database and the New Zealand Treasury.



    Both the high level and rapid ascent of debt in advanced economies has been driven by bor-
rowing by households and the government, as opposed to businesses. Figure 2 splits the total
debt to GDP ratio into non-financial corporate debt and a second category that includes house-
holds and governments, and it shows that the rise in debt has been concentrated in the latter
category. Household and government debt to GDP ratios were relatively constant before 1980,
before beginning an impressive upward trend through recent years. However, borrowing by the
non-financial corporate sector was modest, and therefore not responsible for the debt boom.




                                                         8
                                                                  Figure 3: Secular decline of investment and TFP growth.


                                        28                                                                                           3
        Average investment to GDP (%)




                                        26                                                                                           2




                                                                                                           Average TFP growth (%)
                                        24
                                                                                                                                     1




                                        22
                                                                                                                                     0




                                        20

                                                                                                                                    -1
                                             1950   1960   1970     1980   1990   2000   2010   2020                                     1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010   2020




Left panel shows cross-country average gross capital formation as a percentage of GDP and the right panel shows cross-
country average total factor productivity growth, where the averages are weighted by real GDP in 1970. The countries
in the sample are Australia, Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain,
Sweden, United States and United Kingdom. Cross-country averages are constructed over 3-year moving averages at
the country-level. Data come from the Penn World Tables and World Bank World Development Indicators.



      The fact that businesses have not been responsible for the rise in borrowing is consistent with
the fact that investment to GDP ratios have actually declined during this period of rising debt and
low interest rates. This is shown in the left panel of Figure 3, which plots the gross domestic invest-
ment to GDP ratio across the 14 countries in the sample. The right panel shows that productivity
growth has been at best constant (if not declining) over this time period.
      The rise in debt has not been associated with a traditional channel through which businesses
and the government borrow from the household sector to boost investment and productivity
growth. Instead, rising debt levels appear to have been used to finance personal consumption
and government outlays. That is, it appears that the expansion of credit has been used to increase
aggregate demand rather than supply. This is a key motivating fact behind the model of indebted
demand below.


2.2     Inequality and household debt

The rising share of income earned by the top of the income distribution has been well-established
in the literature (e.g., Piketty, Saez, and Zucman 2017). What is perhaps less well known is that the
rise in top income shares globally began in the 1980s at almost the exact same time as the rise in
government and household borrowing, and the two patterns have been closely linked afterward.
This is shown in Figure 4, which plots the rise in government and household borrowing from Fig-
ure 4 above, along with the top 1% share of income across 14 countries from the World Inequality


                                                                                                       9
Database.
                                                                            Figure 4: Rising inequality and rising debt.

                                                               200                                                                  16


                      Household & government debt to GDP (%)
                                                                                                                                    14




                                                                                                                                         Top 1% income share
                                                               150


                                                                                                                                    12


                                                               100
                                                                                                                                    10



                                                               50                                                                   8
                                                                     1950    1960   1970     1980     1990   2000     2010   2020

                                                                                    Household & government debt to GDP (%)
                                                                                    Top 1% income share


Series are cross-country averages, weighted by real GDP in 1970. The countries in the sample are Australia, Canada,
Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United States and United
Kingdom. Data come from the World Inequality Database, IMF Global Debt Database, the Jorda-Schularick-Taylor
Macrohistory Database and the New Zealand Treasury.



    This close association between the rise in inequality and the rise in household borrowing is
explored in detail in a companion study, Mian, Straub, and Sufi (2019). That study focuses on the
United States, and it shows that the rise in income inequality has generated a "saving glut of the
rich," which has financed a substantial rise in household debt by the non-rich.
    One way to see this is Figure 5, which comes directly from Mian, Straub, and Sufi (2019). It
shows the stock of net household debt across the wealth distribution. Net household debt is de-
fined as gross household debt owed minus household debt held as a financial asset. As the figure
shows, the top 1% experienced a significant decline in their net debt position from 1982 onward,
which reflects the accumulation of a significant amount of household debt held as a financial asset.
In contrast, the bottom 90% experienced a large increase in their net debt position, as gross debt
owed increased substantially but household debt held as a financial asset was relatively stable.
Thus, to a large degree, the rise in saving of the top 1% has not been transformed into investment
or capital account surpluses; instead, it has been absorbed by an increase in borrowing by the
bottom 90%.7
   7 As shown in Mian, Straub, and Sufi (2019), the evidence in Figure 5 is even stronger if saving and dissaving in other

assets, such as houses and the stock market, are included.




                                                                                                 10
                                                        Figure 5: Rich households and the rise in household debt


                                                       .4



                     Scaled by NI, relative to 1982    .2



                                                       0



                                                      -.2
                                                         1960              1980               2000                 2020
                                                                  Top 1%            Next 9%           Bottom 90%

 This figure comes directly from Mian, Straub, and Sufi (2019). The figure focuses on the United States. It shows net
household borrowing by the U.S. household sector across the wealth distribution. It uses the debt and asset shares
from Saez and Zucman (2016) to construct net household borrowing. Net household borrowing is defined as gross
household borrowing minus household debt held as a financial asset. All series are scaled by national income, and the
1982 level is subtracted.




2.3     Saving across the income and wealth distribution

The final set of facts that motivate the model concern the idea that the rich save a larger fraction
out of income, and out of permanent (or lifetime) income in particular. This is an old idea in
economics, showing up in the writings of John Atkinson Hobson, Eugen Bohm von Bawerk, Irving
Fisher, and John Maynard Keynes among others. A recent body of research has resurrected this
idea.
      For the United States, Dynan, Skinner, and Zeldes (2004) use panel data from the Survey of
Consumer Finances to show that individuals in the top 20% of the income distribution have saving
rates out of lifetime income that are substantially larger than the rest of the population. The saving
rates for the top 1% and top 5% out of income are estimated to be particularly large, almost 5 times
larger than at the median of the distribution (0.51 compared to 0.11 out of a dollar of income).
      The recent study of Straub (2019) uses the Panel Study of Income Dynamics to estimate an
elasticity of consumption to lifetime income. The study finds estimates of this elasticity around
0.7, which is evidence of a concave relationship between consumption and lifetime income. The
statistical analysis easily rejects the canonical benchmark model which assumes that the elasticity
of consumption with respect to lifetime income across the lifetime income distribution is 1.
      Fagereng, Holm, Moll, and Natvik (2019) use administrative panel data from Norway to es-
timate saving rates out of income across the wealth distribution. The study finds substantially


                                                                                  11
higher saving rates for wealthier households, with saving rates for the top 1% estimated to be
almost double the saving rates for the median of wealth distribution.

                    Figure 6: Rising inequality and wealth accumulation across U.S. states

                                          3


                                                                                                         CT
                                                                                                        NV          WY

                                          2             AK                   NJ                               NY
                                                             DE
                      Wealth to Income



                                                                    PA             WAIL
                                                                 NH                   CA
                                                             NCVA                        MA
                                                                  NMSC TN          DC         FL
                                                        OH        MDSD
                                                                    GA       CO AZ
                                                                              TX
                                                              MO VT AL
                                          1               WI
                                                           IN
                                                       KY
                                                       AR     MI                UT
                                          LA           ME           MN
                                                 IA                NE
                                                                          ID
                                               MS
                                              WV            HI RI OR
                                                            KS
                                                                  OK
                                          0                       MT


                                                       ND


                                         -1
                                                 .05                   .1              .15         .2         .25
                                                                              Top 1% share

 This figure plots the change from 1982 to 2007 in the ratio of total household wealth to household income at the state
level against the change in the top 1% share of income over the same period. For full details on data, see Mian, Straub,
and Sufi (2019).



    These findings suggest that reallocation of resources from (income or wealth) non-rich house-
holds to rich households increases aggregate saving. Mian, Straub, and Sufi (2019) provide ag-
gregate evidence for this channel, based on heterogeneous trends in income inequality across U.S.
states. In particular, as shown in Figure 6, states with larger increases in income inequality since
1982 (as measured by their top 1% income shares) have significantly larger increases in accumu-
lated wealth relative to average state-level income. While Figure 6 only displays a correlation,
Mian, Straub, and Sufi (2019) show that this result is robust to variety of controls.


3    Model
Motivated by the facts above, this section develops a model of indebted demand. The model
is a deterministic, infinite-horizon endowment economy, populated by two separate dynasties of
agents trading debt contracts. Endowments can be thought of as dividends of real assets, or "Lucas
trees", owned by the two dynasties. Each such asset produces one unit of the consumption good
each instant. There are Y real assets in total, where we normalize Y = 1 for now.
    The agents in the two dynasties share the same preferences and only differ by their endow-
ments of the real asset. For reasons that will become clear below, we refer to the poorer ("non-
rich") dynasty as borrowers i = b and wealthier ("rich") dynasty as the savers i = s. At any point in

                                                                                  12
time, there is a mass µb = 1 - µ of borrowers and a mass µs = µ of savers. We sometimes simply
refer to all dynasties of type i as "agent" i.
      The model is intentionally kept simple and tractable for now; several extensions can be found
in Section 9 and Appendix C.


3.1     Preferences

We begin by setting up the agents' common preferences. An agent in dynasty i  {b, s} dies at
rate  > 0 and discounts future utility at rate  > 0. At any date t, total consumption by dynasty
i is cit and total wealth by dynasty i is ait . The average type-i agent therefore consumes cit /µi and
owns wealth ait /µi , with a utility function given by8

                                                               
                                           e-(+)t log cit /µi + v( ait /µi ) dt                                      (1)
                                    0                          

Utility is derived from two components: each instant, utility over flow per-capita consumption
cit /µi ; and, arriving at rate , a warm-glow bequest motive captured by the function v( a)/. We
assume for now that upon death, the entire asset position of an agent is bequeathed to a single
newborn offspring, ruling out any cross-dynasty mobility.9 The consolidated budget constraint of
all agents of type i is therefore simply given by

                                                       cit + a
                                                              it  rt ait                                             (2)

where rt is the endogenous flow interest rate at date t.
      The function v( a) represents a crucial aspect of this model. It characterizes the relationship
between wealth of a dynasty and its saving rate. To see this, consider the special case where
v( a) = log a. This choice of v( a) makes the preferences in (1) homothetic: the borrower and
saver dynasties would exhibit the exact same saving behavior, just scaled by their current wealth
positions.10
      This is no longer true as v( a) deviates from log a. To capture such deviations, we define  i ( a)
to be the marginal utility of v relative to the marginal utility of log, that is,

                                                 i ( a )  a / µ i · v ( a / µ i ).                                   (3)

 i ( a) is defined in per-capita terms and therefore depends on i.  i ( a) plays an important role in
the analysis, especially  s ( a) which henceforth we also denote by  ( a). When  i ( a) is constant,
for instance  i ( a) = 1 when v( a) = log a, utility is homothetic as marginal utility of bequests and
marginal utility of consumption are proportional. When  i ( a) is decreasing, the marginal utility
   8 Our  results also hold with non-unitary elasticities of the utility function over consumption, see Appendix C.1.
   9 We  relax this assumption in Section 9.4.
  10 In fact, given the normalization with 1/ , v ( a ) = log a exactly corresponds to an altruistic bequest motive in an
                                                     t          t
equilibrium in which rt = .



                                                               13
of bequeathing assets decreases relatively more quickly than the marginal utility of consumption;
in this case, wealthier agents save relatively less. When  i ( a) is increasing, marginal bequest util-
ity decays more slowly than that of consumption, implying that wealthier agents have a stronger
desire to save. This latter, non-homothetic case is the most plausible case intuitively and best sup-
ported case empirically as mentioned in Section 2.3 above. This is the case focused on by the
model.


3.2     Borrowing constraint

The two types of agents in the model maximize utility (1) subject to the budget constraint (2) and
a borrowing constraint. To formulate the borrowing constraint, we separate type-i agents' wealth
positions into two components: their real assets hit and their financial assets, which if negative, we
refer to as debt dit , that is,
                                                        ait = hit - dit                                                (4)

We assume for now that the agents' debt is adjustable-rate long-term debt which decays at some
rate  > 0.
      Agents of type i own a fixed total endowment of  i  (0, 1) of real assets (trees), where  s +
 b = 1. Within the endowment, we assume that                      i
                                                     <  i are pledgeable real assets (e.g. land, houses,
businesses, etc) and  i - i are non-pledgeable real assets (e.g. human capital). Denoting
                                                                       s
                                                  pt             e-   t ru du   Yds                                    (5)
                                                          t

the price of a single real asset (tree), type-i agents' total wealth in real assets is

                                                         hit = pt  i                                                   (6)

and type-i agents' pledgeable wealth is pt i . Henceforth we assume that pledgeable wealth (per
capita) is equal across agents,          b / (1
                                    - µ) = s /µ, and denote  b , so that the only source
of heterogeneity between the two agents are the endowments  i , or equivalently, the agents'
real-asset earning shares. We assume that savers' per capita earnings exceed those of borrowers,
 s /µs >  b /µb .
    We impose the borrowing constraint

                                                   dit + dit   pt                                                      (7)

where, due to asset market clearing, ds    b     11
                                      t + dt = 0. We henceforth focus exclusively on the borrow-
ers' total debt position dt  db
                              t , the key state variable for our analysis. dt essentially captures how
much borrowers have spent beyond earnings  b Y in the past, and how much of a debt burden
  11 We multiply the right hand side by  so that in a steady state, the constraint simplifies to di  p . This is immaterial

to our results.



                                                                 14
borrowers need to service in the future.
      According to borrowing constraint (7), new debt issuance di + dit is bounded above by the
value of pledgeable assets. As we emphasize below, most of our results do not rely on the specific
constraint (7). In fact, we will often allow for a more general constraint of the form

                                             dit + dit   pt ({rs }st )                                                (8)

where     = ({rs }st ) is a general function of current and future interest rates. With slight abuse
of notation, we denote by (r ) the function ({rs }st ) in the case where rates are constant rs = r
for all s  t. In Appendix C.2, we show that many alternative models of borrowing behavior
can be expressed in this more general form. For example, in an economy with housing, (r ) 
  r
1+ r for some  > 0. When borrowers are subject to uninsurable idiosyncratic income risk a la
Bewley-Aiyagari, we show that, under mild conditions, they endogenously choose an average
debt position of the form p (r ) when rt = r in all periods. All examples share the characteristic
that the constraint on debt p (r ) is higher, i.e. more relaxed, for a lower interest rate r.


3.3    Homothetic benchmark

Throughout the analysis, we compare the model to a homothetic benchmark model. This model is
characterized by  ( a) = 1, so that agents' preferences are indeed homothetic. Moreover, to avoid a
continuum of steady state equilibria in the homothetic model, we allow the saver's discount factor
to be different from, and smaller than, the borrower's discount factor, s < . Heterogeneity of
discount factors is not assumed in the non-homothetic model.


3.4    Equilibrium

We formally define equilibrium next.
                                       b a (competitive) equilibrium of the model are sequences
Definition 1. Given initial debt d0 = d0
{cit , ait , dit , hit , pt , rt } such that both agents choose {cit , ait } to maximize utility (1) subject to the budget
constraint (2) and the borrowing constraint (7); dit is determined by (4); hit is determined by (6); pt
is determined by (5); and financial markets clear at all times, that is, ds                     b
                                                                                          t + dt = 0. The goods market
clears by Walras' law.
      A steady state (equilibrium) is an equilibrium in which cit , ait , dit , hit and rt are all constant.
      A steady state with debt d is stable if there exists an > 0 such that any equilibrium with initial
debt d0  (d - , d + ) has debt converge back to d, dt  d. All other steady states are unstable.

      For illustrative purposes, we use the following parametrization of the non-homothetic and
homothetic models throughout the paper. We interpret the saver as comprising the top 1% earning
households of the economy, i.e. with a population share µ = 0.01, and the borrower as the bottom
99%. We choose the saver's real (non-bond) earnings share  s to match a pre-tax income share
of 20%. Subtracting the return to 150% household debt and government debt to GDP with a

                                                           15
4% interest rate, we arrive at  s = 14%. The discount factor  will roughly correspond to the
borrower's discount factor and is set to a value of  = 0.10.
    We directly calibrate  ( a) = v ( a/µ) a/µ, letting it take the following simple functional form,
            ~ -1 log 1 + e a-a
 ( a) = 1 + a                ~
                               . From (3), this then determines v( a) and  b ( a). Given its functional
form,  ( a) is strictly increasing with  ( a)  (0, 1) and admits the homothetic model as a special
        ~  . The calibration uses the borrowing constraint (7).
case if a                                                                and a~ are jointly pinned
down to match a household-debt-to-GDP ratio of 80% and a steady-state interest rate r = 4%,
which corresponds to the average real return on wealth.12 For the homothetic benchmark model,
we achieve the interest rate target by assuming s = 0.04. The parameter  has two roles. It
determines the maturity of debt, and it governs the speed of the debt response to relaxations in
the borrowing constraint. Until Section 9.6, we effectively assume the first role away by focusing
exclusively on adjustable-rate debt, that is, debt has zero duration. Thus, we calibrate  in line
with its second role. To do so, we compare the impulse response of household debt over GDP to
a monetary policy shock implied by our model to that commonly found to identified monetary
policy shocks. In particular, we feed a 4-year 50 basis points interest rate cut (see (17) below)
into the Section 7 variant of our model and compare the household debt / GDP response at its
peak (after 2 years) with the year-2 response found in Jord`
                                                           a, Schularick, and Taylor (2015). This
procedure implies a  roughly equal to 1. Finally, we set  = 0.10. As we demonstrate in Section 10
below, this produces a reasonable local slope of the saving supply curve of around dr /d log a 
-0.032.

3.5     Discussion

What does  ( a) capture?          The literature has pointed out numerous examples of why agents
might care about their wealth beyond its value for financing their own consumption behavior.
This includes bequests (De Nardi 2004), out-of-pocket medical expenses in old age (De Nardi,
French, Jones, and Gooptu 2011), utility over status (Cole, Mailath, and Postlewaite 1992), inter-
vivos transfers (Straub 2019), and numerous other reasons that are documented in other papers
in the literature (e.g. Carroll 2000, Dynan, Skinner, and Zeldes 2004, Saez and Stantcheva 2018,
Boar 2018). Many of these examples are more salient or applicable to wealthier agents and can be
captured in reduced form by assuming a specific shape  ( a). In addition to these examples,  ( a)
could also capture the idea that assets other than a given stock of liquid assets or human capital
are illiquid and therefore being saved "by holding" (Fagereng, Holm, Moll, and Natvik 2019).
      Due to its stylized nature, our model is based entirely on bequests. We suspect microfounded
models of these other reasons for wealth accumulation among the rich behave similarly to ours.


Aggregate scale invariance.          Our baseline non-homothetic model, with increasing  ( a), is not
scale-invariant in aggregate. If aggregate output Y doubles, all agents are wealthier and thus, in
  12 The correct analogue of r in the data is the real return on wealth, rather than the real safe rate. We present an

extension in Section 9.3 that separates the two.


                                                         16
line with a rising  ( a), would raise their savings by more than double. Taken at face value, this
would generate rising saving rates in all growing economies, which seems counterfactual.
      We believe that the key to understanding why a non-homothetic model, which breaks individ-
ual scale invariance, need not necessarily break aggregate scale invariance is that many of the motives
for non-homothetic saving are relative to some economy-wide aggregates. For example, bequests
are likely especially valued among the rich if they are large relative to the average wage or income
in the economy, relative to the price of land, or relative to the average bequest. This suggests that
 ( a) should really be thought of as a function of a relative to Y or aggregate wealth, i.e.  ( a/Y )
or  ( a/( ab + as )). To incorporate this idea and reduce clutter in the formulas, we henceforth as-
sume that  is of the form  ( a/Y ) but output Y is normalized to 1, Y = 1. We demonstrate in
Appendix C.1 that our results carry over to the case where  is of the form  ( a/( ab + as )).

Trading debt vs. trading assets.           In our model, households trade debt contracts, rather than real
assets. The motivation behind this assumption is twofold. First and foremost, as the evidence in
Figure 5 makes very clear, debt contracts have been and continue to be a very important vehicle
for saving and dissaving across the U.S. wealth distribution. This is made even more explicit in
Mian, Straub, and Sufi (2019, Section 5), where we show, for example, that housing was not nearly
as important for the saving behavior of the bottom 90% of the wealth distribution taken together:
their dissaving through debt was not offset by increased saving in housing.13 The second reason
is that borrowers' real assets partly reflect their human capital, which is nearly impossible to sell
directly, but can partly be borrowed against. Aside from these considerations, allowing agents
to trade real assets would not materially change the results in the paper aside from initial reval-
uation effects, as agents are indifferent between trading debt and real assets along deterministic
transitions.


4     Downward-sloping saving supply and Indebted Demand
We next characterize the equilibria in our model. We focus exclusively on equilibria in which debt
is positive dt > 0, that is, the borrower actually borrows and the saver actually saves.14 Such
equilibria always exist in our economy.

4.1    Saving supply curves

The saver's Euler equation is given by

                                           s
                                           c                  cs
                                             t
                                               = r t -  -  +   t
                                                                    ( as
                                                                       t ).                                           (9)
                                           cst                 ast
  13 For details, see Mian, Straub, and Sufi (2019). These findings are also in line with Bartscher, Kuhn, Schularick, and

Steins (2018).
  14 If we assumed away heterogeneity in per-capita real earnings  i / µi , "borrowers" and "savers" become entirely

symmetric, so that for each equilibrium in which borrowers borrow and savers save, strictly speaking there would also
exist one in which savers borrow and borrowers save. With a realistic gap in  i /µi , this possibility vanishes.


                                                           17
                                   Figure 7: Long-run saving supply curves.

                               r
                                                                        ( a)  in a (saving is necessity)

                                                                        ( a) = const (homothetic)




                                                                        ( a)  in a (saving is luxury)

                                                                   a




In a steady state, quantities and prices are constant, so that the budget constraint reads cs =
ras . Substituting this into the Euler equation (9), we find our first key steady state equilibrium
condition
                                                      1 + /
                                           r = ·                   .                                       (10)
                                                   1 + / ·  ( as )
This equation can be understood as a long-run saving supply curve, describing the saving behav-
ior of a possibly non-homothetic saver. Specifically, for each wealth position as , it describes the
interest rate r that is necessary for a saver to find it optimal to keep his wealth constant at as .
   The crucial object that determines the shape of the saving supply curve is the function  ( a), as
illustrated in Figure 7. In the homothetic benchmark economy, where  ( a) is equal to 1 (or another
constant), we recover the standard infinitely elastic long-run supply curve, r = . When  ( a) falls
in a, in which case saving is treated as a necessity by agents, the saving supply curve slopes up.
Finally, and most importantly, when  ( a) rises in a and thus saving is treated as a luxury, the
saving supply curve slopes down. This is the key property of our non-homothetic model. We
summarize it in the following proposition.

Proposition 1. The long-run saving supply curve (10) is downward sloping if and only if wealthier agents
have a greater marginal propensity to save, that is, when  ( a) is increasing in a.

   What is the intuition behind the negative slope? In a model in which wealthier agents save
at higher rates, the higher an agent's wealth is, the lower must be the the return on wealth for the
agent to be indifferent between saving and dis-saving.
   To give an extreme example, consider the following stylized model of Bill Gates's saving be-
havior. Bill Gates consumes a fixed amount c = c and saves everything else, not caring about
his wealth, perhaps so long as it does not shrink below some threshold. Above that threshold,
Bill Gates's saving supply curve is nothing other than r = c/ a and therefore slopes down in his
wealth.




                                                      18
                                       Figure 8: Steady state equilibria.

                 (a) Unique steady state                                 (b) Multiple steady states
      r                                                         r




                                              supply                                                   supply
                                              demand                                                  demand
                                              d                                                       d



4.2   Steady state equilibria

Steady states are the intersections of saving supply curves with debt demand curves, as we charac-
terize in the following proposition.

Proposition 2. Any steady state with positive debt d > 0 corresponds to an intersection of a long-run
saving supply curve
                                                         1 + /
                                       r = ·                                                                (11)
                                                  1 +  /  ·  (  s /r + d )
with a long-run debt demand curve
                                                      (r )
                                                    d=     .                                         (12)
                                                       r
    Proposition 2 shows that the relevant saving supply curve is that of the saver, and that the
relevant debt demand curve is given by the borrowing constraint of the borrower. We write both
conditions in terms of the interest rate (return on wealth) r and debt d. Similar to models with
discount rate heterogeneity, the borrower is up against the borrowing constraint in the steady
state. As explained above, we focus on the natural case where the debt demand curve slopes
down in r, that is, (r )/r is strictly decreasing in r, and where  ( a) is strictly increasing in a.
    We illustrate the two curves and their intersections in Figure 8. As the two panels show, it
might be the case that there is a single intersection, and thus a unique steady state equilibrium, or
it might be the case that there are multiple intersections, and thus steady state multiplicity.


Multiple steady states.      How can there be multiple steady states in this economy? Consider
the high debt, low interest rate steady state in Figure 8 (b). Ceteris paribus, the high debt level
leads to a large debt service burden for borrowers, and a corresponding permanent stream of debt
service payments from borrowers to savers. If savers were adhering to the permanent income
hypothesis (PIH), they would spend this additional income stream one-for-one. This would raise
aggregate demand and hence the equilibrium interest rate sufficiently to incentivize borrowers
to deleverage, which is why a high-debt, low-r equilibrium is impossible with PIH savers. In our
model, however, savers do not satisfy the PIH. Instead, savers spend the additional income stream

                                                        19
for debt service costs less than one-for-one. This causes there to be weaker demand, rationalizing
a low equilibrium interest rate.
    When are multiple steady states possible in this model? This crucially depends on two elas-
ticities:    ( a) a/ ( a) and
                                  (r )r / (r ). The first one,  , governs the strength of non-
homotheticity in the model and thus the slope of the saving supply curve. The second one, ,
captures how elastic borrowing constraints are to interest rates. When is negative--which, as
we show in Appendix C.2, can happen in models where borrowers keep buffer stocks--the debt
demand curve can locally become sufficiently flat to allow for multiple steady states. For non-
negative , one can show that multiple steady states do not exist.


Indebted demand.        At the core of this logic, and in fact at the core of many of the results in this
paper, is that an increase in debt service costs, ceteris paribus, may lower aggregate demand, as
we show in the following result.

Proposition 3 (Indebted demand). Starting from a steady state and holding r fixed, any permanent
increase in debt service costs by dx moves aggregate spending on impact by

                                           +1                            r
                    dC = dcs + dcb = -               1-     1-4 1-                    dx                 (13)
                                           r 2                           +

where     ( 
                 a) a
                ( a)
                      is a measure of the degree of non-homotheticity in preferences. In particular, aggregate
spending falls, dC < 0, iff  > 0.

    Proposition 3 highlights that any increase in debt service costs weighs down on aggregate
demand, dC < 0, precisely if and only if       > 0, a phenomenon we henceforth call indebted de-
                                                 
mand. Why can demand be indebted in our model? The increase in debt service costs dx passes
through to the borrower's spending one-for-one, dcb = -dx. But, since savers have a greater sav-
ing propensity, their spending initially rises by less than the transfer, dcs < dx. Thus, aggregate
spending falls, dC < 0. For the goods market to clear, the equilibrium interest rate must there-
fore fall. As this mechanism only relies on heterogeneity in saving propensities out of a small
permanent transfer dx, any model that generates such heterogeneity along the wealth distribution
exhibits the property of indebted demand.
    The homothetic model, despite its discount rate heterogeneity, has  = 0 and thus does not
generate indebted demand. The reason for this is that there is no heterogeneity in saving propen-
sities out of a small permanent transfer dx: borrowers do not save out of a small transfer as they
are hand-to-mouth; savers do not either as they smooth their consumption perfectly, with r = s .
    As a side remark, observe that our non-homothetic model predicts a positive consumption
dC > 0 response to a reduction in debt service payments, dx < 0. Such a reduction could occur in
reality when households refinance their mortgages to bring down the interest rate ("rate refi"). In
homothetic models, as  = 0, there is no effect of "rate refis" on aggregate consumption (Green-
wald 2018), which quantitatively limits their macroeconomic relevance (Berger, Milbradt, Tourre,

                                                     20
                           Figure 9: Equilibrium transitions in the baseline model.

          (a) Transitions with unique steady state                   (b) Transitions with multiple steady states
      r                                                          r




                                                supply                                                       supply
                I              II               demand                  I        II          III            demand
                                                d                                                            d

             Note. Red: saving supply curve. Black: debt demand curve. Green: transitional dynamics.


and Vavra 2018). In non-homothetic models, such as ours, "rate refis" could instead have sizable
consequences for aggregate consumption.


Steady states in the homothetic economy.                 In the homothetic economy, the interest rate in the
unique steady state is necessarily pinned down by the saver's discount rate, r = s . The associated
debt level is then d = (s )/s .


Analytical example.        The steady state conditions in Proposition 2 can be solved analytically in
a simple special case, where  ( a) is a linear function in the relevant region of the state space and
 (r ) = is constant. For example, assuming  ( a) = a, there is a unique stable steady state in this
region, with interest rate
                                    r =  +  - /( s + )

and associated debt level
                                           d=                               .
                                                 +  - /( s + )

4.3   Transitions

Having characterized the set of steady state equilibria in this economy, we now explore the entire
set of equilibria, including the transitions along which the economy approaches the steady state(s).
For this part, we focus on a simplified borrowing constraint, where ({rs }st ) = ( pt ) only de-
pends on current and future interest rates through the price of real assets pt . We still require that
 ( pt ) pt increases in pt , that is, the demand for debt is downward sloping in the interest rate. It
turns out that our economy admits a unique equilibrium transition path for any given initial level
of debt d0 > 0, despite the possibility of multiple steady states. We verified this using phase di-
agrams, confirmed it in our numerical simulations, and provide an analytical local uniqueness &
existence result in Appendix B.




                                                          21
      Figure 9 illustrates the set of equilibria in the state space for two different positions of the sav-
ing supply and demand curves. In Panel (a), there is a single steady state. As can be seen, for each
initial debt position d0 , there exists a unique transition path to the steady state. If d0 is to the left
of the steady state (region I), the borrower levers up, eventually hitting the borrowing constraint;
if d0 is to the right of the steady state (region II), the borrower has a desire to deleverage, pushing
interest rates down. The magnitude of the decline in interest rates depends on the degree of non-
homotheticity, as when there is more non-homotheticity, the saver spends less of the additional
debt payments.15
      In Panel (b), the saver raises consumption by so little, that right at the middle steady state, in-
terest rates fall sufficiently to help the borrower make his debt payments and still demand enough
for the goods market to clear. To the right of that steady state (region III), it is no longer just interest
rates that adjust in order to clear the goods market. In fact, at first, the borrower increases his debt
even further to finance his spending, moving away from the middle steady state. As the borrower
approaches the borrowing constraint, however, and the speed at which new debt can be taken
out slows, interest rates need to fall increasingly rapidly to keep the borrower's debt payments
manageable. Ultimately, the borrower is at the debt limit and interest rates have fallen enough to
make such high debt burdens relatively affordable for the borrower.


5      Inequality, Financial Liberalization, and Indebted Demand
The framework developed in the previous section may help understand the underlying factors
that contributed to the simultaneous increase in debt and decline in interest rates that many ad-
vanced economies have experienced in the past 40 years. We explore this next.


5.1     Inequality

Long run. As Figure 4 makes very clear, many advanced economies have experienced a signif-
icant rise in income inequality. In the model, a rise in income inequality can be captured as an
increasing share  s of real earnings going to savers, and a corresponding fall in  b = 1 -  s . The
following proposition characterizes the long-run implications of rising income inequality.

Proposition 4. An increase in income inequality (greater  s ) unambiguously reduces long-run equilib-
rium interest rates and raises household debt. In the homothetic model, long-run interest rates and house-
hold debt are unaffected by rising income inequality.

      The long-run implications of rising inequality are best understood in the context of our model's
saving supply and debt demand curves. Figure 10 shows supply and demand diagrams for the
homothetic economy in panel (a), and the non-homothetic economy in panel (b). In the homothetic
  15 Observe that the black line in Figure 9 only corresponds to the borrowing constraint in steady state. Along the

transition, it is possible for the economy to temporarily be to the right of the black line (namely precisely when agents
expect lower interest rates in the future).



                                                           22
      Figure 10: The effects of rising income inequality for long-run saving supply and debt demand.

                          (a) Homothetic model                         (b) Non-homothetic model
                  r                                               r
                              Old and new steady state


                                                                                          Old steady state




                                                                      New steady state
                                                         d                                                   d



case, the supply curve is pinned down by the discount factor and thus independent of inequality.
The demand curve is also independent of inequality, and therefore the old and new steady states
coincide.
    In the non-homothetic economy, savers have a greater propensity to save. Thus, if they earn a
greater share of income, total saving increases. This manifests itself in a shift of the saving supply
curve (11) to the left. As Proposition 4 shows, and as is illustrated in Figure 10, the equilibrium
interest rate falls and the amount of debt in the economy rises in response to the rise in inequality.
The non-homothetic model thus helps rationalize the close empirical association between the rise
in inequality and the simultaneous increase in debt and decline in interest rates across advanced
economies (see Section 2).


Transition.           This is confirmed numerically in Figure 11, which simulates the responses of a ho-
mothetic and a non-homothetic economy to a permanent increase in income inequality. Since
this is a perfect-foresight transition, borrowers begin raising their debt levels already early on, in
anticipation of lower interest rates in the future, which raises interest rates initially.16
    Interestingly, the transition shows a hump-shaped profile in the debt service ratio, which ul-
timately falls back to its pre-transition value. This demonstrates that the debt service ratio is a
highly endogenous object, which can be low either when there is little debt (early in the transi-
tion), or, when there is high debt but interest rates are low (late in the transition).
    One reaction to the strong increase in debt in Figure 11 may be to point out that in the data,
borrowers typically use debt to acquire assets (houses) and that their net worth actually remained
more or less constant (Bartscher, Kuhn, Schularick, and Steins, 2018). Shouldn't this be reflected
in the model?
    It turns out that it already is. Clearly, most of the run-up in debt over the last few decades
is mortgage debt, and thus ultimately collateralized by housing. As we show in our companion
paper, Mian, Straub, and Sufi (2019), however, when taken together, the bottom 90% of the wealth
  16 Similarly,
              the homothetic economy shows an on-impact drop in the interest rate, below its initial steady state value
(dashed gray line) before converging back to it.



                                                             23
                                 Figure 11: Rising income inequality and debt.

                            Top 1% income share                                    Interest rate
               14 %
                                                                7%
               13 %
                                                                6%
               12 %
                                                                5%
               11 %
                                                                4%
               10 %
                      0   10     20     30     40     50             0      10      20     30      40      50
                                   years                                              years

                          Household debt / GDP                                   Debt service / GDP
                                                                4.5 %
               80 %

                                                                 4%
               70 %

                                                                3.5 %
               60 %
                                                                 3%
               50 %
                                                                2.5 %
                      0   10    20     30     40     50                 0   10       20     30     40      50
                                  years                                                years

                                  Homothetic model              Non-homothetic model
Note. Plots show transitions from a steady state withs   = 0.10 (where r = 6.1%, d = 55%, see dotted gray line) to our
calibrated steady state with  s = 0.14. The dashed blue line corresponds to the homothetic model with s = 0.061.


distribution did not use the increase in debt to accumulate more housing. Instead, housing was
bought and sold within the bottom 90%, likely from old homeowners to young homebuyers, and
thus ultimately financed consumption expenditure by old homeowners (Bartscher, Kuhn, Schu-
larick, and Steins, 2018). Net worth only remained stable because house prices were rising.
    At a stylized level, this is precisely the mechanism in our model. A natural measure of borrow-
ers' financial net worth is their pledgable wealth net of debt, pt - dt , where                         can be interpreted
as land or housing owned by borrowers. Figure 11 shows how borrowers' net worth evolves,
and splits it up into its components, pt and dt . Similar to the data, net worth remains stable
in the transition. Underlying the stability, however, are two opposing trends. On the one hand,
pledgable wealth increased tremendously, as asset prices pt rise; one the other, greater pledgable
wealth relaxes the borrowing constraint and thus leads to greater debt accumulation.
    If net worth of borrowers did not change, why then is there indebted demand? Couldn't
borrowers sell their assets, annihilate their debt and finance the same level of consumption as
before? The answer is no. What matters for borrowers' consumption stream--and hence their
contribution to aggregate demand--is not their net worth; instead it is their income stream after


                                                           24
                                    Figure 12: Decomposing borrowers' net worth.

                                                                         30 %




                                       change relative to s.s. output
                                                                         20 %

                                                                         10 %

                                                                          0%

                                                                        -10 %
                                                                        -20 %
                                                                        -30 %
                                                                                0   10    20     30     40   50
                                                                                            years

                                      Net worth                                      Pledgable wealth        Debt

Dashed blue (top): borrowers' pledgable wealth; black solid: borrowers' financial net worth; dashed red (bottom):
borrowers' negative debt.


making debt payments. Valuation effects from lower discount rates and greater asset prices do not
alter the income stream. Thus, indebted demand occurs when rich households save and non-rich
households dissave; this may or may not coincide with a reduction in borrowers' net worth.


5.2       Financial liberalization

Another widespread recent trend in advanced economies has been financial liberalization and
deregulation. Especially the "mortgage finance revolution" of the 1970s and 1980s allowed new
institutions to enter mortgage markets, led to securitization of mortgages and to a general loos-
ening of borrowing constraints (Ball, 1990). For example, Bokhari, Torous, and Wheaton (2013)
document large increases in the fractions of mortgages originated with an LTV ratio above 90%
and a debt-to-income ratio above 40% from 1986 to 1995. One tension in the literature noted by
Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2017) and Favilukis, Ludvigson, and Van Nieuwerburgh
(2017) is that in most standard models, a loosening of such borrowing constraints should be asso-
ciated with an increase in interest rates. We next explore the effects of financial liberalization on
debt and interest rates in the model developed here.
      To do so, financial liberalization is modeled as an increase in the pledgability (r ) of real as-
sets.17 We find the following result.

Proposition 5. Financial liberalization (greater (r )) unambiguously reduces long-run equilibrium inter-
est rates and increases household debt. By contrast, in the homothetic model, long-run interest rates are
unaffected by financial liberalization and household debt rises by less.

      Figure 13 plots the implied shifts in the debt demand curve, as well as the qualitative transi-
tional dynamics from the old steady state to the new one (green arrows). As can be seen, in both
  17 In   our housing application in Section C.2.1 we show that an increase in the LTV ratio corresponds to an increase in
 (r ).


                                                                                         25
        Figure 13: The effects of financial liberalization for long-run saving supply and debt demand.

                     (a) Homothetic model                         (b) Non-homothetic model
              r                                             r




                                                   d                                             d



homothetic and non-homothetic models, the short-run saving supply curve is upward-sloping: the
loosening of borrowing constraints initially increases interest rates, as household demand grows
in response. In the long run, the saving supply curve is flat in the homothetic benchmark model,
so that there is no long run effect of liberalization on interest rates.
      In the non-homothetic model, by contrast, the increased debt burden ultimately leads to a fall
in equilibrium interest rates, which then again contributes to increasing debt further. Interest-
ingly, this resolves the puzzle faced in the literature: the model shows that financial liberalization
might only put upward pressure on interest rates in the short run, and it actually contributes to a
declining interest rate in the long-run.
      When interest rates do not (or cannot) adjust, a permanent increase in         induces a boom-bust
cycle in output. We explore this in Section 8.


5.3     Persistent effects of temporary shocks

The idea of indebted demand can be sufficiently strong to imply that a temporary shock that leads
to greater debt accumulation permanently shifts the equilibrium of the economy. This can happen
in economies that admit multiple steady states.
      To see how this works for the case of temporary financial liberalization, consider Figure 14.
Before the shock, the economy is assumed to sit in the high-r, low-debt steady state. As the shock
hits, raising , demand for borrowing expands and the black curve shifts out. Now, only a single
steady state is left, and as the economy moves towards it, the level of debt rises.
      Once debt is sufficiently high that the economy crossed the gray dashed line, a reduction in
  back to its previous level does not suffice to bring the economy back to its previous steady
state. Instead, debt is so high at that point, that the only way for the economy to generate enough
demand to clear the goods market is for the interest rate to fall further, stimulating yet more debt.
Thus, debt will remain permanently elevated, and interest rates permanently subdued.
      While this effect relies on steady state multiplicity, the broader point here is that the model
generates an important asymmetry: accumulating debt (in response to some shock) may be signif-



                                                       26
Figure 14: Permanent effects of temporary financial liberalization in an economy with multiple steady states

        (a) Before the shock                (b) During the shock                 (c) After the shock
    r                                   r                                    r
               Old steady state




                                                                                   New steady state
                                  d                                  d                                    d



icantly faster than de-cumulating debt thereafter. This asymmetry is present even without steady
state multiplicity.


6    Public deficits and indebted government demand
The previous section showed how private deficits lead to the accumulation of household debt,
and thus indebted demand. A considerable portion of the recent increase in debt, however, has
been public debt. This is shown in Figure 15, which shows the evolution of household debt and
government debt separately for advanced economies. According to conventional wisdom, a rise
in government debt exerts upward pressure on interest rates (e.g., Blanchard 1985, Aiyagari and
McGrattan 1998).
    What are the implications of a rise in government debt in our non-homothetic model? This
section focuses on this question in the context of the equilibrium introduced in Section 3.4, in
which output is fixed at Y = 1, and therefore interest rates endogenously adjust to clear the goods
market. Section 8 revisits fiscal policy in the presence of nominal rigidities and a binding zero-
lower bound.
    We consider fiscal policy in this section, as well as other policies in subsequent sections, mainly
from a positive perspective, documenting its effects in our model without any notion of welfare.
The reason for this choice is that there are several real-world considerations that are first-order
for welfare but outside our model. For example, high debt levels and low interest rates are often
associated with instability and risk-taking in the financial sector, and thus raise the likelihood of
a financial crisis (e.g. Reinhart and Rogoff 2009, Schularick and Taylor 2012, Stein 2012). Low
interest rates may also reduce growth (Liu, Mian, and Sufi 2019). Behavioral aspects, such as time-
inconsistent preferences, would lead borrowers to accumulate too much debt. One important
dimension of welfare an extension of our model can speak to is the potential for a liquidity trap
when the (natural) interest rate is sufficiently depressed. We discuss the welfare implications of
our model in this context in Section 8.



                                                    27
                  Figure 15: Debt by households and governments in advanced economies


                           125


                           100


                            75


                            50


                            25


                             0
                                 1950   1960   1970    1980 1990       2000    2010    2020
                                                          Year

                                                      Household debt to GDP
                                                      Government debt to GDP

Series are cross-country averages, weighted by real GDP in 1970. The countries in the sample are Australia, Canada,
Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United States and United
Kingdom. Data come from the IMF Global Debt Database, the Jorda-Schularick-Taylor Macrohistory Database and the
New Zealand Treasury.



6.1   Incorporating the government

We introduce a standard government sector into the economy. Specifically, the government is
assumed to choose a debt position Bt , government spending Gt , and proportional income taxes ti
on agent i such that its flow budget constraint

                                                      t + ts  s + tb  b
                                         Gt + rt Bt  B

is satisfied at all times t.18 Ponzi schemes are ruled out by assuming that Bt is bounded above,
uniformly in t. For simplicity, government spending is treated here as purchases of goods that
are either wasted or--which is equivalent for the purposes of this current positive exercise--enter
agents' utilities in an additively-separable form. Taxes are assumed to enter agents' real wealth in
                                        i . Taking fiscal policy as given, the definition of a competitive
the natural way, rt hi = (1 -  i ) i + h
                       t           t
equilibrium is unchanged from before, with the exception that the bond market clearing condition
  18 An important question is whether government bonds in fact pay the same interest rate as other assets. To address

this, we propose an extension in Section 9.3 that explicitly allows for a spread between government bond yields and
the return on other wealth rt .



                                                         28
                          Figure 16: Long-run effect of an increase in public debt B.

             (a) Case with a unique steady state                   (b) Case with multiple steady states
         r                                                     r




                                                   d+B                                                    d+B



is now given by db    s
                 t + dt + Bt = 0.


6.2     Long-run effects of fiscal policy

We begin by studying the long-run effects of fiscal policy, focusing on constant policies ( G, B,  s ,  b ).
In this case, the equilibrium conditions for steady state equilibria are given by

                                                       1 + /
                                              r=                                                                (14)
                                                    1 + / ·  ( a)

                                                          s   (r )
                                          a = (1 -  s )     +      +B                                           (15)
                                                          r   r
Equations (14) and (15) characterize the long-run implications of fiscal policy. We are specifically
interested in increases in B, financed by raising taxes  i on both agents or cutting expenditure G;
as well as tax-financed increases in G. This yields the following result.

Proposition 6 (Long-run effects of fiscal policy on interest rates and debt.). In the long run,

   a) larger government debt (B ) depresses the interest rate (r ) and crowds in household debt (d ).

   b) tax-financed government spending (G ) increases the interest rate (r ) and crowds out household
        debt (d ).

   c) fiscal redistribution ( s ,  b ) increases the interest rate (r ) and crowds out household debt (d ).

With a homothetic saver, none of these policies have any effect on the long-run interest rate and on household
debt.

      An intuition for these results can be explained with the help of Figure 16. Consider the first
policy in Proposition 6, and assume the greater debt level B is entirely paid for by a reduction
in government expenditure G. As savers do not raise their consumption one-for-one with the
increase in debt service payments by the government, aggregate demand would fall were it not for
a reduction in interest rates. Graphically, the policy corresponds to an increase in the economy's

                                                          29
                                  Figure 17: The lock-in effect of government debt.

            (a) Small gov. debt, interest rate recovers         (b) Large gov. debt, interest rate remains low
        r                                                       r




                                                     d+B                                                  d+B



total demand for debt, d + B, which shifts out to the right (Panel (a) in Figure 16). Notably, the
reduction in interest rates will crowd-in household debt.
   Conversely, tax-financed government spending and fiscal redistribution reallocate resources
from the saver to a "spender", which is either the government--in the case of government spending--
or the borrower--in the case of redistribution. Such resource reallocation would raise aggregate
demand were it not for an increase in interest rates.
   Proposition 6 and Figure 16 prescribe a very different role for fiscal policy in influencing inter-
est rates than is typically assumed. What helps in the long-run is first and foremost redistribution
between spenders and savers, not redistribution of taxes over time in the form of public deficits,
which, paradoxically, lowers long-run interest rates even further as government demand becomes
indebted.


Japanification and the "lock-in" effect of government debt.                   Fiscal policy might not only be
relevant for shifting a given steady state, but also for the existence of steady states. For example,
when an economy is in a high-debt low-r steady state, then any of these policies affect not only the
interest rate associated with that steady state, but also the likelihood that another steady state--
that is, one with low-debt and a higher interest rate--exists. Panel (b) of Figure 16 illustrates this
for the case of the first policy. In this example, the increase in public debt is sufficiently large to rule
out the existence of the low-debt steady state. The intuition is even more pronounced than before.
Especially if interest rates are high--as in the low-debt steady state--any significant amounts of
public debt constitute a drag on aggregate demand as long as their interest payments are partly
covered by borrowers.
   A similar effect appears in our economy even in case of a single steady state. We illustrate this
in Figure 17. The greater government debt B is, the less the interest rate rises in response to greater
 s , lower  s or lower . For large B, a same-sized increase in r would require a larger adjustment in
government spending or taxes, reducing aggregate demand. This is why the interest rate response
to the same changes in  s ,  s or is smaller when B is large.
   We interpret this finding as a sort of "lock-in" effect. High government debt "locks in" low


                                                           30
                                           Figure 18: Deficit spending.

               Gov. debt / GDP                          Interest rate                        Household debt / GDP
   20 %
                                           6%                                     90 %

   15 %                                   5.5 %
                                                                                  85 %
                                           5%
   10 %
                                          4.5 %
                                                                                  80 %
      5%                                   4%
                                          3.5 %                                   75 %
      0%
           0        10        20                  0       10            20               0         10           20
                     years                                 years                                    years
Note. Plot shows response of non-homothetic economy to temporary government spending shock (AR(1) spending
path with g0 = 5.5% of GDP and a half-life of 2 years). Fiscal rule:  i = r B where r is eventual steady state interest
rate.


equilibrium interest rates, a transition to higher rates becomes less likely. This effect is potentially
an important factor in understanding the Japanese experience. Any material increase in Japanese
interest rates would burden the government with a significant debt service cost, to finance which
a sizable fiscal adjustment would be necessary. That, however, would weigh on demand, making
the interest rate increase unlikely in the first place.19

Fiscal policy in the analytical example. We can illustrate the effects of fiscal policy in the an-
alytical example in Section 4.2. It is straightforward to obtain the steady state given a set of tax
policies ( G, B,  s ,  b )

                    +- 
                        ((1 -  s ) s + )                                           1+ 
                                                                                       B
               r=                                       and        d=                                       .
                              1+ 
                                  B                                          +- 
                                                                                 ((1 -  s ) s + )

We see that greater redistribution and greater spending (both financed through greater  s ) raises
r and lowers d. Greater public debt B lowers r and crowds in d. Finally, greater B reduces the
sensitivity of r to changes in  s ,  s or .


6.3    Short run effects

Despite its novel long-run effects of government debt, the model predicts conventional short-run
effects of debt-financed fiscal stimulus programs (whether through government spending or tax
cuts). As before, in terms of saving supply and debt demand curves, this is due to an upward-
sloping short-run saving supply curve. We illustrate this in Figure 18, which plots the dynamic
response of the economy to temporary deficit-financed government spending. There is a short-
run rise in the natural interest rate, lasting about as long as the fiscal stimulus itself. During this
  19 This
       effect is amplified by the fact that in Japan, large scale asset purchases have shortened the duration of total
government (incl. central bank) liabilities.


                                                          31
time, household debt is crowded out by higher interest rates. Afterward, however, the interest
rate declines, falling below its original level and allowing debt to increase.
      The opposite of the dynamics in Figure 18 would materialize in response to an austerity pro-
gram, causing a short-term reduction in the natural rate but raising natural rates in the longer
term.
      In practice, this suggests a dilemma for economies that are currently stuck in a steady state
with low interest rates and high public debt, but, for some reason outside our model, wish to
raise rates going forward. If they expanded public debt even further, rates would rise in the short
run, but subsequently fall again, even below their already undesirable previous levels. If they
contracted public debt, rates will fall in the short-run--possibly below the effective lower bound,
causing a recession--despite the prospect of greater rates in the long run.
      A possible middle ground in such a scenario may be a gradual reduction in public debt, as
long as economies are still able to do so without hitting the effective lower bound. This will allow
those governments to save some of their "fiscal policy ammunition" for the future.


7      Monetary policy and the limited ammunition effect
In the previous section, we saw that deficit-financed fiscal stimulus reduces natural interest rates
in our model in the long run. In the presence of an effective lower bound, this then implies that
there is only a limited amount of fiscal stimulus "ammunition" that policy makers can use before
interest rates hit the lower bound. In this section, we show a similar "limited ammunition" prop-
erty for monetary policy, by which monetary policy not only affects current output, but also the
natural interest rate going forward.


Introducing monetary policy.            To do this, it is necessary to move away from an endowment
economy, where output Y is fixed at 1 and interest rates endogenously adjust to clear goods mar-
kets. Instead, we now let output, henceforth denoted by Y  ^t , adjust endogenously in response to
monetary policy, that is, exogenous changes to interest rates {rt }. We continue to denote potential
output by Y = 1. All details to the model with nominal rigidities can be found in Appendix C.3.
   To allow output Y^t to be endogenous, we assume it is produced using efficiency units of labor
     ^t = Nt , which are supplied by both types of agents. We assume that dynasty i has labor
Nt , Y
productivity  i and supplies hours nit , such that total labor units are Nt =  b nb   s s
                                                                                  t +  nt . As in
Werning (2015) and Auclert, Rognlie, and Straub (2018), Nt is allocated across agents using a sim-
ple allocation rule, namely that type-i households supply hours in line with total labor demand,
nit = Nt . We assume that prices are flexible and nominal wages are sticky.20 This implies that
                               ^t , and thus that the income distribution is unaffected by aggregate
real earnings by type i are  i Y
       ^t . We call the allocation with Y
output Y                                ^t = Nt = 1 the natural allocation.
    20 The
        precise formulation of wage stickiness is irrelevant for our purposes as we make the simplifying assumption
below that monetary policy sets the real interest rate directly. See Auclert, Rognlie, and Straub (2018) for a related
argument.


                                                         32
    To ensure continued tractability of the model, we treat monetary policy as controlling the real
rate directly.21 Transmission of monetary policy then works in the standard way: monetary policy
changes the interest rate, which steers aggregate demand and thus output (and labor) in the econ-
                                                                               ^t } is endogenous.
omy. With exogenous interest rates {rt }, the goods market now clears because {Y
                                                                          n } that achieves the potential
We define as natural interest rates the sequence of real interest rates {rt
(or natural) allocation, that is, it implements a path of aggregate demand at potential, Y    ^t = Y = 1.


Monetary policy shocks.           To gain the most intuition about the behavior of the model, we con-
sider two types of monetary policy shocks, which hit the economy at a stable steady state with
(cb , cs , r, d). The first type is a T -period long interest rate reduction, before a reversal back to the
original interest rate                               
                                                     r ^ tT
                                                rt =             .                                     (16)
                                                     r t > T

The second type also starts with a T -period long interest rate reduction, but then reverses back to
the path of natural interest rates                         
                                                           r^           tT
                                                 rt =                               ,                           (17)
                                                           r n          t>T
                                                                t

                                                   ^t = Y = 1 in this case.
ensuring that for any t > T after the intervention Y


Debt and ammunition.            We begin by studying monetary policy shocks of the first kind. In our
model, they stimulate the economy via two separate channels. First, they relax borrowing con-
straints and encourage borrowers to use additional household debt for spending (debt channel).
Second, through income and substitution effects, they provide incentives for savers to spend more
(saver channel). To study the role of these channels for monetary transmission, we define the fol-
lowing present values
                                                                     t                       
                                  PV  ({cit }) =           e-       0 rs ds   cit dt -          e-rt ci dt
                                                    0                                    0
                                                                     t                       
                                        ^t }) =
                                  PV  ({Y                  e-       0 rs ds   ^t dt -
                                                                              Y                 e-rt Ydt
                                                    0                                    0

The first is the increase in the present value of agent i's spending until period  ; the second is the
increase in the present value of output until period  . The next proposition shows that the two
channels have asymmetric implications for the path of aggregate demand.

Proposition 7. The  -period present value of the output response to the monetary policy shock (16) is given
  21 One can easily relax this assumption by introducing a Taylor rule and a Phillips curve,
                                                                                        without affecting the results
in this section. Different from a textbook New-Keynesian model, our economy is locally determinate under a real-rate
rule.




                                                                33
by
                                 ^t }) = 1 PV  ({cs      1 -             
                           PV  ({Y                                      0 rs ds
                                          s       t }) + s e                      (d - d) .                  (18)
                                                        
                                             saver channel             debt channel

In the long run ( = ), the present value of output is entirely determined by the saver channel,

                                                             1
                                       PV  ({Y
                                             ^t }) =           PV  ({cs
                                                                      t } ).                                 (19)
                                                             s

This implies that any output stimulus generated by debt accumulation necessarily weighs negatively on
output going forward.

     Proposition 7 shows that the two channels of monetary transmission have vastly different
implications for the path of output. While the saver's consumption response to the interest rate
change affects output permanently, the debt channel only has a temporary effect. In fact, as any ad-
ditional debt taken out by borrowers eventually has to be serviced or even repaid, future demand
is reduced by an active debt channel. Put differently, when monetary policy is used to stimulate
the economy, any resulting increase in demand that is debt-financed does not sustainably raise
demand and will contribute to reduced demand in the future.
     One implication of the result in Proposition 7 is that if monetary policy is accommodative now,
it endogenously limits its room to be accommodative in the future, as it also needs to ensure that
the accumulated debt burden from past interventions does not cause a shortfall in demand. The
accurate object summarizing the "room to be accommodative in the future" is the natural rate of
          n . Our next proposition studies the effect that monetary policy has on r n .
interest rt                                                                         t

Proposition 8. To first order, a monetary policy shock as in (16) or (17) causes debt to rise and the natural
               n < r for any t. For a given increase in debt, the natural rate falls by more (as measured by
rate to fall, rt
   -r ( t - s ) n
 s
   e           rt dt
                  for any s) if there is more non-homotheticity (as measured by the elasticity       of  ); and if
interest rates are lower (lower r^) for longer (larger T).
                                                                                                ^ is sufficiently
If the economy has another stable steady state with higher debt and lower interest rate, and if r
low and T sufficiently large, the natural rate falls permanently and does not converge back to r.

     Accommodative monetary policy systematically reduces natural interest rates in our model,
and thus endogenously limits the "ammunition" that is available to monetary policy in the future.
                                                                              n cannot possibly
This happens because in the presence of a greater debt burden, natural rates rt
be equal to r after t = T as this would tighten borrowing constraints, and lead to the borrower
                                                       n are below r at least for some time after
severely contracting demand. Therefore, natural rates rt
t = T while the borrower deleverages (see Figure 19(a)).
     This logic operates even absent non-homotheticity. However, in a homothetic model, the con-
                  n  r is sped up significantly by the fact that the saver's consumption rises
vergence process rt
significantly due to the increase in the saver's permanent income, pushing the natural rate up,
                                                                                            n
closer to r. In a non-homothetic model such as ours, an additional reason for a decline in rt


                                                        34
                                       Figure 19: Debt limits the ammunition of monetary policy

                        (a) Monetary policy and natural rates                                     (b) Low-for-long monetary policy

                                                                                                convergence to           convergence to
                    r                                                                       r low-debt steady state   high-debt steady state
                          monetary          possible natural
                        intervention       interest rate paths
 r




                                                                     more debt,
  full ammunition




                                                                     greater 



                                                                                  too low
                                              reduced
                                               ammo.

                                                                 t                                                                        d
                                       T                                                               for too long




emerges--indebted demand--which leads to lower natural rates and a significantly reduced con-
vergence rate back to r. In other words, non-homotheticity and indebted demand significantly
aggravate the "limited ammunition" property of monetary policy (see Figure 19(a)). This can be
sufficiently strong to permanently lower natural rates. Such behavior occurs when the economy
                                                                                                   ^
exhibits multiple steady states, and the monetary intervention is "too low for too long", that is, r
is sufficiently low and T sufficiently long (see Figure 19(b)).


Relationship to literature.                    A number of economists have recently emphasized how the effec-
tiveness of monetary policy interventions can be reduced by past interventions (e.g. Eichenbaum,
Rebelo, and Wong 2019, Berger, Milbradt, Tourre, and Vavra 2018, McKay and Wieland 2019). In
this paper, we do not consider consecutive interventions. Instead, we focus on how much "ammu-
nition" in terms of the natural interest rate, a single intervention costs. To give an analogy with the
IS curve, we focus on the effect of monetary policy on the future level of the IS curve as opposed
to its slope.


Practical implications for the conduct of monetary policy. Monetary policy can have long-
lasting (if not permanent) effects on natural rates through the accumulation of debt. This should
be taken into account when contemplating the force with which to respond to different kinds
macroeconomic shocks. Temporary shocks to borrowers' ability to borrow for instance--e.g. dur-
ing a financial crisis--can be met with aggressive monetary easing as debt is unlikely to rise in
this context. However, when reacting to shocks that do not directly affect borrowers' demand for
debt--e.g. negative shocks to business investment as during the 2001 recession--aggressive mon-
etary policy could lead to significant and persistent increases in household debt, and therefore
reduce monetary policy ammunition going forward.
           When used in conjunction with macroprudential policies that are designed to keep debt in


                                                                          35
check, thereby dampening the debt channel, monetary policy can be used more aggressively. That
way, the economy does not merely "pull forward" demand through debt, demand which it then
lacks in the future.


The limited power of forward guidance. In times of "limited ammunition" due to reduced nat-
ural interest rates, one may wonder, whether the central bank can effectively use unconventional
policies such as forward guidance as a way to bring in new ammunition. To study the extent to
which this is possible, we consider monetary policy shocks as in (17) for long periods T . We have
the following result.

Proposition 9. Consider the monetary policy shock (17) as T  . In the homothetic model, output
          ^t  , in every period t. In the non-homothetic model output converges to a well-defined finite
explodes, Y
limit,
              ^t  Y
              Y   ^tT = = ( s )-1 (r        ^ ) /  s ) ( d  - d 0 ) e -  (1+
                                   ^ +  +  (r                                          ^)/ s )t
                                                                                      (r           ^
                                                                                                  +Y T =
                                                                                                                   (20)

where

                                ^
                                r                                                             ^
                                                                                              Y T =
                   T =
                 ^
                 Y     =Y     s
                                     ·  -1   (1 +  /  ) -  /  ,                         ^)
                                                                                  d  = (r           .
                                  ^)
                               + (r        ^
                                           r                                                     ^
                                                                                                 r

     In the homothetic economy, forward guidance is infinitely powerful, mitigating any concerns
about "limited ammunition".22 In the non-homothetic economy, by contrast, forward guidance
                                                  ^0 as the horizon T grows, so much so that
faces decreasing returns in moving current output Y
                                                                ^0 . It also has well-defined long-
even a permanent interest rate cut implies a finite response of Y
run effects (Proposition 9). Due to indebted demand, these long-run effects can even push output
below potential. When the economy admits multiple stable steady states, limt Y   ^  can be below
                                                                                                     t
Y.


8    Debt trap and policies to escape it
The most serious implications of indebted demand occur when it tips the economy into a liquidity
trap. We next discuss ways in which an economy can slide into such a debt-driven liquidity trap,
or debt trap, and evaluate policy options that may help the economy recover.
     To do so, we focus on the case of our model where the interest rate associated with our model's
steady state(s) is possibly below its effective lower bound (ELB). Let r > 0 denote that (real)
effective lower bound. It needs to be positive as we take r to be the real return on wealth in our
model. To get a number for r, we propose to take an estimate of the real return on wealth during
the ELB period--e.g. around 5% according to Farhi and Gourio (2018)--which then needs to be
de-trended by productivity growth--e.g. 1.5%--to obtain r. In this example, r = 3.5%.
  22 See the extensive literature on the forward guidance puzzle, e.g. Del Negro, Giannoni, and Patterson (2015), McKay,

Nakamura, and Steinsson (2016), Werning (2015), Farhi and Werning (2019), Gabaix (2019), Angeletos and Lian (2018),
Bilbiie (2019), Acharya and Dogra (2019).


                                                          36
                Figure 20: Falling into the liquidity trap in response to greater income inequality.

            Household debt / GDP                         Interest rate                               Output gap

100 %                                        7%                                            0%

 95 %                                        6%                                         -0.5 %

 90 %                                        5%                                          -1 %

 85 %                                        4%                                         -1.5 %

 80 %                                        3%                                          -2 %
        0       10           20     30            0      10           20       30                0   10           20    30
                     years                                    years                                       years

                                             Without ZLB              ZLB at r = 3.5%
Note. These plots simulate an increase in income inequality from  s = 0.14 to  s = 0.15 in the non-homothetic
economy. The black line assumes an effective lower bound at r = 3.5% (see text).


The liquidity trap steady state.             We focus on a steady state (r, d) with a natural interest rate r
below the effective lower bound, r < r, that is,

                                                             1 + /
                                              r<                                                                       (21)
                                                      1 +  /   (  s /r + d )

In this case, the economy gives rise to a stable liquidity trap steady state, which we henceforth
also call debt trap.

Proposition 10. In the presence of an effective lower bound with (21), there exists a stable liquidity trap
steady state ("debt trap"), in which output is reduced to

                                              r                
                                  ^ =Y
                                  Y                 ·  -1        (1 +  /  ) -  /          <Y                           (22)
                                         s   + (r )            r

    In the debt trap, household debt is high and output is permanently reduced due to indebted
demand.23 Thus, in our model, household debt is the key endogenous state variable that deter-
mines whether or not an economy is able to generate sufficient demand to avoid a liquidity trap.
The presence of such an endogenous state variable sets our model apart from other recent pa-
pers modeling secular stagnation, e.g. Benigno and Fornaro (2019), Caballero and Farhi (2017),
Eggertsson, Mehrotra, and Robbins (2019), Ravn and Sterk (2018). Moreover, the liquidity trap
here is indeed a trap, meaning associated with a stable steady state, rather than a relatively brief
episode driven by household deleveraging, as in Eggertsson and Krugman (2012) and Guerrieri
and Lorenzoni (2017).


  23 This
        result would be amplified in the presence of a standard Phillips curve, as in that case, a reduction in output
would endogenously lead to weaker inflation and a tighter effective lower bound r.



                                                              37
                             Figure 21: Credit boom-bust cycle with subsequent liquidity trap.

       Borrowing capacity (% of s.s.)                    Household debt / GDP                          Output gap

10 %                                         100 %                                        6%

 8%                                           98 %
                                                                                          4%
 6%                                           96 %
                                                                                          2%
 4%                                           94 %
                                                                                          0%
 2%                                           92 %

 0%                                           90 %                                      -2 %
       0        10           20       30             0       10           20    30             0      10           20     30
                     years                                        years                                    years
Note. These plots simulate a permanent increase in borrowing capacity           by 10% with fixed real interest rates at 3.5%.
 s = 14.6% to obtain a natural rate of 3.5%.


Falling into the debt trap: Inequality. Just like convergence to a steady state, our economy can
fall into the debt trap. Figure 20 shows the dynamics in a simulation when in response to rising
income inequality the only stable steady state has a natural rate below the effective lower bound r.
Thus, interest rates gradually fall until they hit the effective lower bound. At that point, a negative
output gap (i.e. a recession) begins.
    Interestingly, the debt trap drags the economy into the trap even before it would have oth-
erwise crossed the lower bound (blue dashed line in Figure 20). The reason for this is that both
agents anticipate a recession in the debt trap, and thus, in an attempt to smooth consumption,
cut back on their spending already in advance. This, however, only accelerates the decline in the
natural rate, pushing it below the effective lower bound r sooner.


Falling into the debt trap: Credit boom & bust cycle.                          Another particularly relevant way an
economy may fall into the debt trap is in the aftermath of a credit boom. To show this, consider an
economy whose natural interest rate is exactly equal to the one at the lower bound r, and whose
monetary policy keeps the interest rate at r. This captures a monetary policy stance that happens
to be "too loose" during the credit boom, which may happen for many reasons: policymakers
cannot always react sufficiently quickly; they may desire to run the economy "hot", precisely in
an attempt to get away from a liquidity trap (as was commonly argued in the early 2000s); other
policy goals called for an accommodative stance, e.g. inflation or exchange rates.
    Figure 21 shows the response of the economy with r = r to a credit boom. We model the credit
boom here in its simplest possible form, namely as a permanent expansion in borrowing capacity
 . This might literally capture a credit demand shock, such as a relaxation of the LTV ratio; but
in a richer model with default risk this might also capture favorable credit market sentiment, as
in the models of Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2018) and Greenwood, Hanson, and Jin (2019),
                                  ´
and in line with the evidence in Lopez-Salido, Stein, and Zakrajsek (2017).
    For a while, the economy seems to be doing well, output is increasing. Underneath the surface,


                                                                  38
however, imbalances in the form of household debt accumulate. While the borrowing constraint
keeps loosening, these imbalances are masked as new debt can be used to generate demand. As
soon as borrowing capacity stops increasing, the accumulated household debt starts weighing
down on demand, rapidly pushing output below potential and pushing the economy into the
debt trap.
    Crucially, the dynamics in Figure 21 play out despite our assumption that borrowing capacity
levels off but never actually falls; and despite our assumption of rational expectations. Relaxing
either of these assumptions will likely amplify the credit boom-bust cycle in Figure 21.
    These considerations equally apply to increases in government debt, if those are partly fi-
nanced by cutting government spending or taxing borrowers. In that case, a rapid increase in
government debt will fuel a boom in the economy, which--as debt begins piling up and needs to
be financed by cutting expenditure or raising taxes--then reverses into a bust. With interest rates
already at r = r, the economy thus falls into a debt trap.


Fiscal policy in the debt trap.       Once an economy finds itself in the debt trap, how does it get
back out again? We can formally introduce the government exactly as in Section 6 and obtain the
following result.

Proposition 11. With proportional income taxes  s ,  b on the saver and borrower, and a steady state level
of public debt B, output in the debt trap steady state is given by

                                       r                     
                      ^ =Y
                      Y                              ·  -1     (1 +  /  ) -  /  - B                  (23)
                             (1 -  s )  s   + (r )           r

In particular: greater public debt lowers output in the steady state, greater redistribution through taxes
raises output, and greater tax-financed government spending raises output.

    This result is the mirror image of Proposition 6, except that at the effective lower bound, ad-
justments in the natural rate correspond to adjustments in aggregate demand and output. One of
the most striking predictions is that deficit-financed fiscal policy--conventionally thought to be
the best remedy against a liquidity trap--instead digs the economy even deeper into it as long as
the tax burden is not placed entirely on savers. We illustrate this behavior in Figure 22. Temporar-
ily, deficit spending raises demand, bringing output closer to potential, or even above potential.
Eventually, however, as the public debt burden rises, along with the associated taxes to service
it, demand falls again, and the economy finds itself back in the debt trap. To policymakers of the
conventional view, running large deficits, the liquidity trap might thus indeed feel like a "trap",
pulling the economy back into the trap after every round of deficit spending.


Redistributive tax policies and welfare.        By contrast, Proposition 6 suggests that redistributive
tax policies--greater    s --can   raise output Y^ , reducing the severity of the liquidity trap. What
would be consequences of such a policy for the two agents? As long as the effective lower bound


                                                       39
                  Figure 22: Being pulled back into the liquidity trap after deficit spending.

                Gov. spending                             Interest rate                                Output gap

    4%                                    8%                                             0%
                                          7%
    3%
                                                                                        -1 %
                                          6%
    2%
                                          5%
                                                                                        -2 %
    1%
                                          4%

    0%                                    3%                                            -3 %
         0         2            4              0            2             4                    0         2          4
                    years                                    years                                        years

Note. The plot shows the response of a non-homothetic economy to a temporary government spending shock (4% of
GDP for one year). Fiscal rule:  i = r B where r is eventual steady state interest rate. The dotted line is the previous
steady state.


is still binding, steady state consumption and wealth are given by

                                                                                 cs
                    c s = r  -1       (1 +  /  ) -  /  Y ,                as =      ,          ^ - cs .
                                                                                          cb = Y                        (24)
                                    r                                            r

                                                        ^ . Remarkably, greater redistribution there-
The only object that is endogenous to the tax choice is Y
fore leaves steady-state cs and as entirely unaffected, while boosting consumption of borrowers.
The reason for this result is that the income loss of greater taxation of savers' incomes is exactly
offset by rising overall incomes. This can happen in the liquidity trap due to aggregate demand
externalities, as in Korinek and Simsek (2016) and Farhi and Werning (2016).
   What are the implications for welfare? While (24) only holds across steady states, observe
                                   ^ also relaxes the borrowing constraint and thus generates
that any policy change that raises Y
additional consumption for borrowers during the transition period. Moreover, one can show that
consumption and wealth of savers are constant at the levels in (24) throughout the transition.
Thus, our model implies that, in the liquidity trap, greater redistribution is Pareto-improving.


Wealth taxes.      Our framework provides an interesting and novel perspective to the current de-
bate (as of March 2020) surrounding wealth taxes (e.g. Saez and Zucman 2019, Guvenen, Kam-
bourov, Kuruscu, Ocampo-Diaz, and Chen 2019, Sarin, Summers, and Kupferberg 2020). A (pro-
                                                                                               s
gressive) wealth tax  a in our model taxes the saver's wealth as = d +                         r   + B each period, that is,
the savers' consolidated budget constraint (2) becomes

                                                   cs  s
                                                    t +a
                                                                    a    s
                                                         t = (r t -  ) a t                                              (25)

The returns to this policy are rebated to borrowers. As can be seen in (25), the wealth tax effectively
reduces the after-tax return on wealth realized by savers. This changes their steady state saving


                                                             40
supply curve (10) to
                                                          1 + /
                                         r - a =  ·
                                                       1 + / ·  ( as )
The relevant interest rate for savers' saving behavior is the after-tax return on wealth r -  a . Thus,
the presence of  a effectively relaxes the effective lower bound, raising output (23) during the
liquidity trap according to

                                r - a                        
                   ^ =Y
                   Y                           ·  -1            (1 +  /  ) -  /  - B .
                           (1 -  s )  s + (r )            r - a

Thus, a progressive wealth tax is successful in mitigating the impact of secular stagnation in our
framework.


Macroprudential policies in the debt trap.             A commonly prescribed medicine for economies
with high debt burdens is macroprudential policy designed to bring down debt. As before, we
think of such financial regulation as a reduction in . Equation (22) immediately implies that
such a policy raises demand and output Y  ^ in the long run, mitigating the recession. However,
during the period of deleveraging, the economy goes through a significant short-run bust. This
emphasizes that debt is best reduced by reducing saving supply rather than the demand for debt.


Borrower bailouts.       An alternative way to deal with a liquidity trap caused by high levels of debt
is a bailout of borrowers. We consider two such bailout strategies. A government-financed bailout of
size  > 0 is an immediate increase in public debt B by , and an immediate reduction in private
debt d by the same amount . We define a debt jubilee of size  > 0 as an immediate reduction
in both private debt d and saver's assets as by . We assume that the public debt increase after a
bailout is not entirely paid for by taxing the saver (or else it would be equivalent to a debt jubilee).
The following result lays out the long-run implications of bailout and debt jubilee policies:

Proposition 12 (Bailouts and debt jubilee.). Suppose the debt trap is the only steady state. A government-
financed bailout lowers output in the long run. A debt jubilee raises output in the short-run, but unless
combined with structural changes to inequality, redistribution or debt limits, there is no change to the
economy in the long-run.
    If there are multiple steady states and the economy is in the low-r high-debt steady state, a debt jubilee
can raise long-run output and interest rates if its size is sufficiently large.

    A debt jubilee amounts to a jump in the state variable dt . With a unique stable steady state, this
cannot have a long-run effect. In other words, borrowers would get themselves into debt again.
However, a debt jubilee has positive short run effects, as it lifts the economy temporarily out of
the debt trap. To prevent it from falling into it again, it needs to be paired with other policies, e.g.
redistributive or macroprudential policies (see above). Such a combination can jointly address
short and long-run issues. A government-financed bailout increases long-run public debt and
therefore lowers long-run output, as in Proposition 11.

                                                       41
      Things are somewhat more subtle with steady state multiplicity. Here, if  is sufficiently large,
a debt jubilee, i.e. a jump in dt , can put the economy on a permanently different trajectory, towards
a different steady state. This also works for a government-financed bailout, with the caveat that
when public debt is too large, another steady state, one with higher r and lower d, might cease to
exist (see our discussion in Section 6.2).


Summary: Policy implications of a debt trap.              All in all, we find that the traditional macroe-
conomic policy toolbox reaches its limits in a debt trap. Conventional monetary policy is, per
definitionem, constrained. Unconventional monetary policy, such as forward guidance, is less ef-
fective than previously thought, were the debt trap to end at some point. We have not included
an analysis of quantitative easing in the present paper, but its effects are likely captured by a re-
duction in the return on wealth r that can be earned during a debt trap. It would mitigate the
immediate output loss, but not address the structural problem of high debt levels and low interest
rates. Finally, conventional deficit spending only works if it is financed in a progressive way. In
the model, this requires taxing savers. In reality, this could require raising top marginal income
tax rates, better enforcement of estate taxes, or introduction of wealth taxes.
      Some policy tools outside the traditional toolbox, however, gain in importance. Redistributive
policies and structural changes to reduce income inequality are effective in sustainably generating
more demand, and thus can prevent debt traps and effectively lead economies out of them. Simi-
larly effective are tax-financed government spending and productive government investment (see
the next section below). Macroprudential policies succeed in preventing economies from falling
into a debt trap, but can worsen the recession in the short run when already in a debt trap.


9     Extensions
Our baseline model was intentionally kept simple. Next we discuss several extensions to our
baseline model. We begin with two generalizations of the supply side of our economy, introducing
growth and investment.


9.1     Growth

To introduce growth into our model, we assume that each real asset (tree) now bears Yt = e gt
                                                                                                ^
fruits, instead of Y = 1. For any quantity x (e.g. consumption, assets, asset prices) denote by x
                                 ^ t  e- gt xt . As usual, the de-trended budget constraint of type i
its de-trended version, that is, x
agents is then
                                          ^it + a
                                          c      it  (rt - g) a
                                                ^             ^ it .




                                                     42
Crucially, as we continue to assume that preferences are over wealth relative to income, v( ait /Yt ),
as discussed in Section 3.5, we can express preferences (1) as function of de-trended variables,

                                                                      
                                          e-(+)t                          ^ it /µi ) dt
                                                             ^it /µi + v( a
                                                    gt + log c
                                   0                                  

where clearly the term gt is irrelevant for consumption choices. Finally, the de-trended price of a
tree is
                                                                            s
                                                 ^t 
                                                 p             e g(s-t)-   t ru du   ds.
                                                        t

      Following exactly the same steps as before, we can derive two conditions that characterize the
steady state(s) with growth. As it turns out, both equations are simply shifted versions of the
conditions without growth. The saving supply and debt demand curves now read

                                                 1 + /                                           (r - g )
                      r-g = ·                                                         and   d=              (26)
                                       1 +  /  ·  (  s / (r - g ) + d )                          r-g

where we now write             as a function of r - g since common microfoundations (e.g. those in Ap-
pendix C.2) would precisely predict such a relationship. Equation (26) shows that growth is or-
thogonal to the steady states in our model. It merely shifts both curves vertically in parallel.
Similarly, one can show that growth does not change the dynamics of the economy either, after
de-trending.


9.2     Investment

Having studied the effects of growth, we now turn to a different extension of the supply side of
our economy, namely allowing for capital and investment. To do so, we allow output Y to be
produced from three factors, capital K and both types of agents' labor supply Li , and we write the
net-of-depreciation production function as24

                                                     Y = F ( K , L b , L s ).

We assume that without loss that Y has constant returns to scale; otherwise we include a fixed
factor owned by savers and/or borrowers. Thus, total income Y can be split up into income going
to savers and income going to borrowers. As we assume that labor supplies Li are fixed, the
income shares only depend on the level of capital K, which itself is pinned down by the interest
rate,
                                                               FK = r.
  24 We   assume the typical: F is strictly concave, satisfying Inada conditions.




                                                                 43
Further, in our economy, only savers hold capital. The agents' income shares are then functions of
the interest rate and given by

                                    FK K  F s Ls                              FLb Lb
                         s (r ) =        + L           and         b (r ) =          = 1 -  s (r ).
                                     F      F                                   F

With these income shares, we can now characterize our economy's steady states as

                                              1 + /                                       (r )
                             r = ·                                      and        d=          .        (27)
                                      1 +  /  ·  (  s (r ) /r + d )                       r

Crucially,  s (r ) is now possibly a function of r. As we demonstrate in the following proposition,
the shape of  s (r ) depends on the (Allen) elasticity of substitution   FLb FK /( FKLb F ) between
capital and borrowers' labor supply.

Proposition 13. Let  be the elasticity of substitution between capital and borrowers' labor supply in the
economy with investment. Denote by  s (r ) the savers' income share.

  a) If  = 1:  s (r ) is independent of the interest rate r. All steady state(s) are identical to the economy
      without investment.

  b) If  < 1:  s (r ) falls with lower r. This flattens the saving supply curve.

   c) If  > 1:  s (r ) rises with lower r. This steepens in the saving supply curve.

   Proposition 13 precisely characterizes the role of investment for the long-run economy. When
an increase in capital leaves the income distribution unchanged, investment will have no effect on
the long-run (case (a)). So to what extent capital matters depends on whether it crowds the share
of income going to borrowers in or out. If capital is complementary to borrowers' labor supply, it
reduces the extent of indebted demand (even if it can never fully undo it) as lower interest rates go
hand in hand with greater capital and a more equitable income distribution (case (b)). If capital is
substitutable with borrowers' labor supply--one may think of capital-skill complementarity and
automation as in Krusell, Ohanian, Rios-Rull, and Violante (2000) and Autor, Levy, and Murnane
(2003),--the opposite is the case. Lower interest rates endogenously lead to a more unequal in-
come distribution, effectively steepening the saving supply curve and amplifying the problem of
indebted demand (case (c)).25 We illustrate the three cases in Figure 23.
   This discussion focused on the long run. Investment contributes to demand in the short run
as interest rates fall, irrespective of the structure of the production function F. For example, if F
is Cobb-Douglas, and the economy sees a shift in income inequality, investment picks up initially,
temporarily slowing the decline in r. As the investment boom recedes, however, the fall in r
accelerates again, eventually falling to the exact same steady state level as would have occurred
without investment (as in Section 5).
 25 See   Straub (2019) for a related point.



                                                             44
                                Figure 23: Capital and indebted demand

                                r




                                                                    <1

                                                                    =1
                                                                    >1
                                                                    d


   Observe that the recent US experience does not align well with this description of investment
(see Figure 3). It did not seem that investment rose as interest rates fell. This is subject of a
recent literature (Guti´
                       errez and Philippon 2017, Liu, Mian, and Sufi 2019, Farhi and Gourio 2018,
Eggertsson, Robbins, and Wold 2018).

Which kind of debt causes indebted demand? Productive vs. unproductive debt.                Investment
may be funded with (corporate) debt, raising the question, which kind of debt actually causes in-
debted demand? In Section 4, we argued that, starting in some steady state, a one-time exogenous
increase in debt by some dD, holding r fixed, causes a response of aggregate spending of

                                    +                         r
                          dC = -           1-     1-4 1-                   dD                       (28)
                                    2                         +

(see Proposition 13). The debt in this experiment is unproductive, that is, it is being used for con-
sumption.
   We now repeat this exercise with productive debt, that is, debt that is being used to raise the
capital stock of the economy, dK = dD. Holding r and household debt d fixed, what are the
implications for aggregate spending?

Proposition 14 (Indebted demand when debt is productive). Starting from a steady state and holding
r and d, fixed, an exogenous increase in debt dD that raises the capital stock by the same amount affects
aggregate spending by

                                    +                        r
                         dC = -           1-     1-4 1-                    dD.                      (29)
                                    2                        +

where   1 - -1  b - r rd
                      Y < 1.

   A first observation about Proposition 14 is that productive debt, (29), always causes strictly
less indebted demand than unproductive debt, (28). To see this, note that  = 1 - -1  b -
  Y < 1. Thus, even if capital is perfectly substitutable with borrowers' labor supply,  = ,
r rd
productive debt does not cause as much indebted demand. The reason for this is that even if

                                                   45
 = , capital raises aggregate output. A second observation is that the negative effect of dD
on aggregate spending dC falls for lower values of , as one would expect given (13). In the
case  = 1, the effect is positive at first, dC > 0. Recall that (29) is the contemporary effect on
spending--but once we allow household debt to increase with Y , the positive effect fades.
      The distinction between productive and unproductive debt is not always obvious. Consider,
for example, investments in infrastructure (e.g. airports, buildings, trains) in remote locations,
as some argue can be found in China today. Debt that is financing such investments ought be
thought of as unproductive.
      A special case where debt is used productively but  is still very high is residential investment
into borrowers' owner-occupied housing. For example, imagine borrowers remodel or extend
their houses. Clearly this is productive, as a greater housing stock produces more housing ser-
vices. However, these additional housing services are consumed by borrowers themselves and do
not increase borrowers' marginal product of labor. Thus, in this case,  =  and  =  b - r rd
                                                                                         Y,
the largest possible value for productive debt.
      In sum, our results suggest that productive debt always causes weaker indebted demand than
unproductive debt. The degree to which it is weaker depends on the elasticity of substitution 
between the capital that is accumulated using debt and the borrowers' labor supply. This suggests
that debt-financed productive investments made by firms or governments need not necessarily
contribute to indebted demand.


Does student debt contribute to indebted demand?         Since the end of the Great Recession, the US
has witnessed a significant increase in student debt, begging the question whether student debt is
a likely contributor to indebted demand. At the face of it, it seems that the answer is no. After all,
student debt finances investment in human capital, and thus can be analyzed like investment in
physical capital.
      There is, however, an important difference. The rise in student debt partly reflects the rising
cost of college tuition. To the extent this is the case, student debt is indeed a source of indebted
demand, as borrowers have to service larger piles of student debt without having accumulated
greater human capital.


9.3     Risk premia and convenience yields

A concern one might have with our fiscal policy results is that they were derived in a model in
which government bonds pay the same return as any other asset, while this is clearly not the case
in the data. What, for instance, if there is a spread between the overall return on wealth r and the
return on government bonds r B ? How does this impact our predictions for fiscal policy?
      We allow for such a spread by assuming that savers, who are the equilibrium holders of gov-
ernment bonds, derive an additional utility from holding government bonds, as in Krishnamurthy
and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012). In particular, since savers derive utility from both consumption and



                                                   46
wealth, we assume the per-period utility function of a representative saver is

                                 log ((cs            s              s               s
                                        t +  Bt ) / µ ) +  /  v (( at +  Bt /r ) / µ ) .


   The saver's Euler equations now differ for bonds and other assets. In the steady state, we
obtain
                                                          
                                        0 = r B +  -  -  + r  ( a +  B /r )                                              (30)
                                                          
for government bonds and
                                                        
                                           0 = r -  -  + r  ( a +  B /r )                                                (31)
                                                        
for other assets. Subtracting (31) from (30) yields a steady-state government bond return of

                                                        rB = r -  .                                                      (32)

Due to the spread  in (32), r B is always strictly lower than r. Thus, it might hit zero even as r is
still positive. We distinguish two cases, depending on whether r B is positive or zero.


Steady states without ZLB (positive r B ).              The steady states in this economy turn out to be exactly
the same as before, characterized by the intersections of the exact same two curves,

                                   1 + /                                           s   (r )
                         r=                             and        a = (1 -  s )     +      + B.                         (33)
                                1 + / ·  ( a)                                      r   r

That is, an increase in government debt B shifts out the demand curve for borrowing, pushing
down the long-run return on wealth r, and through (32), also the return on government debt.
   The reason for this finding is simple. There is a positive spread in (32) since savers derive
tangible benefits from investing in government bonds. These benefits, however, make savers ef-
fectively richer, offsetting the reduction in saver wealth due to lower interest income (r -  ) B
from government bonds. Thus, when the benefits are included, the value of government bonds
for savers is indeed B and not r B B/r.
   While the steady state curves (33) are unaffected, the spread in (32) obviously affects the gov-
ernment budget constraint. In particular, financing a steady-state public debt position B now only
costs (r -  ) B instead of rB.26 This becomes especially relevant in a liquidity trap.


Steady states with binding ZLB (zero r B ).               We can use the model with government bond spreads
to revisit the liquidity trap ("debt trap"). In Section 8 we assumed there to be an effective lower
bound r > 0 for the return on wealth r. In this economy, we can now explicitly impose a zero lower
bound for the government bond yield r B . Given (32), this is fully consistent with our previous
approach when r =  .
 26 Paradoxically,   this might even raise the effect of B on steady state return on wealth r as  s adjusts by less in (33).



                                                              47
      Thus, as before, a debt trap steady state exists if the natural allocation would require a negative
government bond yield r B < 0, or equivalently, r <  . The result in Proposition 10 carries over to
this economy, meaning output in the debt trap is given by

                                           r                      
                         ^ =Y
                         Y                              ·  -1      (1 +  /  ) -  /  - B              (34)
                                 (1 -  s )  s   + ( )             

and therefore still decreasing in B.
      There is, however, a new policy option on the table now, which was absent in Section 8. As gov-
ernments pay zero interest rates on their bonds, r B = 0, they can effectively run a Ponzi scheme:
permanently raise government spending G by an amount equal to the shortfall in demand to
                                ^ = Y , financed by an ever-growing pile of government debt.
restore the natural allocation, Y
      While this is a perfectly well-defined equilibrium in theory, it is risky in practice, not the least
because a high public debt to GDP ratio might expose the government to rollover crises (unmod-
eled here) even if interest rates r B are expected to remain low for long. There is also no exit strategy.
As (34) highlights, the longer a government runs the Ponzi scheme, the more significant the out-
put loss when exiting will be. In addition, as we demonstrate in Section 6.2, a recovery to greater
equilibrium interest rates is more unlikely when government debt is large.


9.4     Intergenerational mobility

We have so far ignored mobility across saver and borrower dynasties. Yet, since current mobility
levels in the US are low while income inequality is rising (Lee and Solon 2009, Chetty, Hendren,
Kline, Saez, and Turner 2014), several policies have been proposed to promote intergenerational
mobility. To study the effects of such policies on household debt and interest rates, we next extend
our framework to include mobility.
      To do so without jeopardizing the tractability of our model, we assume that with some prob-
                                                                                          µ
ability q > 0, savers' offsprings turn into borrowers; and with probability q 1-µ , borrowers' off-
springs turn into savers. A saver-turned-borrower immediately consumes his wealth down to the
level of an average borrower ab /(1 - µ); and vice versa, a borrower-turned-saver immediately re-
ceives a transfer from all savers to achieve their average asset position as /µ.27 Agents' preferences
are unchanged.
      This structure changes the saving supply curve to

                                              1 + /          / ( a)
                                     r=                + q                                           (35)
                                            1 + / ( a)     1 + / ( a)
                                                               contribution of mobility


where  is a measure of steady-state income inequality, equal to 1 minus the ratio of per capita
 27 This   may be interpreted as borrowers marrying into saver families.




                                                          48
incomes
                                               b - / (1 - µ )
                                     = 1-                     .
                                                ( s + ) /µ
We see from (35) that the intergenerational mobility term increases in a. This makes the saving
supply curve less downward-sloping, thus mitigating indebted demand. The effect of greater
mobility (raising q) is particularly relevant when income inequality  is high, i.e. close to 1, since
in that case, it redistributes wealth within each generation in a similar fashion as redistributive
taxation.


9.5    Open economy model

Many countries with large debt burdens are open economies. This begs the question whether
our model can be generalized to an open economy setting, and if so, whether this generates new
insights. This is what we briefly discuss next.
      We assume that our two types of agents live in a small open economy (the "home" country),
which trades a single good with the rest of the world. It has imperfect access to world financial
markets: as in Gabaix and Maggiori (2015), a continuum of foreign-based financial intermediaries
invests in the home country, earning a return spread equal to the domestic interest rate r minus
the world interest rate r  . Thus, home's net foreign asset position is given by

                                                  1 
                                         nfat =    [r - r t ] .                                  (36)
                                                  

      What do steady states look like in this economy? To understand this, it helps to view the
rest of the world as another "borrower" in the economy. When the home interest rate rt is lower
than the world interest rate r  , the rest of the world borrows an amount equal to nfat from the
home economy. Thus, nfat expands total steady-state saving demand to dt + Bt + nfat . Given
(36), opening up the economy's financial account amounts to a counterclockwise twist around the
point on the saving demand curve where r = r  .


International credit boom-bust cycle.    A similar open economy extension can be developed with
nominal rigidities, in the spirit of Gali and Monacelli (2005), but with imperfect international cap-
ital markets as in (36). In that extension, a permanent expansion in    would also induce a boom-
bust cycle--much like the one in the closed economy in Section 8. Assuming that monetary policy
follows a standard Taylor rule, the boom-bust cycle will be more pronounced in an open economy,
due to amplification from capital flows. In particular, as the economy booms, imports and interest
rates rt rise, pulling in additional capital, which is ultimately lent to borrowers. Then, as borrow-
ers start to cut back on their spending, and rt falls, capital flows reverse and leave the country
again. This international credit cycle bears similarities with the evidence in Mian, Sufi, and Verner
(2017).




                                                  49
9.6     Longer duration debt

A recent literature highlighted that responses of economies to interest rate changes differ accord-
ing to the type of debt contract agents hold (e.g. adjustable-rate vs. fixed-rate contracts) as well
as the debt's maturity (e.g. Campbell 2013, Calza, Monacelli, and Stracca 2013, Di Maggio et al.
2017). In this extension, we investigate the role of debt duration for indebted demand. We assume
that all debt is fixed rate, and is being rolled over at Poisson rate . Since asset duration is irrel-
evant for the steady state(s), we focus on two transitional dynamics experiments: one of falling
real interest rates and increasing debt levels (e.g. due to rising income inequality as in Figure 11)
and one of rising real interest rates and falling debt levels (e.g. due to redistributive taxation). For
both experiments, we ask whether fixed-rate debt (FR) would speed up the transition relative to
adjustable-rate debt (AR), or slow it down.
      To study the first experiment, when a shock suddenly lowers real interest rates relative to
what they were expected to be, this does not affect the present value of AR debt, but pushes up
the present value of FR debt. Formally, this means the state variable d jumps up on impact of the
shock. Such a jump corresponds to a fast transition in practice. Since the present value increases
without any actual increase in debt originations, the additional demand typically associated with
strong credit growth is absent in this case.
      To study the second experiment, consider a shock that pushes real interest rates up. The
present value of AR debt is again unchanged, but the present value of FR debt falls, again speed-
ing up the transition. Thus, in some sense AR debt makes it harder to leave a steady state with
high levels of debt since any increase in interest rates leads to an immediate sharp fall in demand
without favorable revaluation effect.
      These discussions highlight that AR debt contracts slow down transitions into states with low
r and high debt, and FR debt contracts speed up transitions away from such states. Fixed-rate
contracts with automatic refinancing achieve both of these arguably favorable outcomes.28 Policies
that raise the share of refinancing among US fixed-rate mortgage owners are therefore beneficial
from this perspective.


10      How indebted is demand in practice?
Measuring the slope of the saving supply curve.             The key ingredient to our theory is the downward-
sloping saving supply curve. This begs the question of whether one can get a sense of the mag-
nitude of the slope of the saving supply curve. To investigate this, we employ a simple sufficient
statistics approach.
      Let C (r, a) be the steady state consumption of rich households in an economy (e.g. the top 5%
or top 1%). The definition of the saving supply curve r ( a) as function of rich households' wealth
  28 Lengthening  the maturity of debt when debt is high, as in Campbell, Clara, and Cocco (2018), would further
speed up transitions back to lower debt states as they would lengthen the duration of debt. Automatic refinancing
is reminiscent of the idea to convert FR into AR contracts (Guren, Krishnamurthy, and McQuade 2017), albeit such a
conversion would slow down transitions back to states with lower debt levels.


                                                       50
requires that
                                            C (r ( a ), a ) = r ( a ) a.

Total differentiation of this equation with respect to a allows us to isolate the local slope of the
saving supply curve
                                         dr     MPCcap. gains - r
                                              =           c
                                      d log a      1- ra
                  c
where   r    logr is the rich's semi-elasticity of consumption with respect to a permanent shift in
interest rates, and MPCcap. gains is the MPC out of wealth of the rich. To get a sense of magnitudes,
we assume r = 0, which would be implied by log preferences. The MPCcap. gains should be in-
terpreted as an MPC out of an increase in capital gains as most wealth gains for the very richest
households come in the form of capital gains. We use the estimate from Chodorow-Reich, Nenov,
and Simsek (2019) for this MPC, MPCcap. gains = 0.028, which is in the same ballpark as the esti-
mates of Baker, Nagel, and Wurgler (2007) and Di Maggio, Kermani, and Majlesi (2019). Finally,
recent estimates of the real return on wealth are on the order of 5-7% (Farhi and Gourio 2018). We
take r = 6% for this exercise.
    Together this simple calculation implies an estimate for the local slope of the saving supply
curve
                                              dr
                                                    -0.032.
                                           d log a
In words, this implies that if the richest households' wealth rises by 10%, the interest rate has to
come down by 32 basis points. While this is certainly not a precise calculation, it gives a rough
sense of the magnitudes that are at play in our model.


Implications for indebted demand in the US.                A way to get a sense the extent of indebted de-
mand in the US is to evaluate the hypothetical demand shortfall from high debt levels, had real
interest rates not fallen since 1980. In the spirit of Proposition 3, we thus ask: if debt levels were as
high as they are today, with interest rates still at 1980 levels, how much smaller would aggregate
spending dC + dG be?
   To conduct this exercise, we need to know the hypothetical debt service costs that would have
prevailed absent a fall in interest rates. We compute this for every year since 1980 in Figure 24,
finding significant increases in hypothetical debt service costs, both for household and govern-
ment debt. Together, they have amounted to 15% of household disposable income in recent years.
Thus, with the same MPCcap. gains estimate and r, the demand shortfall is in the ballpark of

                                                          MPCcap. gains
                        dC          -15%              +                 · 15% = -8%
                                                              r
                              borrower debt service
                                                          partial offset by savers


This is a significant number, which would rationalize why the natural interest rate indeed had to
decline significantly in order for debt burdens not to depress demand.


                                                          51
                        Figure 24: Hypothetical debt service costs had interest rates not declined.

                                  Household                                                                      Government
            20                                                                             20




                                                                                           15
  Percent




                                                                                 Percent
            15
                                                                                           10




                                                                                           5



            10
                                                                                           0
                 1980   1990           2000                2010           2020                  1980   1990            2000               2010   2020

                               Household DSR                                                                  Government DSR
                               Household DSR (counterfactual)                                                 Government DSR (counterfactual)




                                                                See Appendix A for details.



11                Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed a new theory connecting several recent secular trends: the increase in
income inequality, financial liberalization, the decline in natural interest rates, and the rise in debt
by households and governments.
            The central element in our theory are non-homothetic preferences, which lead to richer house-
holds having greater saving rates out of a permanent income transfer. This gives rise to the idea of
indebted demand: greater debt levels mean a greater transfer of income in the form of debt service
payments from borrowers to savers, and thus depress demand.
            We identified three main implications of indebted demand. First, secular economic shifts that
raise debt levels (e.g. income inequality or financial liberalization) also lower natural interest rates,
which then itself has an amplified effect on debt. Second, monetary and fiscal policy, to the extent
that they involve household or government debt creation, can persistently reduce future natural
interest rates. This means that there is only a limited number of such policy interventions that can
be used before economies approach the effective lower bound. Finally, when the lower bound is
binding, the economy is in a debt-driven liquidity trap with depressed output. In this "debt trap",
debt-financed stimulus deepens the recession in the future, whereas redistributive policies and
policies addressing the structural sources of inequality mitigate it.
            Our results suggest that economies face a sort of "budget constraint for aggregate demand".
They can stimulate aggregate demand through debt creation, but that reduces future demand (and
thus natural interest rates). This logic suggests a new trade-off for debt-based stimulus policies.
We view an exploration of this trade-off in an optimal policy setting as a promising avenue for
future research.


                                                                            52
References
Acharya, S. and K. Dogra (2019). Understanding hank: Insights from a prank. Working Paper.

Achdou, Y., J. Han, J.-M. Lasry, P.-L. Lions, and B. Moll (2017). Heterogeneous agent models in
  continuous time. Manuscript.

Aiyagari, S. R. and E. McGrattan (1998). The optimum quantity of debt. Journal of Monetary
  Economics 42(3), 447­469.

Angeletos, G.-M. and C. Lian (2018). Forward guidance without common knowledge. American
 Economic Review 108(9), 2477­2512.

Auclert, A. and M. Rognlie (2018). Inequality and aggregate demand. Technical report, National
 Bureau of Economic Research.

Auclert, A., M. Rognlie, and L. Straub (2018). The intertemporal keynesian cross.

Autor, D., F. Levy, and R. J. Murnane (2003). The skill content of recent technological change: An
 empirical exploration. Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Baker, M., S. Nagel, and J. Wurgler (2007). The Effect of Dividends on Consumption. Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity 38(1), 231­292.

Ball, M. (1990). Under one roof: retail banking and the international mortgage finance revolution. Har-
  vester Wheatsheaf.

Bartscher, A. K., M. Kuhn, M. Schularick, and U. I. Steins (2018). Modigliani meets minsky: Amer-
  ican household debt, 1949-2016. Working Paper.

Benhabib, J., A. Bisin, and M. Luo (2019). Wealth distribution and social mobility in the us: A
  quantitative approach. American Economic Review 109, 1623­47.

Benigno, G. and L. Fornaro (2019). Stagnation traps. The Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

Beraja, M., A. Fuster, E. Hurst, and J. Vavra (2018). Regional Heterogeneity and the Refinancing
  Channel of Monetary Policy. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134(1), 109­183.

Berger, D., K. Milbradt, F. Tourre, and J. Vavra (2018). Mortgage prepayment and path-dependent
  effects of monetary policy. Working Paper.

Bernanke, B. S. (2005). The global saving glut and the U.S. current account deficit. Speech 77,
  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.).

Bernanke, B. S. and M. Gertler (2001). Should central banks respond to movements in asset prices?
  American Economic Review 91(2), 253­257.

Bhutta, N. and B. J. Keys (2016). Interest rates and equity extraction during the housing boom.
  American Economic Review 106(7), 1742­74.

Bilbiie, F. O. (2019). Monetary policy and heterogeneity: An analytical framework. Working Paper.

Blanchard, O. (1985). Debt, deficits, and finite horizons. Journal of Political Economy 93(2), 223­247.

Boar, C. (2018). Dynastic precautionary savings. Manuscript.

                                                  53
Bokhari, S., W. Torous, and W. Wheaton (2013). Why did household mortgage leverage rise from
  the mid-1980s until the great recession. In American Economic Association 2013 Annual Meeting.
  San Diego, California. Citeseer.

Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2018). Diagnostic expectations and credit cycles. The
  Journal of Finance 73(1), 199­227.

Borio, C. and P. Disyatat (2014). Low interest rates and secular stagnation: is debt a missing link?
  VoxEU.

Borio, C. and W. White (2004). Whither monetary and financial stability? the implications of
  evolving policy regimes. BIS Working Papers.

Bourguignon, F. (1981). Pareto superiority of unegalitarian equilibria in stiglitz'model of wealth
  distribution with convex saving function. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 1469­
  1475.

Caballero, R. and E. Farhi (2017). The safety trap. The Review of Economic Studies 85(1), 223­274.

Caballero, R. J. and A. Simsek (2019). Prudential monetary policy. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

    ´ I. and J. Sim (2018). Income inequality, financial crises, and monetary policy.
Cairo,

Calza, A., T. Monacelli, and L. Stracca (2013). Housing finance and monetary policy. Journal of the
  European Economic Association 11(S1), 101­122.

Campbell, J. Y. (2013). Mortgage market design. Review of Finance 17(1), 1­33.

Campbell, J. Y., N. Clara, and J. F. Cocco (2018). Structuring mortgages for macroeconomic stability.
  Manuscript.

Carroll, C. (2000). Why do the rich save so much?

Chetty, R., N. Hendren, P. Kline, E. Saez, and N. Turner (2014). Is the united states still a land of
  opportunity? recent trends in intergenerational mobility. American Economic Review: Papers and
  Proceedings 104(5), 141­147.

Chodorow-Reich, G., P. T. Nenov, and A. Simsek (2019). Stock market wealth and the real econ-
  omy: A local labor market approach.

Cloyne, J., C. Ferreira, and P. Surico (2019). Monetary Policy when Households have Debt: New
  Evidence on the Transmission Mechanism. The Review of Economic Studies.

Coeurdacier, N., S. Guibaud, and K. Jin (2015). Credit constraints and growth in a global economy.
  American Economic Review 105(9), 2838­81.

Cole, H. L., G. J. Mailath, and A. Postlewaite (1992). Social norms, savings behavior, and growth.
  Journal of Political economy 100(6), 1092­1125.

Dalio, R. (2018). Principles For Navigating Big Debt Crises. Bridgewater.

De Nardi, M. (2004). Wealth inequality and intergenerational links. The Review of Economic Stud-
 ies 71(3), 743­768.

                                                 54
De Nardi, M., E. French, J. B. Jones, and A. Gooptu (2011). Medicaid and the elderly. Technical
 report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Del Negro, M., M. Giannoni, and C. Patterson (2015). The forward guidance puzzle. Working
 Paper.

Di Maggio, M., A. Kermani, B. J. Keys, T. Piskorski, R. Ramcharan, A. Seru, and V. Yao (2017). In-
  terest rate pass-through: Mortgage rates, household consumption, and voluntary deleveraging.
  American Economic Review 107(11), 3550­88.

Di Maggio, M., A. Kermani, and K. Majlesi (2019). Stock market returns and consumption. Journal
  of Finance.

Di Maggio, M., A. Kermani, and C. Palmer (2019). How quantitative easing works: Evidence on
  the refinancing channel. The Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

Dynan, K. E., J. Skinner, and S. P. Zeldes (2004). Do the rich save more?       Journal of Political
 Economy 112(2), 397­444.

Eggertsson, G. B. and P. Krugman (2012). Debt, deleveraging, and the liquidity trap: A Fisher-
  Minsky-Koo approach. Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(3), 1469­1513.

Eggertsson, G. B., N. R. Mehrotra, and J. A. Robbins (2019). A model of secular stagnation: Theory
  and quantitative evaluation. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 11(1), 1­48.

Eggertsson, G. B., J. A. Robbins, and E. G. Wold (2018). Kaldor and piketty's facts: the rise of
  monopoly power in the united states. Working Paper.

Eichenbaum, M., S. Rebelo, and A. Wong (2019). State dependent effects of monetary policy: the
  refinancing channel. Working Paper.

Erceg, C. J., D. W. Henderson, and A. T. Levin (2000). Optimal monetary policy with staggered
  wage and price contracts. Journal of monetary Economics 46(2), 281­313.

Fagereng, A., M. B. Holm, B. Moll, and G. Natvik (2019). Saving behavior across the wealth
  distribution: The importance of capital gains.

Farhi, E. and F. Gourio (2018). Accounting for macro-finance trends: Market power, intangibles,
  and risk premia. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Fall, 147­250.

Farhi, E. and I. Werning (2016). A theory of macroprudential policies in the presence of nominal
  rigidities. Econometrica 84(5), 1645­1704.

Farhi, E. and I. Werning (2019). Monetary policy, bounded rationality, and incomplete markets.
  American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Favilukis, J., S. C. Ludvigson, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2017). The macroeconomic effects of
  housing wealth, housing finance, and limited risk sharing in general equilibrium. Journal of
  Political Economy 125(1), 140­223.

Gabaix, X. (2019). A behavioral new keynesian model. Working Paper.

Gabaix, X. and M. Maggiori (2015, 03). International liquidity and exchange rate dynamics. Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics 130(3), 1369­1420.

                                               55
Gali, J. and T. Monacelli (2005). Monetary policy and exchange rate volatility in a small open
 economy. Review of Economic Studies 72, 707­734.

Greenwald, D. (2018). The mortgage credit channel of macroeconomic transmission.

Greenwood, R., S. G. Hanson, and L. J. Jin (2019). Reflexivity in credit markets.

Guerrieri, V. and G. Lorenzoni (2017). Credit crises, precautionary savings, and the liquidity trap.
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(3), 1427­1467.

Guren, A. M., A. Krishnamurthy, and T. J. McQuade (2017). Mortgage design in an equilibrium
 model of the housing market. Working Paper.

Guti´
    errez, G. and T. Philippon (2017). Investment-less growth: An empirical investigation. Tech-
 nical report, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.

Guvenen, F., G. Kambourov, B. Kuruscu, S. Ocampo-Diaz, and D. Chen (2019). Use it or lose it:
 Efficiency gains from wealth taxation. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Iachan, F. S., P. T. Nenov, and A. Simsek (2015). The choice channel of financial innovation. Tech-
  nical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Illing, G., Y. Ono, and M. Schlegl (2018). Credit booms, debt overhang and secular stagnation.
   European Economic Review 78(104).

Jord`  ` M. Schularick, and A. M. Taylor (2015). Betting the house. Journal of International Eco-
    a, O.,
  nomics 96, S2­S18.

Jord`  ` M. Schularick, and A. M. Taylor (2016). The great mortgaging: housing finance, crises
    a, O.,
  and business cycles. Economic Policy 31(85), 107­152.

Justiniano, A., G. E. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2017). The mortgage rate conundrum. Working
  Paper.

Katz, L. F. and K. M. Murphy (1992). Changes in relative wages, 1963­1987: supply and demand
  factors. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(1), 35­78.

King, M. and D. Low (2014). Measuring the"world"real interest rate. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Koo, R. (2008). The Holy Grail of Macroeconomics - Lessons from Japan's Great Recession. Wiley.

Koopmans, T. C. (1960). Stationary ordinal utility and impatience. Econometrica: Journal of the
  Econometric Society, 287­309.

Korinek, A. and A. Simsek (2016). Liquidity trap and excessive leverage. American Economic
  Review 106(3), 699­738.

Krishnamurthy, A. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2012). The aggregate demand for treasury debt.
  Journal of Political Economy 120(2).

Krusell, P., L. E. Ohanian, J.-V. Rios-Rull, and G. L. Violante (2000). Capital-skill complementarity
  and inequality: A macroeconomic analysis. Econometrica 68(5), 1029­1053.



                                                 56
                    ere, and P. Winant (2015). Inequality, leverage, and crises. American Economic
Kumhof, M., R. Ranci`
 Review 105(3), 1217­45.

Lee, C.-I. and G. Solon (2009, November). Trends in Intergenerational Income Mobility. The Review
  of Economics and Statistics 91(4), 766­772.

Liu, E., A. Mian, and A. Sufi (2019). Low interest rates, market power, and productivity growth.
  Working Paper.

Lo, S. and K. S. Rogoff (2015). Secular stagnation, debt overhang and other rationales for sluggish
  growth, six years on. BIS Working Papers.
 ´
Lopez-Salido, D., J. C. Stein, and E. Zakraj sek (2017). Credit-market sentiment and the business
  cycle. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(3), 1373­1426.

Lucas, R. E. J. and N. L. Stokey (1983). Optimal fiscal and monetary policy in an economy without
  capital. Journal of Monetary Economics 12(1), 55­93.

McKay, A., E. Nakamura, and J. Steinsson (2016). The power of forward guidance revisited. Amer-
 ican Economic Review 106(10), 3133­3158.

McKay, A. and J. Wieland (2019). Lumpy durable consumption demand and the limited ammuni-
 tion of monetary policy. Working Paper.

Mian, A., L. Straub, and A. Sufi (2019). The saving glut of the rich and the rise in debt.

Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2015). House of debt: How they (and you) caused the Great Recession, and how we
 can prevent it from happening again. University of Chicago Press.

Mian, A., A. Sufi, and E. Verner (2017). Household debt and business cycles worldwide. The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(4), 1755­1817.

Piketty, T. (2014). Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Belknap Press: An Imprint of Harvard Uni-
  versity Press.

Piketty, T. and E. Saez (2003). Income inequality in the united states, 1913-1998. Quarterly Journal
  of Economics.

Piketty, T., E. Saez, and G. Zucman (2017). Distributional national accounts: methods and esti-
  mates for the united states. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(2), 553­609.

Rachel, L. and L. H. Summers (2019). On falling neutral real rates, fiscal policy and the risk of
  secular stagnation. In Brookings Papers on Economic Activity BPEA Conference Drafts, March 7-8.

Rannenberg, A. (2019). Inequality, the risk of secular stagnation and the increase in household
  debt. Working Paper.

Ravn, M. and V. Sterk (2018). Macroeconomic fluctuations with hank and sam: An analytical
  approach. Working Paper.

Reinhart, C. M. and K. S. Rogoff (2009). This Time is Different: Eigth Centuries of Financial Folly.
  Princeton University Press.

Reinhart, C. M. and K. S. Rogoff (2010). Growth in a time of debt. American economic review 100(2),
  573­78.

                                                 57
Saez, E. and S. Stantcheva (2018). A simpler theory of optimal capital taxation. Journal of Public
  Economics 162, 120­142.

Saez, E. and G. Zucman (2016). Wealth inequality in the united states since 1913: Evidence from
  capitalized income tax data. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(2), 519­578.

Saez, E. and G. Zucman (2019). Progressive wealth taxation. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.

Sarin, N., L. Summers, and J. Kupferberg (2020). Tax reform for progressivity: A pragmatic ap-
  proach. Tackling the Tax Code: Efficient and Equitable Ways to Raise Revenue.

Schularick, M. and A. M. Taylor (2012). Credit booms gone bust: Monetary policy, leverage cycles,
  and financial crises, 1870-2008. American Economic Review 102(2), 1029­61.

Stein, J. C. (2012). Monetary policy as financial-stability regulation. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 127(1), 57­95. forthcoming in the Quarterly Journal of Economics Draft Date: Revised
  May 2011.

Stein, J. C. (2013). Overheating in credit markets: Origins, measurement, and policy responses.
  Speech at Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis.

Stiglitz, J. E. (1969). Distribution of income and wealth among individuals. Econometrica: Journal
   of the Econometric Society, 382­397.

Straub, L. (2019). Consumption, savings, and the distribution of permanent income.

Strotz, R. H. (1956). Myopia and inconsistency in dynamic utility maximization. The Review of
  Economic Studies 23(3), 165­180.

Summers, L. H. (2014). Us economic prospects: Secular stagnation, hysteresis, and the zero lower
  bound. Business Economics 49(2), 65­73.

Svensson, L. E. (2018). Monetary policy and macroprudential policy: Different and separate?
  Canadian Journal of Economics 51(3), 802­827.

Turner, A. (2015). Between Debt and the Devil: Money, Credit, and Fixing Global Finance. Princeton
  University Press.

Uzawa, H. (1968). Market allocation and optimum growth. Australian Economic Papers 7(10), 17­27.

Von Schlicht, E. (1975). A neoclassical theory of wealth distribution. Jahrbucher
                                                                            ¨     fur
                                                                                   ¨ National¨
                                                                                             okonomie
  und Statistik 189(1-2), 78­96.

Werning, I. (2015). Incomplete markets and aggregate demand. Working Paper.




                                                 58
                                          Appendix

A    Data and figures
Figure 24. Quarterly, seasonally adjusted data on disposable personal income (DPI) are obtained
from the US Bureau of Economic Analysis. Levels and debt service ratios (DSR) for household
mortgage debt and consumer credit debt are obtained from the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System. In these data, the overall DSR is by definition the sum of household mortgage and
consumer credit DSRs, and debt service ratios are calculated as debt service payments as a percent
of DPI. Following the methodology used by the Federal Reserve, we take the level of consumer
credit debt for households and nonprofit organizations (LA153166000 in Financial Accounts of
the United States) and the level of mortgage debt as total mortgages to households and nonprofit
organizations (FL153165005 in Financial Accounts of the United States).
    For each of household mortgages ( HM) and consumer credit (CC), we assume that there is a
constant amortization rate d and a fixed interest rate rd,t , which determine the debt service ratio,
equal to:


                                               Dd,t × (rd,t + d )
                                    DSRd,t =                      ,
                                                     DPIt
    where d is a type of debt, DPIt is disposable personal income and Dd,t is the level of debt
at time t. Note again that DSR HM,t and DSRCC,t sum to the total household debt service ratio
DSR HH,t .
    We build a counterfactual series under the premise that rd,t remained constant over time, fixed
at 1980 Q1 levels. We use this to recalculate the counterfactual DSRs for the two types of debt, as
follows, with dots denoting counterfactual:


                                   ¨ d,t = Dd,t × (rd,1980Q1 + d )
                                  DSR
                                                      It
                                     ¨ HH,t = DSR
   Finally, we sum these to obtain DSR            ¨ HM,t + DSR¨ CC,t . The left panel of Figure 24
                    ¨ HH,t .
plots DSR HH,t and DSR
   For the government's debt service ratio, we conduct a similar analysis using total government
debt DG,t and government interest payments IPG,t . Government in this case refers solely to the
federal government. We define the government debt service ratio DSRG,t to be:


                                                      IPG,t
                                          DSRG,t =          .
                                                      DPIt
    We decompose the government debt service ratio in the same manner as we do for households:


                                               DG,t × (rG,t + G )
                                   DSRG,t =
                                                     DPIt
   We build the government's counterfactual DSR series under the assumption that rG,t remained
constant at 1980Q1 levels. Precisely,


                                                 59
                                     ¨ G,t = DG,t × (rG,1980Q1 + G )
                                    DSR
                                                      DPIt
                                                   ¨ G ,t .
    The right panel of Figure 24 plots DSRG,t and DSR


B    Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1. This proof is an immediate consequence of (10).

Proof of Proposition 2. Given that debt d > 0, savers cannot be up against their borrowing
constraint. Thus, the Euler equation has to hold with equality, implying (11). Moreover, the Euler
equation cannot hold with equality for borrowers, as their per capita wealth is much smaller than
that of savers. Thus, their borrowing constraint is binding, implying (12)

Proof of Proposition 3. As borrowers are borrowing constrained, their consumption responds
one for one, dcb = -dx. To analyze the consumption response by savers define their consumption-
wealth ratio t  cs      s                                                                  s
                   t / at . Expressing budget constraint and Euler equation in terms of ( at , t ), we
find
                        as                       t
                                                                   
                           t
                           s = r - t     and        = t -  -  + t  ( as   t ).
                        at                       t                 
To get the on-impact consumption response of savers, we need to solve the ODEs for a small
change in wealth at date 0 away from the steady state, in which  = r and r =  +  - /r  ( as ).
    ^, 
Let a  ^ be the deviations (in levels, not logs) from the steady state. Defining    ( as ) as / ( as ),
we have
                     t = - as                      t = ( + )                       ^t
                                                                                   a
                    ^
                    a           ^t      and       ^           ^ t + (  +  - r ) r  s .             (37)
                                                                                  a
We guess and verify that     ^ = -k a ^ / as for k > 0. Using the equations in (37) we find a quadratic
for k,
                                   k2 - ( + ) k + ( +  - r )r  = 0.
The only solution that leads to a positive consumption response to transfers is

                                    +                            r
                               k=            1-     1-4 1-                .
                                    2                            +

      ^s     s ^ + r a
                     ^ t = (r - k ) a
                                    ^ t , and a
                                              ^ 0 = dx /r, we have
Since c t = a   t

                                               s
                                             dc0 = dx - k/rdx
                      b implies (13).
which together with dc0

Local uniqueness and existence result. Here we prove that locally around a stable steady state,
i.e. for d0 in a neighborhood of steady-state debt d , there is a unique equilibrium. To do this,
we first collect the equations describing equilibrium when the borrower is up against a binding
borrowing constraint. We focus on the special case with ( pt ) = = const; the general case of a



                                                      60
stable steady state when ( pt ) pt increases in pt follows analogously. The pricing equation for real
assets is
                                                          t.
                                             rt pt = 1 + p                                       (38)
The debt level evolves as
                                                dt =  pt - dt                                         (39)
which we can plug into the savers' collective budget constraint, we get the interest rate

                                              1 s                   s
                                       rt =     { c +  p t -  d t - t }.                              (40)
                                              dt t
Finally, savers' Euler equation is given by

                             s
                             c                       cs
                               t
                                 = r t -  -  +        t
                                                                (  s p t + d t ).                     (41)
                             cst                 ( s pt + dt )

Equations (38)­(41) describe a system of 3 ODEs in variables ( pt , dt , cst ), after using (40) to substi-
tute out the interest rate rt . Denote by ( p , d , cs ) the respective steady state values of the three
variables. We define two auxiliary variables

                                         s
                                  w                  and            +  - r .

In the homothetic model,  = 0. Using them, we find for the steady state variables

                                 1                         c                        p   1
                          p =      ,     d =         ,       = r  (1 + w ),            = .
                                 r              r          d                        d 


Denote by p~, d~, c
                  ~s the log-linearized versions of p, d, cs . Denote by r
                                                                         ~ the linearized version of r.
Linearizing (38)­(41) we find

                                   ~ = -r  d
                                   r            ~  (1 + w ) +  p
                                            ~ + cr             ~ - d~

                                                       ~ + r p
                                                      =r
                                                     ~
                                                     p       ~                                        (42)

                                                    d = p
                                                     ~  ~ - d~

                                                                          ~+d
                                                                         wp  ~
                                    =r
                                    ~
                                    c ~+ c
                                         ~- 1-                        
                                                                         w+1
We guess and verify that the solution takes the form

                                       ~ = - Rd
                                       r       ~,         ~ = Pd
                                                          p     ~,       ~ = Cd
                                                                         c     ~.

We also verify that d /d
                      ~ ~ < 0, which is necessary for an equilibrium in the neighborhood of the
steady state. After some algebra, we arrive at a condition for P,

                                                         F ( P) = 0




                                                            61
where

  F ( P) = [ +  (2 - P) + r  (1 + w)] ((1 - P) + r  ) P +  P
                                                          - ( + (1 - P)) - r   + r   (1 -                               ) (1 +   Pw) - 1 .

As one can see easily, F (0) < 0, F (1) > 0, F (1) < 0, F (0) > 0 (the coefficient on P3 is positive).
Together, they imply that F admits a unique root P below 1. This root is therefore unique in
implying stability, d/d
                     ~ ~ = ( P - 1) < 0. It also implies that

                                                      R = P(1 - P) + r  P > 0,                                                          (43)

so that the (natural) interest rate is lower if the economy has a higher debt level than steady state
debt. Moreover, observe that F strictly declines in  . Thus,

                                                                 P
                                                                   > 0.                                                                 (44)
                                                                  

Proof of Proposition 4. The proof is an immediate consequence of Proposition 2.

Proof of Proposition 5. The proof is an immediate consequence of Proposition 2.

Proof of Proposition 6. This follows directly from (14) and (15).

Proof of Proposition 7. Savers' intertemporal budget constraint is given by
                                          t                                   t                           
                                    e-   0 rs ds   cit dt =  s          e-   0 rs ds   ^t dt + d0 - e-
                                                                                       Y                 0 rs ds   d                    (45)
                             0                                   0

which implies (18) by subtracting from (45) its steady state analogue. (19) is a direct consequence
of (18) and the fact that the steady state is stable, and so d  d as   .29

Proof of Proposition 8. To start, we derive the system of equations characterizing the evolution
of the economy in response to an arbitrary path of interest rates rt . From the savers' budget
constraint and Euler equation we have

                                                             s
                                                             a         s    s
                                                               t = rt at - ct

                                                    s
                                                    c                  cs
                                                      t
                                                        = r t -  -  +   t
                                                                             ( as
                                                                                t) .
                                                    cst                 ast
 As one can easily see in a phase diagram (Figure 25), both equations are forward looking. Thus,
under a monetary policy shock as in (16), cs         s
                                              t and at jump up on impact, converging back towards
their steady state values, ct = c and at = a , which they reach at t = T . Noting that as
                            s    s     s    s                                               s
                                                                                        t =  pt + dt ,
we find that debt evolves as
                                    dt = -(1 + w-1 )dt + w-1 as  t                              (46)
  29 Stability                                            ^ follows from (46) below. For fixed r
              of a steady state for a fixed interest rate r                                       ^s
                                                                                               ^, a t is immediately at its
steady state value (see discussion below and Figure 25).




                                                                        62
                  Figure 25: Phase diagram for (cs    s
                                                 t , at ) under an exogenous interest rate.

                                  cs
                                   t
                                       s
                                       a T = 0 locus


                                 0
                                 a s = 0 locus



                                                                      s
                                                                      c T = 0 locus



                                            0
                                            c s = 0 locus
                                                                                      as
                                                                                       t



implying that dt > d for all t > 0 (w   s / ). Thus, under a monetary policy shock as in (16), debt
strictly rises. An (first-order) increase in debt, as explained in (43), leads to a reduction in natural
interest rates.
    The increase in debt is greater for all t under monetary policy shock (17). The reason for this
is that under (16), natural rates are still below steady state r after t = T . Thus, if rt = rt    n is set

after t = T , rt is below what it would be under (16). But if rt is lower, both as          s
                                                                                     t and ct are greater
everywhere (Figure 25), which by (46) must translate into a greater level of debt. Similarly, if we
increase T or reduce r   ^, this further raises cs       s
                                                 t and at in Figure 25, thus also increasing the path of
debt dt at all times.
    Why do natural rates fall more with greater non-homotheticity? To prove this, we focus on a
                                                                                            -r ( t - s ) n
convenient measure of the path of natural rates, namely the present value, Rn      s  r s e             rt dt.
We ask: how does R    ~n     R n - r vary with the level of debt d~? And how does that mapping depend
                       s       s
on  ? By (42), we find that
                                                 ~n         ~
                                                R  t = -rP dt .

Thus, natural interest rates always fall when d  ~t > 0, and more so the larger P is, e.g. when  is
greater (see (44)).
    Finally, consider a situation with multiple steady states. Call r the interest rate of the alternative
high-debt, low-interest-rate steady state, and cs , as , d the associated values of cs , as and d. Based
on Figure 25, setting r^ = r forever (T = ) means cs         s      s    s
                                                       t = c and at = a for any t > 0. Both variables
jump immediately to their new values. Debt evolves as in (46), and converges to d. Because the
new steady state is stable, the economy does not converge back to its original values. Also, by
continuity, there exists a threshold T , such that any T > T will bring the economy sufficiently
close to d that it will converge by itself (without any further stimulus) to the alternative steady
state.

                                                      ^, c s
Proof of Proposition 9. As explained above, for fixed r           s
                                                           t and at jump immediately to their new
values cs   s
         , a . Solving (46), we find

                                                 -1 ) t           as
                                                                                         -1
                          d t = d 0 e -  (1+ w            +                1 - e -  (1+ w ) t
                                                               (1 + w -1 )
                                                                                           as
                                                                                             -dt
for the path of debt. This gives us the path of asset prices from pt =                        s    and output from

                                                          ^ = r pt - p
                                                          Y          .



                                                                 63
After some algebra, this yields (20).

Proof of Proposition 10. The expression for Y^ follows directly from inverting saving supply
curve at r,
                                            1 + /
                                r=
                                                  s + (r ) ^
                                     1 + /           r    Y

to solve for Y^ . The debt trap is stable since the economy, for a fixed interest rate r, is described by
constant c , as , and debt evolves as in (46), converging always back to the debt trap debt level.
           s



Proof of Proposition 11.    (23) again follows directly from inverting the saving supply curve with
fiscal policy at r,
                                                  1 + /
                                r=                                            .
                                                  (1-  s )  s + (r ) ^
                                        1 + /              r        Y    +B

Proof of Proposition 12. A partial or full debt jubilee has no effect in the long run as the economy
will always converge back to the unique debt trap steady state. A (government-financed) bailout
lowers output in the long run as it increases government debt B (Proposition 11).
    If there are multiple steady states, there is a threshold for debt d (equal to that of the second-
largest-debt steady state), such that if the jubilee moves the economy to a debt level d0  d ,
long-run output and interest rates are greater than before.

Proof of Proposition 13.    The result follows directly from (27) and the behavior of  s (r ). Observe
that
                                 s         b                   F
                                    =-        = 1 -  -1  b K                                 (47)
                                K         K                     Y
implying that  s increases with K (and falls with r) precisely iff  > 1, and is constant if  = 1.
The slope of the saving supply curve is given by

                                r           r
                                  =-        s (r )
                                d     +  -  r +   s (r )

where  ,  are evaluated at  s (r )/r + d. Evidently, the larger (more positive)  s (r ) is, the flatter
is the saving supply curve. Vice versa for negative  s (r ).

Proof of Proposition 14. To derive (29), observe that

          ( a s /Y )        s   rd                             rd FK                 rd
                     =        +         = 1 -  -1  b -               = 1 -  -1  b - r  
            D          D    r   Y                              Y Y                   Y

where we used (47). Following steps as in the proof of Proposition 3, we then find that the savers'
consumption response to the increase in their assets dD is given by
                                             s
                                           dc0 = (r - k)dD




                                                   64
where now
                                  +                                 r
                            k=           1-        1-4 1-                           .
                                  2                                 +
Thus, dC = -kdD.


C       Model extensions
C.1     More general preferences
C.1.1    EIS different from one
Our model naturally generalizes to utility functions over consumption with an elasticity of in-
tertemporal substitution (EIS) -1 different from one. Assume the preferences of a type-i agent
are given by
                                       1             1-    
                            e-(+)t           cit /µi     +  v( ait /µi ) dt.
                         0           1-                   
Define  ( a)  ( a/µs ) v ( a/µs ) so that the homothetic benchmark with v ( a)  a- continues to
correspond to  ( a) = 1. The Euler equation of savers is then given by

                                  cs                            cs      
                                   t  = rt -  -  +               t
                                                                            ( as
                                                                               t)
                                  cst                            ast
which, at a steady state, reduces to
                                                                
                                                            r
                                       r = +-                       ( a s ).
                                                            

While not necessarily solvable in closed form for r, this equation still has a unique solution for r for
any value of as , by the intermediate value theorem. Moreover, by the implicit function theorem,
the slope of the implied saving supply curve is still negative.

C.1.2    Recursive preferences over consumption
Our preferences (1) involve a warm-glow utility over bequests. Does the negative slope of the
saving supply curve hinge on bequests (or wealth more broadly) entering the utility function? We
now argue that the answer is no. To do so, we give both agents a recursive utility function solely
defined over consumption, as in Uzawa (1968) and Lucas and Stokey (1983). We thus assume
preferences are given by
                                                   
                                       Ui =           u(cit /µi )e-t dt
                                               0

where    t =  ci /µi , u is strictly increasing, continuously differentiable and concave, and  is
                  t
continuously differentiable. If  = const, this corresponds to standard homothetic preferences,
but in general, these preferences allow the discount factor to move with consumption.
   After some math, we find that savers' steady state Euler equation is

                                              r = (ras /µs ).

This defines an implicit equation in r for any ai . If  decreases, such that greater consumption


                                                       65
levels are associated with less impatience, the saving supply curve is downward-sloping, just as
in the model of Section 3.

C.1.3   Preferences over relative wealth
As we mentioned in Section 3.5, an alternative way to set up the warm-glow bequest utility is to
define it not relative to output Y , but relative to total wealth. In this formulation, preferences are
given by
                                                                ait /µi
                                 e-(+)t log cit /µi + v                    dt
                              0                                    At
where we let At  as      b
                    t + at . Observe that A = Y /r = 1/r in a steady state (Y is normalized to 1).
Defining  as before, we then obtain the savers' Euler equation and saving supply curve

                  s
                  c t                cs
                                      t          ait                       1 + /
                      = r t -  -  +     s                          r=                .             (48)
                  cst                 a t        At                     1 + / (ras )

The only change in (48) relative to (10) is that there is now an additional "r" on the right hand side.
Conceptually, this plays no role, however. When  ( a) is increasing, the right hand side falls in r,
implying that there is a unique interest rate r for any as . Moreover, as the right hand side also falls
in as , that interest rate must decline as as increases. Thus, we still have a negatively sloped saving
supply curve.

C.2     Borrowing constraints nested
We provide three alternative microfoundations for a borrowing constraint that fits our general
description in (8).

C.2.1   Housing as collateral asset
In Section 3, we derived a simple borrowing constraint based on the idea that agents can pledge
an income stream Y (e.g. coming from land they own). We now show that one would obtain a
similar borrowing constraint when borrowers purchase houses instead, and use them as collateral.
To do so, assume there is a fixed mass µb of housing units, freely traded at price pt
                                                                                    h , over which

borrowers have additive preferences  log ht each period,  > 0. We assume that the collateral
constraint is d + d   pt  h h , where  is the loan-to-value (LTV) ratio. In steady state, one can
                             t
show that this implies a market clearing house price

                                                          b
                                 p h (r ) =
                                              (1 -  /  )  + (1 +  )  r / 

This fits into our earlier framework by assuming that (r ) = rph (r ).
    In this version of the model, agents in the borrower dynasty bequeath both the house and their
debt position to their offsprings. In a more realistic model with a life-cycle, older agents would
sell their house, pay down their debts and consume the proceeds before death. Younger agents
would purchase houses, partly debt-financed. A larger house price (due to lower interest rates),
would stimulate consumption of existing homeowners and sellers of houses, raising aggregate
consumption of the borrower dynasty, even if younger agents now pay more for the same-sized
house.


                                                       66
C.2.2   Bewley-Aiyagari model
For this extension, we model borrowers as in Achdou, Han, Lasry, Lions, and Moll (2017), that is,
we deviate from homogeneous preferences across types of agents. We focus on a steady state with
a constant interest rate r. Each borrower i maximizes utility
                                                        
                                              E0           e-t log cit dt
                                                    0

subject to budget and borrowing constraint

                                 dit = rdit + cit - yb ei
                                                        t        and           dit  dyb

where d > 0 and ei     t > 0 is a random Markov process for productivity in continuous time; y 
                                                                                                  b
  b      b
 Y /µ is borrowers' average income. This specification implies that borrowers can borrow up to
a fixed fraction (or multiple) of their average income. Following the logic in Achdou et al. (2017),
we see that total debt taken out by borrowers, d(r, yb )  dit di in a steady state with rate r is
continuous and approaches - as r   and approaches dyb as r  0. Moreover, observe that
d(r, yb ) scales in yb due to homothetic preferences, see Straub (2019). Therefore, we can write total
debt as
                                                                           Y
                                  d(r, yb ) = d(r, 1)yb = rd(r, 1) b /µb ·
                                                                           r
                                                                        (r )

in line with our general borrowing constraint (8). Thus, this model generates a steady-state debt
demand curve that is "mostly" downward-sloping, in the sense that d(r, yb ) is - for r  , rising
to dyb for r  0. There could be non-monotonicity in between, although that is unlikely given the
results in Achdou et al. (2017).

C.2.3   Simplified buffer stock model
We have found that a simplified and tractable version of the full Bewley-Aiyagari model is a
useful way to understand its implications. Specifically, we assume that there is a small Poisson
probability  > 0 that a borrower receives a one-time negative income shock of size Y > 0 (after
which there are no more other shocks). We model the negative shock to be sufficiently large that it
shows up in a borrower's asset position: when assets are ab                                 b
                                                          t before the shock, they fall to at - Y
after the shock. As we make the shock probability very small,   0, this setup converges to a
model where the borrowing constraint is given by

                                             dit + dit  pt - Y

where the borrowing constraint is tightened by the potential income loss Y relative to (7). The
right hand side can be rewritten in the form ({rs }st ).

C.3     Nominal rigidities
Households. We describe the model with nominal rigidities here in more detail. First, agents
preferences are given by
                                                                                          1 +  -1
                          e-(+)t log cit /µi + v( ait /µi ) -         nit                           dt   (49)
                   0                                          1 +  -1


                                                            67
where  is the Frisch elasticity of labor supply, and  is a disutility shifter. Observe that in the
limit   0, this model converges to an endowment economy, with labor endowments nit = 1 per
agent. The budget constraint is still given (2) with a total asset position equal to

                                                   ait = hit - dit .

Real asset wealth, which is equal to human wealth here, is given by
                                                                  i
                                               rhit = wt  i nit + h                                            (50)
                                                                    t

where wt is the real wage per efficiency unit and  i /µi denotes the efficiency units per hour
worked of dynasty i. Total efficiency units supplied by dynasty i are then  i nit . Combining (2)
and (50), we can also write the budget constraint in the more traditional form,

                                            cit + rt dit  dit + wt  i nit                                      (51)

To be consistent with this description, the price of pledgable wealth is then assumed to be equal
to                                                 s
                                     pt        e- t ru du ws nis ds                           (52)
                                                   t

with the interpretation that a total amount <  i of efficiency units can be pledged by each
dynasty. This implies the same borrowing constrained as before, (7).

Production. Production in this economy follows a simple linear aggregate production function

                                                           ^t = Nt
                                                           Y

where Nt equals total efficiency units supplied by the dynasties, Nt =  b nb         s s
                                                                               t +  nt . We assume
production is perfectly competitive and prices are flexible, so that the real wage is equal to 1 at all
times, wt = 1.

Nominal rigidities and monetary policy rule. Instead, we assume that nominal wages are per-
fectly rigid, Wt = 1. While this might seem extreme, our results will be amplified if a Phillips
curve is assumed instead.30 With a wage rigidity in place, workers may be off their labor supply
curves, so it is important to determine which worker works how much. Here, we keep with the
existing literature, e.g. Werning (2015) and Auclert, Rognlie, and Straub (2018), and assume that
both dynasties' hours move identically, nb           s          ^
                                              t = nt = Nt = Yt . The central bank in this model sets a
path for the real interest rate {rt } directly (as in Auclert, Rognlie, and Straub 2018).
    Observe that with these modifications, the above modeling equations can be simplified. For
instance, the budget constraint (51) becomes

                                              cit + rt dit  dit +  i Y
                                                                     ^t

and the price of pledgable wealth (52) becomes
                                                                    s
                                             pt               e-   t ru du   ^s ds
                                                                             Y
                                                       t
  30 This can be for instance done by integrating the heterogeneous-agent version of the Erceg, Henderson, and Levin

(2000) wage rigidity model developed in Auclert, Rognlie, and Straub (2018).



                                                              68
Natural allocation. The natural allocation is defined as the allocation that would materialize if
wages were perfectly flexible. In that case, rt is no longer determined by monetary policy. With
labor supply as in (49), wealth effects on labor supply imply that the natural allocation need not
necessarily feature nit = 1 and thus not necessarily Y ^t = Y = 1. To establish continuity with our
analysis before and focus on the case where the natural allocation indeed exhibits Y ^t = Y = 1, we
focus on the case where   0. This assumption essentially makes labor supply arbitrarily curved
around 1. While not having any effects on our analysis of monetary policy, it does imply that the
natural allocation is one in which nit = 1 for both dynasties, implying that dynasty i's income is
equal to  i just as in the endowment economy introduced in Section 3.




                                                69
