                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            QUITTING IN PROTEST:
           PRESIDENTIAL POLICYMAKING AND CIVIL SERVICE RESPONSE

                                      Charles Cameron
                                    John M. de Figueiredo

                                      Working Paper 26944
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26944


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2020




We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the National Science Foundation (SES
1262230, SES 1061512, SES 1061600, ACI 1443014) and the Smith Richardson Foundation. de
Figueiredo thanks the Institute for Advanced Study for support during the early drafting of the
paper. Neither author has a conflict of interest with respect to the research reported here. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Charles Cameron and John M. de Figueiredo. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Quitting in Protest: Presidential Policymaking and Civil Service Response
Charles Cameron and John M. de Figueiredo
NBER Working Paper No. 26944
April 2020
JEL No. H11,H83,J45,K00

                                           ABSTRACT

We formally model the impact of presidential policymaking on the willingness of bureaucrats to
exert effort and stay in the government. In the model, centralized policy initiative by the president
demotivates policy-oriented bureaucrats and can impel them to quit rather than implicate
themselves in presidentially imposed policies they dislike. Those most likely to quit are a range
of moderate bureaucrats. More extreme bureaucrats may be willing to wait out an incumbent
president in the hope of shaping future policy. As control of the White House alternates between
ideologically opposed extreme presidents, policy-minded moderates depart from bureaucratic
agencies leaving only policy extremists or poorly performing "slackers." The consequences for
policy making are substantial. Despite these adverse consequences, presidents have strong
incentives to engage in centralized policymaking.


Charles Cameron
Princeton University
Woodrow Wilson School
030 Corwin Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
ccameron@princeton.edu

John M. de Figueiredo
The Law School and Fuqua School
Duke University
210 Science Drive, Box 90360
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
jdefig@duke.edu
                                      I.   Introduction

    In November 2017, President Trump announced, "I'
                                                   m the only one that matters" in
setting U.S. foreign policy (Chappell 2017). This comment culminated a year of departures
of high ranking civil servants and diplomats from the State Department. One report noted
that over one-half of career diplomats in the two highest ranks of the Foreign Service had
departed government service and that lower level diplomats had their ranks depleted by
17% (Stephenson 2017). High level non-diplomatic civil servants also departed, such as the
Director of the Diplomatic Security Service (DSS) who had served in the DSS for 30 years,
the award-winning Acting Director of the Bureau for International Organization A¤airs, and
the careerist Assistant Secretary of State of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement
A¤airs with 38 years of service. Departing and former civil servants characterized the ad-
ministration as having "complete and utter disdain for our expertise," creating a situation
                   1
that is "untenable"  , and leading to a "[perilous] political climate" for career civil servants
(Lynch and Gramer 2017).
    Meanwhile, similar events unfolded at the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
In July 2017, President Trump'
                             s White House O¢ ce of Management and Budget (OMB)
detailed when and how executive agencies would repeal numerous Obama-era environmental
regulations regarding air pollution, water pollution, fossil fuel extraction, and climate change
(Cama 2017). During the same time, there was a mass exodus of senior level civil servants
from the EPA. The Acting Head of the O¢ ce of Water with 37 years of EPA experience, the
Acting Head of the O¢ ce of Research and Development with 33 years of scienti...c research
leadership at the agency, and an award-winning Senior Executive Service scientist with 40
years of government service, all departed the EPA. Some former EPA employees decried the
perceived anti-environmental policies of the Trump Administration and refused to be part
of its implementation. Others were said to soldier on, providing the politicians the "facts"
necessary to make good decisions (Davidson 2017a). One departing scientist noted, "[Many]
EPA sta¤ are becoming increasingly alarmed about the direction of the EPA. . . The policies

                                               2
this Administration is advancing are contrary to what the majority of the American people
                            2
want the EPA to accomplish."
    Stories of this kind abound in the Trump era. But are the dramatic departures merely
artifacts of one extraordinary administration or are they indicative of patterns, perhaps
less dramatic but nonetheless discernible, at other times? In fact, recent empirical research
detects an increase in departures among civil servants after a party change, particularly at the
highest levels and among those whose views di¤er most dramatically from the new president
(Bolton et al 2016, Doherty et al 2016, see also Bertelli and Lewis 2013, Richardson 2017).
Thus, the Trump examples may well be just extreme instances of pre-existing practices.
    One is then led to ask: What logic drives the departure patterns? And, what are
the consequences? First, what calculations underlie the stay/go decisions of civil servants?
For example, should professionals wait out a new president, hoping for a new and better
successor? Should they stay and try to make a di¤erence in the current administration?
Or, should they quit and leave with clean hands rather than implement policies they ...nd
misguided? Second, what happens to policy making when many motivated civil servants
depart? The new empirical research, while fascinating or even disturbing, leaves unclear the
mechanisms at play. Indeed, relatively little e¤ort has been devoted to building theory about
the career decisions of civil servants in highly politicized environments.
    In this paper we address this theoretical lacuna. We study the e¤ects of centralized
presidential policymaking on work, careers, and policy in federal agencies. We develop a
formal model of authority in public organizations that reects actors'commitment to pol-
icy, their rational decisions about work e¤ort, and their strategic calculations about careers.
The paper examines how presidents, by centrally directing policymaking, dishearten and de-
motivate policy-oriented bureaucrats ("zealots"), who would otherwise willingly exert e¤ort
and initiative to innovate new policy. Centralization thus undermines bureaucratic initia-
tive. However, the e¤ects of centralization are even more deleterious over time. In the
model, zealots on the opposite end of the ideological spectrum from the president resign


                                               3
their position because departing a¤ords them clean hands ­distasteful policies that will be
implemented regardless of the zealot'
                                    s presence or absence are less abhorrent if the agent is
not directly implicated in their administration. However, the model uncovers two dynamics
mitigating policy-induced departures. The ...rst, which we dub "wait them out" (WTO), oc-
curs when a zealous bureaucrat, faced with a hostile president who forces distasteful policy
on the agency, nonetheless stays because of the possibility of implementing a better policy
under a friendlier president in the future. It is extremist zealots opposed to the current
president who are most inclined to WTO, which requires a turn-over in party control of the
presidency. The second dynamic, which we call "I can make a di¤erence" (IMD) occurs when
a very moderate zealot, faced with a friendly president who insists on an extreme policy,
remains in the agency because she may be able to craft a more moderate policy under the
friendly president in the future. It is moderate bureaucrats who are the players in IMD,
which requires continuity in party control of the presidency.
    Despite the WTO and IMD dynamics, policy-induced departures ­"quitting in protest"
­are frequent among zealous civil servants, at least in the model. Policy-induced departures
then strip an agency of its most motivated employees, those whose initiative generates new
policies when the president'
                           s centralized apparatus fails to do so. Moreover, the model
shows that in the longer run, as party control of the presidency alternates and presidents
press policies on agencies, the departure of moderate zealous bureaucrats tends to hollow
out the agencies. In starkest form, only two types of civil servants remain in the government:
highly motivated extremist zealots on the left in some agencies and the right in others, and
moderate slackers who exert little e¤ort on policy innovation.
    Not surprisingly, centralized policymaking and quitting in protest have major implica-
tions for expected policy in the agencies, which we detail. The model further indicates that,
despite the adverse consequences of departures, centralized policymaking is in the president'
                                                                                            s
short-term interest. Hence, presidents have an incentive to boost resources and capacity at
the center.


                                              4
                    II.   The Rise of the Centralized Presidency

    Political scientists have extensively documented the rise and growth of the centralized
presidency (Schlesinger 1973; Rudalevige 2005). The Great Depression and Second World
War impelled a dramatic expansion of the administrative state and presidential power (Higgs
1987). Congress and presidents created scores of programs and agencies sta¤ed by hundreds
of thousands of new federal employees. Concerned about weaknesses in administration, Pres-
ident Roosevelt appointed the President'
                                       s Committee on Administrative Management (the
Brownlow Committee) to make recommendations about how to improve the administration
of government. The Committee recommended the creation of a permanent Executive O¢ ce
of the President (EOP) and an expansion of the White House sta¤. The Committee pro-
posed that the EOP include the White House O¢ ce, along with its expanded sta¤, and other
sta¤ agencies such as the Bureau of the Budget. To a great extent, these recommendations
became reality (Burke 1992, Dickinson 1997, Hart 1992, Milkis and Nelson 2012). Later
presidents and Congresses continued to expand the EOP, adding new employees and units
such as the National Security Council and Council of Economic Advisers (Burke 1992). The
expansion of the EOP reects a frank admission by the nation'
                                                           s policymakers that the role of
the president in the constitutional system has changed. As the scope, volume and complexity
of government work has expanded, Congress has increasingly delegated responsibility to the
executive establishment to solve national problems (Epstein and O'
                                                                 Halloran 1999; Huber
and Shipan 2002).
    The burgeoning of the institutional presidency allows presidents to play a much greater
role in policymaking than formerly, not only through increased control over budgets and
legislation but also through appointments and direct presidential action such as executive
orders, presidential memoranda, presidential ...ndings, and so on (de Figueiredo and Stiglitz
2017; Fisher 2000; Howell 2003; Lewis 2008; Neustadt 1954; Weko 1995). A well-developed
literature examines how unilateral actions by the president play out in a separation of powers
context (Cooper 2002; Deering and Maltzman 1999; Howell 2003; Mayer 2001). This litera-

                                              5
ture argues that the president, by administratively altering a status quo policy yet keeping
it within an expansive congressional gridlock region, can advance his policy interests while
assuring that Congress cannot o¤er an e¤ective legislative riposte. Thus the administrative
presidency emerges as a powerful tool of executive policymaking (Nathan 1975; Waterman
2009, but see Chiou and Rothenberg 2017 for a partial demurral).
    The extent of presidential centralized policymaking has varied from administration to
administration as well as across policy areas. This is no surprise since survey research,
both individual and expert, reveals signi...cant ideological variation across the agencies in the
executive establishment (see, e.g., Aberbach et al. 1981, Clinton et al 2012). Such variation
implies that the choice of whether to centralize or rely on a particular agency is apt to be
consequential for outcomes in a speci...c policy domain, and apt to di¤er in application across
presidents of di¤erent parties (Rudalevige 2002).
    Despite important insights about presidents' use of unilateral policymaking, scholars
of the administrative presidency have placed little emphasis on the incentive e¤ects in the
agencies so often by-passed by the White House. But, a relevant line of inquiry was initiated
in organizational economics beginning with a notable paper by Aghion and Tirole (1997).
They develop a model of formal authority in organizations (who has the right to decide) and
real authority (who has e¤ective control over decisions). A subordinate may have real au-
thority because she maintains an information advantage over a superior, despite the superior
having formal decision rights. The superior can exercise control through his decision rights
but, importantly, the exercise of those decision rights may seriously degrade the initiative of
the subordinate to work hard.3
    Within political economy, several scholars have explored the demotivating consequences
of a political principal'
                        s meddling in agent decisions. For example, if courts frequently
veto agency regulations, agencies will respond by reducing their policy initiative (Bueno de
Mesquita and Stephenson 2007, Stephenson 2007). Similarly, limited writs of statutory dis-
cretion from Congress may discourage policy-oriented bureaucrats from investing in expertise


                                               6
and may even induce them to leave the agency (Gailmard and Patty 2007).
    In this paper, we bring these insights to bear on the administrative presidency. We
study the e¤ects of centralized presidential policymaking on policy-induced departures of
personnel in public agencies, on the policymaking e¤ort in agencies, on expected policy, and
on the long-run capacity of agencies to innovate policy. We also consider when, and to what
extent, presidents bene...t from centralized policymaking.


                                     III.   The Model

                                       A.    Overview

    The model features two players, a President and a Bureaucrat, who interact to determine
policies in two distinct periods. The model distinguishes policy targets, policy proposals, and
...nal policies. A policy target is a contemplated action under consideration by a governmental
actor or agency, but a policy target is not a concrete actionable plan for achieving the target.
Writing such a plan requires incurring costs. That is, the actor must study the issue, learn
which government instruments are e¤ective, ...gure out how to cast ideas into legislative or
rulemaking language, and so on. A policy proposal is a government-sanctioned approved plan
of action, ready for implementation, e.g., a public law, an agency rule, a majority opinion
from an appellate court. A ...nal policy is an adopted policy proposal that has the force of
law. Each of these entities are treated as a point on a line; additionally, there is a status
quo in each period. Presidents have preferences over policies and a clearly identi...able most-
preferred policy. An agency Bureaucrat may be policy-minded or, instead, may be indi¤erent
to policies and thus only seek employment.4 Following Gailmard and Patty 2007, we dub
the former types "zealots"and the latter type "slackers."
    Both the Bureaucrat and President can choose to exert costly e¤ort in an attempt
to convert a policy target into a policy proposal. Both actors may succeed in crafting a
policy proposal, only one actor may succeed, or neither may succeed. Given one or more
policy proposals and the status quo, the President decides which proposal, or the status

                                               7
quo, becomes the ...nal policy. The Bureaucrat then faces a stark choice: either participate
in implementing the ...nal policy, or quit to avoid joining in. (The model does not allow
the Bureaucrat to sabotage, undermine, or otherwise subvert the selected policy, which will
be carried out even if the Bureaucrat quits).5 A presidential election occurs after the ...rst
period, so the incumbent President may stay or a new and more congenial chief executive
may emerge; and, the policymaking process recurs in the second period. Hence, the shadow
of the future can a¤ect a Bureaucrat'
                                    s career decision in the ...rst period. Endogenously
determined within the model are the following elements: proposal development e¤ort by
the President and by the Bureaucrat; policy proposals; ...nal policies; quit/stay decisions by
bureaucrats with di¤erent policy preferences; and the probability an agency is ultimately
populated by slackers or zealots. The model allows an analysis of whether and when the
creation of a capacity for centralized policy development actually advantages the President,
taking into account its e¤ects on bureaucrats.
    Two features of this simple model deserve elaboration: its treatment of proposal devel-
opment, and the rationale for a zealous Bureaucrat to quit the agency rather than participate
in a detested policy.
    In the model ­ and in real life ­ actors may know what ...nal policy they desire, for
instance, a dramatic reduction in high school dropout rates among low income students,
peace in the Middle East, or the end of the opioid crisis. But these are just policy targets;
actors may not be at all clear how to craft a proposal that accomplishes this end. Agency
employees and White House sta¤ exert e¤ort by undertaking or commissioning studies,
collecting statistics, convening experts, reviewing best practices, studying history, drafting
white papers, consulting with agency counsel, and circulating inter-agency memos. But all
this work may avail them naught: despite intense labor, the innovator'
                                                                     s e¤orts may fail to
develop a policy proposal that can withstand legal challenge, has a realistic chance of success,
be feasible to administer, or achieve its goals within available resources. Contrary to the
Apollo 13 mantra, failure is always an option (Kranz 2001).6


                                               8
    In practice, actors who fail at proposal development may substitute incremental changes
for transformative ones or symbolic actions for substantive ones. The model, however, treats
proposal development in a very stark way: the probability of turning a given policy target
into a concrete policy proposal is proportional to the e¤ort expended, and failure results in
no policy proposal at all. That is, e¤ort e 2 [0; 1] is the probability of being able to o¤er
a policy proposal at a selected policy target. One can view this very simple approach as a
highly reduced-form version of more elaborated search or development technologies (see for
instance Callander 2011).7
    A second feature of the model leads to the following question: Why would a zealous
bureaucrat quit the government rather than participate in a loathed policy, especially if
quitting does not alter the ...nal policy outcome? The answer is: an unattractive policy
imposed on the agency by the president is not just painful for policy-minded employees,
actually participating in the bad policy oneself can be extraordinarily distasteful. An agent
who opposes the policy receives substantial disutility from having to actually implement
it. Quitting may not change the situation on the ground but it allows the bureaucrat to
maintain "clean hands" and sleep at night. The examples in the beginning of the paper
allude to the clean hands motivation.8 Maintaining one'
                                                      s moral integrity comes at a cost
however: one is no longer in the policy game and hence unable to a¤ect policy in the future.
This trade-o¤ is at the heart of the model.
    The model treats clean hands in graphic fashion: either one gains clean hands by quitting
or receives dirty hands by staying. Though more complex alternatives are possible, this
dichotomy brings the key strategic elements to the fore with clarity and tractability. We
now turn to a formal description of the model.


                                       B.     Set-Up

    A ...nal policy is an action undertaken by the President'
                                                            s administration, implemented
directly by the Bureaucrat'
                          s agency at the direction of the President, for example in response


                                              9
to an executive order, presidential memorandum, or presidential directive to the agency. We
employ the standard formalization in which a policy, x, is a point on a closed and bounded
subset of the real line X = [ z; z ]: A distinguished policy is the status quo q = 0. The
                                                     i
President is either L or R with policy utility           (x; p) de...ned over X with ideal policy
p = ` < 0 if i = L and p = r > 0 if i = R. Bureaucrats are either slackers or zealots;
the former cares only about wage utility while the latter also derives utility from policy,
especially the implementation of an attractive policy. A zealous Bureaucrat B has policy
          B
utility       (x; b) and ideal policy b > 0. (There is a mirror set of bureaucrats with ideal
policies less than zero; the results below extend straightforwardly to the mirror cases.) We
employ subscripts to denote time periods, either 1 or 2. The probability of converting a
policy target into a policy proposal in Period t is ei                                 B
                                                     t 2 [0; 1] for the President and et 2 [0; 1]

for the Bureaucrat. In words, the two actors employ costly e¤ort in an attempt to create
policy proposals. Thus, an actor may attempt to devise a policy proposal delivering (say)
her ideal policy outcome (the policy target); but the e¤ort may fail to bear fruit. Only the
President can approve a ...nal policy, so the President has both formal and real authority
(Aghion and Tirole 1997, Baker, Gibbons, and Murphy 1999).
     The model has two periods; each period has seven stages. We assume an incumbent
zealous Bureaucrat at the start of Period 1. In Period 1:


   1. Nature sets the status quo policy q = 0 which is common knowledge to the players,
      and determines the winner of the presidential election (either L or R) using common-
      knowledge probability :

   2. The incumbent Bureaucrat B (a zealot in Period 1) and the elected President simul-
      taneously choose policymaking e¤orts eB      i
                                            1 and e1 (i = (L; R)) attempting to create a

      policy proposal.

   3. The e¤orts of the Bureaucrat and the President succeed with probabilities eB      i
                                                                                 1 and e1

      respectively.

                                               10
  4. B o¤ers the President a policy proposal xB
                                              1 2 X = [ z; z ]. If the Bureaucrat'
                                                                                 s proposal
                                                   i
     e¤ort at xB
               1 succeeded, B '
                              s o¤er reveals           ( xB
                                                          1 ) to the President via hard information

     but reveals nothing about the value of any other policy proposal. If the Bureaucrat'
                                                                                        s
     proposal e¤ort failed, the Bureaucrat does not know the policy value of any proposal
     other than q and hence the proposal reveals nothing to the President about its utility
     value.

  5. The President chooses the ...nal policy xF
                                              1 2 X: If the ...nal policy is q or the product of

     a successful proposal attempt by either player, ...nal policy xF
                                                                    1 is the associated policy.

     If not, xF
              1 results from a draw from a uniform distribution over the policy space.


  6. After the President'
                        s policy choice, B may either stay in the public service (g1 = 0)
     or depart (go) for the private sector, quitting in protest (g1 = 1). If B quits, she is
     replaced by another bureaucrat (a slacker) and xF
                                                     1 is nonetheless implemented.
                                                                                  9



  7. Players receive per-period payo¤s.


    Stages 1-7 repeat in Period 2 with either the same incumbent zealous bureaucrat if she
stayed in Period 1 or her slacker replacement if she exited, and either a president with the
same policy orientation as in Period 1 or a new president with the opposing policy orientation
depending on the outcome of the Period 2 election.


                    C.   Policy Preferences and the Four Regions

    In the model Presidents and zealous bureaucrats care about policy. We employ the fol-
lowing single-peaked per-period policy evaluation function for the President and Bureaucrat:


                                 i
                                     (x; p) = jp       qj   jp   xj
                                 B
                                     (x; b) = jb       qj   jb   xj


    where i = (L; R) and p = ` < 0 if i = L and p = r > 0 if i = R: These "tent" utility

                                              11
Figure 1: Policy Utility for President and Bureaucrat. Utility for the President (L and R)
is show with solid lines, that of Bureaucrats with dashed lines. The ideal point of L is `
and that of R is r. The four regions of R-side bureaucrats are labeled. In addition, utility
functions for bureaucrats in each region are shown.

functions are normalized so that the utility value of the status quo q = 0 is zero for all players,
          i            B
that is       (q ) =       (q ) = 0 (see Matthews 1989). Because these von Neumann-Morgenstern
utility functions are simply an a¢ ne transformation of the more familiar zero-ideal point
normalized utility functions, they are fully equivalent to them. However, the zero-status quo
normalization a¤ords very substantial savings in algebraic complexity in this setting.
    Figure 1 illustrates the policy evaluation functions. In the ...gure, each curve is a policy
                             i
evaluation function              (:) for a speci...c actor (the ...gure includes 6 such curves). The two
solid curves indicate the policy evaluation function of an illustrative L President and an
illustrative R President. The dashed lines indicate policy evaluation functions for four


                                                       12
di¤erent bureaucrats. As shown, each actor has a most-preferred policy, the argmax of
 i
     (x). The most-preferred policy for an L-President is ` and that for an R-President is r
(both points are indicted in the ...gure), while that for a Bureaucrat is denoted b (not shown in
the ...gure). Each evaluation function is scaled so that the utility value of the status quo ­the
origin in the ...gure ­is zero. Each actor also evaluates a policy ti as equivalent to the status
quo. For an L-President, tL = 2`, for an R president tR = 2r, and for a bureaucrat tB = 2b.
A President (weakly) prefers policies in the interval de...ned by q and ti to q (i = R; L as
appropriate) and a Bureaucrat (weakly) prefers policies in the interval de...ned by q and tB to
q . Thus, there are a range of policies an R President and an R side Bureaucrat both agree
are preferable to the status quo, but there are no policies an L President and an R side
Bureaucrat agree are preferable to the status quo.
       It proves very convenient to de...ne four regions in the policy space, de...ned by the
relative placements of the ideal policies of the R President and the Bureaucrat. The four
regions, which are labeled in Figure 1, are:

        Region 1: 0 < b < r=2."Very moderate bureaucrats". In this region, implementation of
        an R President'
                      s ideal policy r is worse for B than retention of the status quo q = 0.
        However, implementation of B '
                                     s ideal policy is better for an R President than the
        status quo.

        Region 2: r=2      b    r:"Somewhat moderate bureaucrats." In this region, for both
        actors implementation of the other actor'
                                                s ideal policy is better than retention of the
        status quo. However, B is somewhat more moderate than the R President.

        Region 3: r < b < 2r: "Somewhat extreme bureaucrats." In this region, for both actors
        implementation of the other actor'
                                         s ideal policy is better than the status quo. However,
        B is somewhat more extreme than R.

        Region 4: b     2r. "Very extreme bureaucrats". In this region, implementation of B '
                                                                                            s
        ideal policy is worse for the R President than retention of the status quo. However,

                                               13
      implementation of R'
                         s ideal policy is better for B than the status quo.


    Also important is the hostile president con...guration, in which ` < q         b for Bureaucrats
in all four regions. Figure 1 displays a policy evaluation function for a Bureaucrat in each of
the four regions (that is, the Bureaucrat'
                                         s ideal policy lies within the indicated interval). For
instance, the dashed line whose peak is closest to the origin displays the policy evaluation
function of a Region 1 Bureaucrat.
                                                                                             B
    The Bureaucrat'
                  s utility depends not just on the policy evaluation function                   (x; b) but
also on how much e¤ort she exerts and whether she has clean hands.10 Speci...cally
                               8
                               >
                               <   B
                                       (x; b)    c eB
                                                    t    if B remains in the public sector
          uB (x; eB
                  t ; b; ) =
                               >
                               :   c eB         if B quits
                                      t



where    is the indicator variable for zealot ( = 1) versus slacker ( = 0). The function
c( ) captures the cost of expending e¤ort innovating policy proposals while employed in the
                                                             2
public sector; henceforth we assume c eB
                                       t = eB
                                            t . We assume bureaucrats are forward-
looking and make career decisions in the shadow of the future while the incumbent president
perceives "the future is now," that is, focuses only on payo¤s in the current period. Both
positions ...nd support in empirical studies.11


                   IV.    Policy Centralization and Agency Response

    We begin by examining a natural baseline, the absence of centralization, a scenario that
corresponds roughly to the pre-WWII, pre-Brownlow Committee presidency. We then turn
to the centralization game. We focus throughout on policymaking when the President is
unconstrained by Congress, e.g., a uni...ed party President. (We briey discuss the implica-
tions of constraints from the other branches in Section VI.) Our discussion focuses primarily
on action in Period 1 when the shadow of the future a¤ects the stay/go decision of the
Bureaucrat. To appreciate the impact of the shadow of the future, however, one needs an


                                                    14
understanding of play in Period 2.


                    A.    Baseline: No Presidential Centralization

    Consider the game when only the Bureaucrat can generate policy proposals.This game is
a variant of a Romer-Rosenthal game since, conditional on successful proposal development
by the Bureaucrat (assumed a zealot), she will be able to make an o¤er to a President who
can only accept or decline (Romer and Rosenthal 1978). However, the costly, probabilistic
e¤ort by the Bureaucrat alters the standard analysis somewhat, as detailed in Appendix A.
The following points stand out.

      The Bureaucrat will never quit, since the President cannot impose loses on her. There-
      fore, each period is stand-alone.

      Given an L President, the Bureaucrat does not work at all, since the president would
      never accept a policy the Bureaucrat prefers to the status quo.

      Given an R President, the Bureaucrat'
                                          s work e¤ort increases monotonically from Re-
      gion 1 to Region 3, plateauing at a relatively high level in Region 4. Expected policy
      tracks along with e¤ort.

    In Section V we examine the implications for the President'
                                                              s expected utility from the
Bureaucrat'
          s work performance.


          B.   Presidential Centralization: Summary of Play in Period 2

    We now take up the game with presidential policy centralization. Appendix B provides
a formal analysis of play in Period 2. Summarizing, in Period 2 the President attempts to
develop his most-preferred policy proposal and if he succeeds he imposes it as the ...nal policy.
If an R President'
                 s e¤ort failed, he is willing to accept B '
                                                           s most-preferred policy proposal
as a take-it-or-leave-it o¤er if B '
                                   s ideal point lies in Regions 1-3, while an unsuccessful
R President will not accept a Region 4 B '
                                         s most-preferred policy proposal. However, an

                                               15
unsuccessful R President will accept the compromise policy proposal most-preferred by a
Region 4 B , a proposal a¤ording R a utility equivalent to the status quo (xB
                                                                            2 = 2r ). An

L President is unwilling to accept any policy proposal B prefers to the status quo.
    These basic facts about policy choice have strong implications for B '
                                                                         s career decisions in
Period 2 as well as both parties'work e¤orts. In particular, the Bureaucrat'
                                                                           s stay/go decision
is simple: the Bureaucrat stays if the President'
                                                s ...nal policy is as good or better than the
status quo; otherwise, B departs in order to mitigate the sting of complicity in a bad policy.
As a result, when the President'
                               s policymaking e¤ort fails, B stays in public service, since
either q prevails or (even better under an R President) a successful B gets to shape the
policy in a favorable way. However, if B faces an L President and the President succeeds in
his policy proposal e¤ort, L imposes xF = ` and B exits. In addition, when an R President
is in power, a very moderate B (a B in Region 1) exits if R'
                                                           s policymaking succeeds, since
the President'
             s ideal policy r is worse for B than the status quo. More extreme B '
                                                                                 s (those in
Regions 2-4) stay even when the R president succeeds, because they prefer the President'
                                                                                       s
policy over the status quo.
    The work e¤ort chosen by the Bureaucrat anticipates her subsequent stay/go decisions.
In addition, the work e¤orts of both players reect the strategic interaction of their joint
proposal game. Critically, the work e¤orts for an R President and B are strategic substitutes
in the sense of Bulow, Geanakoplous, and Klemperer 1985: additional e¤ort from one party
reduces the marginal return on e¤ort exerted by the other party. (We explore the implications
of strategic substitutes when discussing work e¤ort in Period 1). The interaction of an
L President and B is even more stark: because L will not accept any policy preferred by
B over the status quo, B undertakes no work e¤ort. Hence, an L President has to "go it
alone" in the face of an unhelpful bureaucracy.
    The expected value of a zealot to an R-President depends not only on his proximity to
the President, but on how hard B works in equilibrium. In turn, this depends on the distance
of the Bureaucrat from the status quo and on the strategic interaction with the President'
                                                                                         s


                                             16
own e¤ort. Of least value are L-side zealots (who don'
                                                     t work, leaving the President to go-
it-alone) and Region 4 zealots, who work hard but if successful present the President with
a policy utility-equivalent to the status quo. Region 1 zealots are somewhat more valuable
than either of these types, but because they so favor the status quo their work e¤ort is tiny;
hence, they are not much more valuable. Regions 2 and 3 zealots are much more valuable.
Of these, at the same distance of the Bureaucrat from the President, Region 2 zealots are
most valuable because Region 3 zealots work very hard to pull policy too far to the right,
even accounting for the o¤set in the President'
                                              s own work e¤ort. Hence, the ranking is:
L-side = Region 4 < Region 1 < Region 3              Region 2. Not surprisingly, the most valuable
zealot has the same ideal point as the President.12


              C.     Career Choice in Period 1: The Stay/Go Decision

    To make her career decision in Period 1, the Bureaucrat compares two alternatives:
on the one hand, the payo¤ from remaining in government service in Period 1 plus the
continuation value V (0) of the game in Period 2 given a stay decision in Period 1 (g1 = 0); on
the other hand, the payo¤ from leaving government service in Period 1 plus the continuation
value V (1) of the game in Period 2 given an exit from government service in Period 1 (g1 = 1).
For bureaucrats in all regions, the continuation value V (1) from departing in Period 1 is 0.
This reects the clean hands e¤ect on the value of future policy plus the fact that B will
not undertake costly proposal development e¤ort in the future if she is no longer employed
in the government.
    Formally, the Bureaucrat departs if and only if:


                       B                             B
                           (xF
                             1 ; g = 0) + V (0) <        (xF
                                                           1 ; g = 1) + V (1) = 0




    implying "depart" if and only if




                                                    17
                                          B
(1)                                           ( xF
                                                 1 ; g = 0) > V (0)




      In words, the Bureaucrat departs if the loss from implementing the ...nal policy is greater
than the continuation value of the game.
      Figure 2 illustrates the stay/go calculation (discussed momentarily). In the panels, the
dark line displays the continuation value V (0) to a zealous B from staying in Period 1 (see
Table 1 in Appendix B). The four regions are distinctly visible in the ...gure. An important
fact to note is that B '
                       s continuation value from staying is positive regardless of region (this
is easily seen in the ...gure). The reason for this is simple: the continuation value reects
optimal e¤ort and optimal quitting in Period 2. In Period 2, B can always guarantee herself
utility of zero by not working and quitting so that in expectation any other optimal course
of action must yield utility greater than or equal to zero.
      The fact that the continuation value of staying in government service V (0) is positive
has important implications for B '
                                 s career decisions. First, if the President is unsuccessful in
proposal development, B remains in government whether the President is an R President or
an L President. Second, if the President is successful in proposal development the Bureau-
crat may still stay in government if the imposed policy isn'
                                                           t too bad and the continuation
value of the game is su¢ ciently attractive. More precisely, the only situation leading to a
                                      B
quit decision in Period 1 requires        (xF
                                            1 ) to be negative, that is, the Period 1 policy must

be worse for B than the status quo. This situation can arise in only two circumstances: 1)
when a successful L President imposes the ...nal policy ` on a relatively moderate B , or
2) when a successful R President imposes the ...nal policy r on a very moderate B (b lies
                                           s ...nal policy xF
within Region 1). In that con...guration, R'                1 = r yields B utility 2b      r<0
(by construction). These situations give rise to two distinct career dynamics, "wait them
out" and "I can make a di¤erence."



                                                    18
Figure 2: The Stay/Go Calculation in Period 1. The dark line is the continuation value of
the game if the Bureaucrat stays, V (0): The gray line is the immediate loss from staying
given a presidentially imposed policy. B stays if the former is greater than the latter. The
left-hand panel shows the "wait them out" calculation. The right-hand panel shows the "I
can make a di¤erence" calculation.

    Wait Them Out (WTO).-- If an incumbent L President'
                                                      s proposal e¤ort succeeds
he sets xF
         1 = `. This unattractive proposal imposes an immediate loss of            ` on B: B
can mitigate this loss by quitting and retaining clean hands. Nonetheless, B may choose
to remain in government and su¤er the loss if the continuation value of staying V (0) >       `
(from Equation 1). In words, B will wait them out if the prospect of participating in
attractive policymaking in a future R President'
                                               s administration is large enough to o¤set
the immediate loss from the incumbent L President'
                                                 s policy.
    The left-hand panel in Figure 2 illustrates the calculation of B in the face of a successful
L President. The dark line in the ...gure is the continuation value of staying V (0); the gray
line is the immediate loss           s imposed policy xF
                             ` from L'                 1 = `. In the example in the ...gure,

all Region 1 and 2 bureaucrats exit, as do many Region 3 bureaucrats. However, a portion
of Region 3 bureaucrats and all Region 4 bureaucrats remain. These bureaucrats decide to
wait out the opposition President and remain in government service despite the unattractive
policy imposed on them. They do so in the hope of serving under an R President next
period.
    From inspection of V (0) (see Table 1 and Equation 1) the comparison of present losses


                                              19
and future gains is more likely to result in waiting-them-out when 1) an R President is
more likely to be elected ( is higher) and 2) the incumbent L President is less extreme (j`j
is smaller). Both results are intuitive.
    I Can Make a Di¤ erence (IMD).-- If an incumbent R President'
                                                                s policy attempt
succeeds, he sets xF
                   1 = r , an attractive ...nal policy for Bureaucrats whose ideal policy falls

in Regions 2-4. Consequently they remain in government in Period 1. But Bureaucrats in
Region 1 face an immediate loss from R'
                                      s policy choice, of size 2b        r. Nevertheless, they
may stay in government in order to have a chance to create policy proposals themselves in
Period 2 under an unsuccessful R. In other words, they reason I can make a di¤erence in
the future (note that this cannot occur if an L president gains o¢ ce in Period 2). This
calculation requires the continuation value of remaining V (0) > r      2b (using Equation 1).
The comparison of V (0) and r      2b is shown in the left-hand panel of Figure 2. Remark 12
in Appendix C shows that a small group of Region 1 Bureaucrats near the boundary of the
                      r
region (that is, near 2 ) will not quit. Remark 13 in Appendix C shows that this small group
of Region 1 stayers is somewhat larger when 1) an R President is more likely to be elected
president in the future (because then R'
                                       s policy attempt may fail and B can achieve her
most-preferred policy), 2) when b is closer to the boundary r=2, and 3) when the incumbent
R-President is less extreme, so the policy r is less painful for B .
    Three broad theme'
                     s stand out about career choice in Period 1. First, not surprisingly
but importantly, policy extremity by an opposing incumbent president impels exits by zealous
bureaucrats, at least if the President is successful in his own policy proposal attempt. Second,
and also not surprisingly, good election prospects for the same side President encourage
policy-sensitive bureaucrats to remain in government. And, this is true regardless of which
president is incumbent. Third, almost all Region 1 zealous bureaucrats exit if the President
                                         s party.13
is successful regardless of the president'
    Together, these results imply that if presidents are ideologically extreme relative to
many bureaucrats, the bureaucrats' tenure in government may well be short, especially if


                                               20
Figure 3: Reaction Functions in Period 1. In each panel, the reaction function of the
President is shown as a dashed line while that of the Bureaucrat is a solid line. In all three
panels r = 34
                                       1
              . In the left Panel, b = 4 ; in the middle panel b = 1; in the right pane b 3
                                                                                          2
                                                                                            .


presidents exert much centralized policymaking e¤ort.


                 D.   Presidential E¤ ort and Bureaucratic Initiative

    Figure 3 displays the reaction functions in e¤ort of an R President and the Bureaucrat
in Period 1 (see Equations C1-C3 in Appendix C). These functions show how each actor'
                                                                                    s
choice of proposal e¤ort responds to that of the other actor. The critical feature of the e¤orts
exerted by the Bureaucrat and the R President is that they are strategic substitutes: an
increase in the proposal e¤ort of one party reduces the marginal return on e¤ort for the other
party and thus creates an incentive to reduce its e¤ort. Consequently, the reaction functions
in Regions 1, 2, and 3 are negatively sloped (panels 1 and 2 of Figure 3). In Region 4,
however, the President is insensitive to the e¤ort of the Bureaucrat. In this con...guration, if
B'
 s search is successful, she generates a proposal that is utility-equivalent to the status quo
for the President. Accordingly, from the President'
                                                  s perspective the Bureaucrat'
                                                                              s e¤ort is no
substitute for his own. However, the converse is not true for a Region 4 Bureaucrat, since
e¤ort by the President can bring a better ...nal policy for the Bureaucrat. Consequently,
in Panel 3 of Figure 3 B '
                         s reaction function continues to be downward sloping but the
R president'
           s is constant, insensitive to B '
                                           s e¤ort.
    An L President faces a very di¤erent strategic situation. There is no policy the Bureau-
crat prefers to the status quo that an L President does as well. Therefore, L would reject


                                              21
all the policies the Bureaucrat would like to recommend. Given this fact the Bureaucrat
exerts no proposal e¤ort at all. Consequently an L President facing an R side Bureaucrat
must go it alone.
    The intersection of the two reaction functions yields the equilibrium e¤ort levels (eR ; eB )
(see EquationC4 in Appendix C). Figure 4 displays the equilibrium proposal e¤orts exerted
by an R President and by a zealous Bureaucrat separately and jointly, as a function of the
location of B '
              s ideal point b. As shown in the left-hand panel of the ...gure, e¤ort by the
Bureaucrat increases as her most-preferred policy b is increasingly distant from the status
quo q = 0, at least in Regimes 1-3. In Regime 4, however, the Bureaucrat is constrained to
recommend the same policy while the e¤ort of the President is a constant; hence, all Regime
4 bureaucrats undertake the same high level of e¤ort. An R-President works harder than B
when the R President is more extreme than B , while B works harder than an R-President
when B is more extreme than R. An R President works hardest when the Bureaucrat'
                                                                               s
e¤ort is low (that is, when b = 0) or when a successful e¤ort by B would yield a policy
recommendation utility equivalent to the status quo (Region 4). In these two situations, an
                                                           r 14
R-President e¤ectively goes it alone and exerts e¤ort eR = 2 . If the President were un-
                                                                                               b
able to exert centralized e¤ort, zealous bureaucrats in Regions 1-3 would exert e¤ort eB =     2

while those in Region 4 would exert e¤ort eB = r.15 These "go it alone" e¤orts for B exceed
the strategic, jointly determined e¤orts for B shown in the ...gure. In this sense, e¤ort by
the President undercuts bureaucratic initiative.
    The right-hand panel in Figure 4 displays total proposal e¤ort (eR + eB ) given an R-
President and zealous Bureaucrat. Total policymaking e¤ort is greatest when the R president
faces a Regime 4 Bureaucrat, for both work hard to change the distant status quo. Total
e¤ort is lowest when the Bureaucrat favors the status quo (b = 0): In this case, only the
President exerts e¤ort. This situation would be compatible with the common observation of
unmotivated or "lazy" bureaucrats who force the president to compensate for their inaction.
In this situation, though, even zealots would exert little proposal initiative, because they


                                              22
Figure 4: Policy Making E¤ort in Period 1. The left-hand panel shows equilibrium levels of
e¤ort in Period 1 exerted by the President and Bureaucrats in the 4 regions (the President'  s
e¤ort is the dashed line while the Bureaucrat's is the solid line). The right-hand panel shows
                                              3
the sum of the two e¤orts. In the ...gure r = 4 .


favor current policy. Though the e¤orts of the two actors are strategic substitutes, total
e¤ort is nonetheless higher when both work than when one actor "goes it alone." Of course,
under an L-President, the Bureaucrat exerts no e¤ort and the e¤ort exerted by L is a
                                  j`j
constant, the go-it-alone level    2
                                      .
    With an R President, the probability of a policy proposal departing from the status
quo is 1   (1   eR )(1    eB ) (the probability at least one of the two actors is successful in
generating a proposal). This quantity closely tracks total e¤ort.


                E.   The Policy Consequences of Quitting in Protest

    From the President'
                      s perspective, the immediate consequence of bureaucrats who quit
in protest is negligible. After all, the President has created the policy proposal he wants and
ordered it implemented (otherwise, the Bureaucrat will not quit), and slacker agents in the
agency are willing to implement it. The result is a policy the President likes and that he or
his party can take to the electorate. The real consequences fall on the President'
                                                                                 s succes-
sor. Two cases are important: 1) when an R President follows a successful R President
predecessor, and 2) when an R President follows a successful L President predecessor. To
make matters concrete, the ...rst scenario corresponds to (say) George H.W. Bush succeeding



                                              23
Figure 5: The E¤ect of Policy-Induced Departures on Expected Policy. The two left-hand
panels show expected policy at the beginning of Period 1. If the President'
                                                                          s policy search suc-
ceeds, the calculations shown in Figure 2 ensue and many moderate zealots depart. Expected
policy in Period 2, given a successful Period 1 president, are shown in the two right-hand
panels. Given an R president in Period 1, the policy consequences in Period 2 are very
modest. But they are dramatic given a Period 1 L president.

Ronald Reagan. The second scenario corresponds to a Democrat succeeding Donald Trump:
recalling the vignettes about the State Department and EPA at the beginning of the paper,
what are the future policy consequences for a Democratic successor? The model a¤ords a
structured analysis.
    An R President Following a Successful R Predecessor.-- Suppose an R President
is elected in Period 1. At the beginning of Period 1, expected policy in that period is E (xF
                                                                                            1) =

ei
 1 r + (1   ei   B B           B
             2 )e1 x1 , where x1 is the policy recommendation of the Bureaucrat. This ex-

pected policy is shown in the upper left-hand panel of Figure 5 as a function of the location
of B '
     s ideal policy. Not surprisingly, ex ante expected policy in Period 1 tracks total e¤ort.
Recall from the earlier results that a Region 1 Bureaucrat exerts modest e¤ort, since he
does not ...nd the status quo particularly onerous. Hence, expected changes in policy in that
region largely reect Presidential proposal e¤orts, which are considerable.

                                              24
    But, the incumbent R President'
                                  s Period 1 proposal e¤ort is either successful or not.
If unsuccessful, B does not exit regardless of the location of her ideal policy. However, if
the incumbent R President is successful, he orders B to implement the President'
                                                                               s most-
preferred policy, r. If B '
                          s ideal policy lies in Regions 2-4, she perceives this change as an
improvement over the status quo. Hence, B will not exit. Because she doesn'
                                                                          t exit, expected
policy in Period 2 remains the same as the ex ante expected policy in Period 1 (the upper
left-hand panel in Figure 5). But if the zealous Period 1 B '
                                                            s ideal policy lies in Region 1,
she will exit unless her ideal policy is very close to r=2 (this calculation was shown in the
right-hand panel of Figure 2).
    What then are the implications for policymaking in Period 2 if a Period 1 R President'
                                                                                         s
policy search succeeds? The results are shown in the upper right-hand panel of Figure 5,
which displays expected policy in Period 2 as a function of the location of b. Even if b lies
in Region 1, the impact of a policy-induced departure is small. Of course, the Period 2
president must exert more e¤ort than he would have if the zealous Region 1 B had remained
in government. But since the president would have worked hard in any event, while B
would not have displayed much initiative, the impact of B '
                                                          s departure is modest in terms of
expected policy.
    An R President Following a Successful L Predecessor.-- The situation is quite
di¤erent when an R President follows a successful L President: Suppose L is elected in
Period 1. Because B will not assist L (who would not take B '
                                                            s advice in any case), expected
policy reects only L'
                    s go-it-alone e¤orts. The resulting expected policy is shown in the
lower left-hand panel of Figure 5. Again, though, the incumbent L President'
                                                                           s Period 1
proposal attempt either succeeds or fails. If it fails, B will not exit. In this case, expected
policy in Period 2 is the same as that shown in the upper left-hand panel of Figure 5. On
the other hand, if the Period 1 L President'
                                           s innovation attempt succeeds, he orders B to
implement L'
           s most-preferred policy, `. As discussed earlier, only if B '
                                                                       s ideal point is rather
extreme will she be willing to remain in government, hoping to "wait them out" (recall the


                                              25
left-hand panel in Figure 2).
    The departure of moderate zealous agents then has real policy impact in Period 2, at
least for an R President. The results are shown in the lower right-hand panel of Figure
5, which displays expected policy in Period 2 as a function of the location of b. In the
example in the ...gure, B will depart if her ideal policy lies in Region 1, Region 2, and the
more moderate part of Region 3. Accordingly, expected policy reects only the Period 2
president'
         s go-it-alone e¤ort. In the example, only if B '
                                                        s ideal policy was rather extreme
(in the less moderate part of Region 3 or in Region 4) does she stay and work in Period 2.
Not surprisingly, expected policy in Period 2 is quite di¤erent from what it would have been
absent the departure (compare the lower right-hand panel and the upper left-hand panel
in Figure 5). The new R President is quite handicapped by the L President'
                                                                         s legacy of
policy-induced departures.
    These results suggest that even future-oriented presidents would have little incentive
to forebear from centralization, because the resulting loss of bureaucratic initiative will fall
mainly on opposition-party presidents, not same-party presidents.


            V.    The President'
                               s Incentive to Centralize Policymaking

    In Terry Moe'
                s celebrated analysis of presidential incentives to centralize executive
branch policymaking, he argued that those incentives are almost completely unproblem-
atic for a president: "Because the president can count on unequaled responsiveness from
his own people, increases in White House organizational competence ­for example, through
greater size, division of labor, specialization, hierarchic coordination, formal linkages with
outside organizations and constituencies ­ appear to him to have direct, undiluted payo¤s
for the pursuit of presidential interests"(Moe 1985:244). Does this evaluation change when
we explicitly account for the perverse e¤ects of centralization on bureaucratic initiative and
retention? Furthermore, under what circumstances are presidential incentives to central-
ize policymaking most powerful? Our simple model provides an avenue to address these


                                              26
Figure 6: Centralization and the Expected Utility of the President. The left-hand panel
displays the expected utility of a period of play for the President absent centralization (gray
line) and with centralization (darker line). Centralization is always weakly better. The
right-hand panel displays the expected utility di¤erential for the President across the two
regimes. The analysis assumes a zealous Bureaucrat.

questions.
                                                                                    i
       In the no-centralization regime, the President'
                                                     s expected utility is simply       (q )(1 eB )+
 i
     (xB )eB (see Equation A4 in Appendix A). In words, the President'
                                                                     s expected utility at
the start of a period reects the Bureaucrat'
                                           s optimal e¤ort allocation and policy recommen-
dation contingent on success, for any location of the Bureaucrat relative to the President
(the President cannot undertake independent policy innovation in this regime). The gray
line in the left-hand panel of Figure 6 displays the expected utility of an R President in
the no-centralization regime as the ideal point of the Bureaucrat, b, varies. As shown, the
expected utility of the President is zero (the utility a¤orded by the status quo) when facing
an L side Bureaucrat or a Region 4 Bureaucrat. Expected utility rises as the Bureaucrat'
                                                                                       s
ideal point approaches that of the President (r in the ...gure), reaching a maximum when the
two ideal points coincide.
       The expected utility of the President under centralization is somewhat more compli-
cated because it now reects the e¤ort and policy choices of both players, to wit, for an
                  R                i                             2
R President           (r)(eR ) +       (xB ) 1   eR    eB   eR       (see Equation C5 in Appendix
C). The dark line in the left-hand panel of Figure 6 displays the expected utility of an
R President in the centralization regime as the ideal point of the Bureaucrat, b, varies. The

                                                      27
right-hand panel in the ...gure displays the utility di¤erential between the two regimes, the
critical issue.
     Three points, clearly visible in the right-hand panel of Figure 6, stand out about the
relative attractiveness of centralized policymaking over no-centralization:


   1. The President'
                   s expected utility with centralized policymaking is unambiguously greater
      than without, irrespective of the relative location of the Bureaucrat;

   2. The greatest gain from centralization relative to decentralization occurs when the Pres-
      ident faces a hostile Bureaucrat, that is, either an L side Bureaucrat who wishes to
      defend the status quo or a Region 4 Bureaucrat who desires rather radical changes in
      the status quo;

   3. Even if the policy preferences of the President and the Bureaucrat coincide, so there is
      no policy disagreement between them, the President is still better o¤ with a capacity
      for centralized policymaking.


     The ...rst point indicates that the President always has an incentive to centralize pol-
icymaking. Moe'
              s insight goes through even when accounting for the perverse e¤ects of
centralization on bureaucratic performance. The second point is entirely intuitive ­ the
biggest gains for centralization come in the face of a hostile bureaucracy. The third point
may be somewhat unexpected. It reects the fact that, although the e¤orts of the President
and the Bureaucrat are strategic substitutes, overall proposal e¤ort is greatest when both
work. Or, to put it another way, even if the Bureaucrat is completely ideologically attuned to
the President, the President will not wish to free-ride completely on the Bureaucrat'
                                                                                    s e¤ort;
the President'
             s central sta¤ will also work, bringing net policy bene...ts to the President.
     In sum, in our simple model of presidential-agency relations, presidents have a strong
incentive to centralize policymaking, despite its adverse consequences in the agencies.




                                             28
                                     VI.    Extensions

    We briey discuss some obvious extensions or worthwhile departures.
    Wages.-- We have abstracted from public and private sector wages, though including
them in the model is relatively straightforward. Clearly, wage di¤erentials would a¤ect
stay/go decisions. In fact, Moe 2013 notes that in models with slackers and zealots, public
sector wages must at least meet private sector wages, otherwise, slackers will exit the public
sector, e¤ectively shutting down the government. Beyond that, if public sector wages were
attractive relative to private sector ones, the di¤erential would undercut but not obviate the
incentive to quit in protest.
    This raises an obvious point: Why not pay bureaucrats enough to keep them in the gov-
ernment even when they must implement policies they dislike? The required wage structure
would strongly resemble so-called e¢ ciency wages, which pay more than market-clearing
wages to valuable employees so that they do not quit in the face of occasional temptations to
do so (Shapiro and Stiglitz 1984). In the context of our simple model, wages would overpay
Region 2-4 Bureaucrats under an R-President (successful or unsuccessful) so that the bu-
reaucrats do not quit in the face of a successful L president. And such wages would overpay
Region 1 bureaucrats under an unsuccessful R president so that these bureaucrats do not
quit in the face of a successful R president.
    Though conceptually simple, bureaucratic e¢ ciency wages are deeply problematic po-
litically. First, tying wages to the political orientation of bureaucrats or their agencies is
anathema to the concept of a non-partisan civil service and would likely be subject to po-
litical abuse. Second, if presidents are constrained to o¤er the same wages across agencies
and employees, much of the extra wage bill would go to slackers who do not need e¢ ciency
wages. This would be quite costly and likely unpopular with economy-minded voters. But,
the biggest sticking point is surely the following: the necessary wage structure would require
L presidents to pay premium wages to R-side bureaucrats with the bene...t from decreased
exits accruing to R presidents rather than L presidents. And similarly, R presidents would

                                                29
need to pay premium wages to L side bureaucrats with no immediate bene...t to themselves.
Perhaps such a wage structure could be sustained by a relational contract between R and L
presidents; but this thorny question deserves a closer and more acute analysis of the politics
of bureaucratic wage setting than we can o¤er here. The political economy of public sector
wage setting appears a worthwhile topic of research (Cameron et al 2020).
    Political Appointees.-- We have focused on interactions between presidents and civil
servants because policy tensions there are apt to be frequent and consequential. Because
presidents select their own political appointees, policy tensions between them should be
much more muted. Nonetheless, policy di¤erences may exist and when they do, much of the
analysis in the paper would apply. One example concerns presidents who prove unpredictable
and head-strong in a policy domain, such as foreign policy. For example, in December 2018
Secretary of Defense James Mattis resigned his post, simultaneously denouncing President
Trump'
     s sudden and surprising policy change toward Syria and Turkey. Mattis'
                                                                          s stay/go
calculations may have resembled those explored above. In other cases, presidents appoint
individuals with close ties to interest groups or powerful blocs within the president'
                                                                                     s party.
When presidents favor more expedient policies, these individuals may ...nd themselves facing
many of the same quandaries as the civil servants we study. Hence, the model in the paper
may have applicability to at least some political appointees.
    The Impact of Other Branches.-- Restrictions on presidential policymaking arise
naturally in a system of separated powers. A hostile or skeptical judiciary or a Congress held
by the opposition party can constrict the range of sustainable unilaterally imposed policies.
For example, if presidential unilateral action is to be invulnerable to a legislative reversal, the
President must locate his new policy so at least one-third of the members in a chamber will
sustain a presidential veto of legislation over-turning the President'
                                                                     s unilateral action. In the
conventional analysis, this implies that the President must locate policy within the Pareto
set between the median legislator and the chamber'
                                                 s veto or ...libuster pivot (Howell 2003).
If the President'
                s most-preferred policy lies within the relevant Pareto set, as would typically


                                                30
be the case in uni...ed party government, then the President'
                                                            s ideal policy will be legislatively
sustainable. This is the scenario we examined. But suppose the President'
                                                                        s ideal policy lies
outside that Pareto set, as is common during divided party government (Cameron 2000).
Then the best policy the president can sustainably achieve is the policy at the nearest edge
of the Pareto set, namely, the ideal point of the relevant veto pivot. In turn, this enforced
moderation has implications for bureaucrats'stay/go decisions, for policymaking e¤orts by
both the president and bureaucrat, and for expected policy.16
    Space prevents a full consideration of separation of powers e¤ects on president-agency
incentives but several deserve brief mention. It is easy to see that congressional restrictions
on a L President may bene...t a right-side Bureaucrat. First, the restrictions imply that
an L President will not expend as much e¤ort on proposals, hence, he will succeed less
frequently. This in turn implies B will not exit as frequently in Period 1 when an L President
holds power. In addition, less extreme B '
                                         s may be more willing to "wait them out" even
in the face of a successful policy attempt by L since that success will result in less extreme
policies from L: The e¤ect of restrictions with an R President are more complex. Given
limits on sustainable policy by an R President; very moderate B '
                                                                s (those in Region 1) will
...nd it less distasteful when R'
                                s policy search succeeds. Hence, they will be less inclined to
depart ­ "I can make a di¤erence" becomes more compelling. But, extreme B '
                                                                          s will ...nd
this constrained policy less attractive. So, if an extreme Bureaucrat faces an L President
in Period 1 and anticipates a constrained R President in Period 2, the reduced Period 1
continuation value may induce the Bureaucrat to exit. In other words, "waiting them out"
may become insu¢ ciently attractive to keep the Bureaucrat in government.
    Complementary Actions by the President and Bureaucrat.-- We have focused
on a class of policies in which central e¤ort and agency e¤ort are strategic substitutes, a
situation we see as typical. But, one can imagine a very di¤erent class of policies in which
central e¤ort and agency e¤ort are strategic complements. In that case, the two e¤orts would
reinforce one another, so that e¤ort from the center encourages e¤ort in the agency and may


                                              31
lead bureaucrats to stay in government rather than depart. For example, one might imagine
the bureaucrats designing a policy that both actors like, with the president then supplying
"marketing" e¤ort that makes the policy more popular or better known to the public and
hence utilized more frequently. The modeling technology used in this paper could be applied
to such situations, likely yielding very di¤erent results.
    Learning-By-Doing, Investing in Human Capital, Recruiting Zealots, and
Revolving Doors.-- Several other simple extensions appear promising or intriguing. First,
experience with policymaking may make long-term zealots more capable than less experi-
enced individuals. Learning-by-doing may thus lead to greater e¤ective e¤ort from agencies
even in the face of presidential centralization, but conversely imply greater relative losses
from policy-induced departures. Similarly, zealous bureaucrats may be willing to invest in
valuable agency-speci...c human capital (similarly to Gailmard and Patty 2007). Presidential
centralization may then imply the departure not only of the most motivated bureaucrats but
the most skilled ones as well. On the other hand, the ability to recruit new zealots may partly
o¤set policy-induced departures, at least over time. Finally, the market for ex-bureaucrats
­the revolving door ­appears quite under-studied and could interact with centralized poli-
cymaking in important ways. All these topics appear reasonably tractable as extensions to
the analysis here.


                                     VII.    Conclusion

    Presidential scholars have long described departures like those at the State Department
and EPA sketched at the beginning of the paper. For instance, following President Nixon'
                                                                                       s
centralization of foreign policy and Henry Kissinger'
                                                    s ascendancy as National Security Advi-
sor in the White House, morale in the State Department plummeted and key aides including
some in the NSC quit in protest (Burke 1992, 132). Similarly, in the wake of President
Obama'
     s extensive use of White House czars, the Environmental Protection Agency found
it more di¢ cult to recruit and retain top executives in government (Steinzor 2012).


                                               32
    The analysis presented here suggests that the Trump departures and other earlier inci-
dents are not isolated ukes but instead reect systematic long-term changes in presidential-
agency relations. Our model o¤ers three insights about the e¤ects of presidentially central-
ized policymaking on executive agencies.
    First, when presidents make policy unilaterally using devices like executive orders or
presidential memoranda, they undermine the incentives for bureaucrats to work hard, dis-
play initiative, and devise policy proposals. Some bureaucrats derive satisfaction from the
opportunity to improve public policy (both relative to the status quo and their ideal policy).
Without the potential to inuence policy, these bureaucrats have less incentive to expend
e¤ort. In turn, their failure to expend e¤ort inuences the ability of government to ...nd
alternatives to existing policies or respond to new and emerging problems.
    Second, centralized presidential policymaking can lead bureaucrats to quit in protest.
When presidents make policy unilaterally, they often override advice from the agency and
sometimes impose changes opposed by agency employees. As a result, bureaucrats may
leave rather than be implicated in the administration of the policy. The principal exception
(according to the model) is a class of very extreme zealots who will be willing to wait out a
hostile president. These bureaucrats are willing to persist in government during bad times
in anticipation of a friendlier president and the policies that will ensue. (A relative handful
of moderate bureaucrats may be willing to put up with an extreme president from their own
party in the hope that they might have a moderating inuence on his policies in the future.)
    With regular electoral turnover at the top, one would expect a hollowing out of moderate
bureacrats across the government, leaving only extreme zealots and slackers. One might
not expect much policy moderation. In addition, policy could swing dramatically from
administration to administration, with the zealous bureaucrats and an allied president trying
to undo the policies of a hostile predecessor, and presidents working hard on their own to
impose favored policies on agencies ...lled with hostile zealots.
    Third, presidents have a strong incentive to engage in centralized policymaking despite


                                               33
the adverse consequences in the agencies. The advantages of centralized policymaking accrue
to the incumbent president, while the adverse consequences impose what is in essence an
externality on future presidents of the opposite party. As a result, one would expect policy
centralization to increase over time.
    In sum, presidents inuence policymaking in the modern administrative state not only
by politicizing agencies via appointments, but by building an in-house policymaking capacity
allowing them to ignore and override agency recommendations. Scholars have well-described
these historic developments, and a sizeable literature explores politicized appointments and
unilateral presidential action. Largely missing has been an analytic treatment of centraliza-
tion'
    s incentive e¤ects in the agencies, including civil servant departures, the hollowing out
of moderates, and a degradation in policy innovation. In this paper, we have tried to address
this gap in our understanding of the administrative presidency.


                     A    Baseline: No Presidential Centralization

    In this version of the game the President has no central capacity for policy formulation,
so his proposal e¤ort must be ei = 0:
    The following lemma assures that if the Bureaucrat'
                                                      s proposal attempt fails, the Presi-
dent will not choose a new policy at random. Let F (x), with density f (x), be a distribution
over the policy space. Assume F (x) is uniform on [ z; z ]. If the President selects a policy
other than q or B '
                  s successful proposal, he draws a policy from this distribution. The key
element in the lemma is: policies outside the interval [q; ti ] be su¢ ciently probable.

Lemma 1. (No Guessing Lemma) If the Bureaucrat's proposal attempt is unsuccessful, the
President chooses no policy (retains the status quo), so xF = q:

Proof. For the President, choosing the status quo q = 0 brings policy utility of zero. Suppose
an unknowledgeable president selects a policy at random, that is, implements a random draw
from F (x), which is uniform on [ z; z ], z > 0. For an R president the expected utility of a


                                               34
random policy (using the Matthews normalized policy function) is:
                                            8
                                            > R                      Rz
              Rz                            < r       x
                                                         dx   +           2r x
                                                                               dx     =    (r z )2
                                                                                                     if z > r
                          R                      z    2z             r     2z                2z
                     z
                            (x; r)f (x)dx =   Rz
                                            >
                                            :         x
                                                         dx   = 0 if z            r
                                                    z 2z



So expected utility must be less than or equal to zero and the random draw cannot be
pro...table. Similarly for L
                                           8
                                           > R                       Rz
            Rz                             < `      x 2`
                                                         dx      +         x
                                                                             dx   =       (`+z )2
                                                                                                    if   z<`
                         L                      z    2z               `   2z                2z
                 z
                           (x; `)f (x)dx =   Rz
                                           >
                                           :         x
                                                       dx   = 0 if ` <         z
                                              `     2z



which also must be weakly negative for all                  z < `. Hence the President chooses the status
quo rather than a random policy.

    No Bureaucrat ever quits absent centralized policymaking. To see this, note that no
Bureaucrat will generate a proposal worse for itself than the status quo, which has a util-
ity value of 0 (the proposals a successful Bureaucrat will pro¤er are detailed in the next
Proposition). In light of the No Guessing Lemma, the President will never select a policy at
random, i.e., if the Bureaucrat fails to generate a policy. Hence, the value to the Bureaucrat
of xF cannot be lower than 0. The value of quitting is 0. Hence, staying must (weakly)
dominate exiting in both rounds of play. Moreover, because no period 1 Bureaucrat exits,
the two rounds of play simply involve repetition of the same situation.
    The following is a subgame perfect set of policy proposals and ...nal policies; this Propo-
sition is almost identical to the central result in Romer and Rosenthal 1978 but accounts for
costly proposal development.

Proposition 2. (Agency Proposal and Presidential Policy Choice). The President sets ...nal
policy         8
               >
               < xB if B was successful and and xB 2 [minfq; ti g; maxfq; ti g]
            F
           x =
               >
               : q otherwise


                                                            35
The bureaucrat's policy proposal in each period is
                             8
                             >
                             >
                             >
                             > b if B was successful, i = R and b < tR
                             <
(A1)                    xB =   tR if B was successful, i = R and b tR
                             >
                             >
                             >
                             >
                             : q if B was not successful or i = L


Proof. Part 1, Presidential policy choice. If the Bureaucrat'
                                                            s proposal e¤ort was successful,
the President is placed in the position of the receiver in a Romer-Rosenthal take-it-or-leave-it
(TILI) game: he accepts any policy that is as good or better than the status quo (that is,
        i
where       ( xB )   0) and rejects all others. (Recall: if the Bureaucrat succeeds, the utility
value of her recommendation is veri...able for the President). The set [minfq; ti g; maxfq; ti g]
indicates all the policies that are weakly better for the President than the status quo. From
the No Guessing Lemma, if B '
                            s attempt was unsuccessful the President will not choose a ...nal
policy at random so the status quo q again continues. Part 2, the Bureaucrat'
                                                                            s policy pro-
posal. Given the President'
                          s policy choice strategy in Part 1, a successful zealous Bureaucrat
is able to make a proposal as if she were the proposer in a Romer-Rosenthal TILI game. That
                                                                             B
is, a successful zealous Bureaucrat o¤ers the proposal that maximizes            (x) among those
proposals that the President will accept, namely the set of policies [minfq; ti g; maxfq; ti g].
The indicated proposals follow immediately (see Romer and Rosenthal 1978). If the Bu-
reaucrat'
        s proposal e¤ort was unsuccessful, the President will not accept any proposal from
the Bureaucrat other than q so the Bureaucrat may as well o¤er q (no successful proposal
is equivalent to recommending q ). Note that if P is an L-President, there is no proposal
other than q that the Bureaucrat could recommend that L would accept so B might as well
recommend q . If B is a slacker she does not care about policies and may as well follow the
indicated strategy; of course, if the slacker undertook no proposal e¤ort, she can only o¤er
q (which is equivalent to no proposal).

    The proposal strategy is e¤ectively unique in the following sense. Unsuccessful Bureau-
crats (which will include all slackers in equilibrium) could propose a random policy knowing

                                                36
that their o¤er will be rejected by the President who will understand that it is a random
policy; but a random policy is thus equivalent to recommending q .
    In light of the above, the expected utility of the Bureaucrat after the election but prior
to undertaking e¤ort is:
                                 8
                                 >
                                 >                      2
                                 >
                                 > eB b            eB
                                                    2       if i = R and b in Regions 1-3
                                 <
                                                            2
             EuB (eB ; i; b; ) =   eB 2r            eB          if i = R and b in Region 4
                                 >
                                 >
                                                     2
                                 >
                                 >
                                 :   eB
                                               2
                                                   if i = L
                                       2



    where    = 1 denotes a zealot and         = 0 denotes a slacker. Using these expected utilities
one may straightforwardly derive optimal e¤ort for B :


                              8
                              >
                              >   b
                              >
                              >   2
                                       if i = R,    = 1, and b in Regions 1, 2, or 3
                              <
(A2)          eB (b; r; ) =     r if i = R, = 1, and b is in Region 4
                              >
                              >
                              >
                              >
                              : 0 if = 0 or i = L


    Note that these values require 0          b < 2 and 0           r   1 in order to restrict eB in [0; 1].
    Given the Bureaucrat'
                        s optimal e¤ort strategy and proposal strategy and the President'
                                                                                        s
acceptance strategy, expected ...nal policy is simply 0(1               eB ) + xB eB , to wit:
                              8
                              >
                              >   b2
                              >
                              >   2
                                       if i = R;    = 1; and b in Regions 1-3
                              <
(A3)                ExF =       2r2 if i = R, = 1, and b is in Region 4
                              >
                              >
                              >
                              >
                              : 0 if = 0 or i = L


    Finally, the per-period expected utility of the President at the beginning of a round of




                                                    37
          i                     i
play is       (q )(1   eB ) +       (xB )eB , to wit:
                                             8
                                             >
                                             >   b2
                                             >
                                             >   2
                                                      if i = R;    = 1; and b in Regions 1 or 2
                                             <
(A4)            Eui (eB ; xB ; i; b; ) =          r     b2
                                                             if i = R;   = 1; and b in Region 3
                                             >
                                             >          2
                                             >
                                             >
                                             :                       0 otherwise




                                         B       The Game in Period 2

    The following describes the Bureaucrat'
                                          s stay/go strategy in Period 2.

Proposition 3. (Stay/go Period 2) The Bureaucrat's stay/go strategy in Period 2 is:
                                                     8
                                                     >
                                                     < 1 if B (xF ; b) < 0
                                            F                    2
                                       g2 (x2 ; b) =
                                                     >
                                                     :     0 otherwise


Proof. B '
         s e¤ort costs are sunk when deciding to stay or go, hence only the policy impact
                                                                                                  B
of xF matters. If B quits (g = 1) her utility is 0. If she stays (g = 0) she receives                 ( xF
                                                                                                         2 ):

The comparison of these two utility values determines the strategy.

    The following lemma extends the No Guessing Lemma to centralized policymaking. It
assures that, if proposal development fails, the president will not choose a new policy at
random. Let F (x), with density f (x), be a uniform distribution of policies over the policy
space. For simplicity assume F (x) is uniform.

Lemma 4. (No Guessing Lemma [centralized policymaking]) If both the Bureaucrat's and
the President's innovation attempt fails, the President chooses no policy (so xF = q ):

Proof. For the President, choosing the status quo q = 0 brings policy utility of zero. If
the proposal e¤ort of both actors has failed, opting for a policy change results in the
implementation of a random draw from F (x), which is uniform on [ z; z ]. For R the


                                                              38
expected utility of a random policy (using the Matthews normalized policy function) is:
Rz R                      Rr x        R z 2r x        (r z )2
  z
      (x ; r )f ( x )dx =   z 2z
                                 dx +  r   2z
                                               dx =     2z
                                                              which must be negative for all z > r.
      Rz                         R`             Rz x            z )2
For L z L (x; `)f (x)dx = z x 2z2` dx + ` 2z         dx = (`+  2z
                                                                     which also must be negative for
all   z < `. Hence the President chooses the status quo rather than a random policy.

      The following is a subgame perfect set of policy choices and proposals in Period 2.

Proposition 5. (Bureaucrat Proposal and Presidential Policy Choice in Period 2). The
President sets ...nal policy
                8
                >
                >
                >
                > p if i'succeeded
                <
           xF
            2 =   xB if i'failed, B succeeded, and xB 2 [minfq; ti g; maxfq; ti g]
                >
                >
                >
                >
                : q otherwise


The bureaucrat's policy proposal is
                                8
                                >
                                >
                                >
                                > b if B succeeded, i = R and b < tR
                                <
                           xB
                            2 =   tR if B succeeded, i = R and b tR
                                >
                                >
                                >
                                >
                                : q if B failed or i = L


Proof. Part 1, Presidential choice. If the President'
                                                    s proposal e¤ort succeeded, he can act
as the Dictator in a Dictator game. Accordingly, he orders the implementation of his own
ideal policy, r if i = R and ` if i = L. If the President'
                                                         s proposal e¤ort failed but the Bu-
reaucrat'
        s succeeded, the President is in the position of the receiver in a Romer-Rosenthal
take-it-or-leave-it (TILI) game: he accepts any policy proposal that is as good or better than
the status quo ( i (xB )     0. The set [minfq; ti g; maxfq; ti g] indicates all those policies. If the
                                                       i
President failed and Bureaucrat succeeded but              (xB ) < 0 the President rejects the proposal
so that q prevails. From the No Guessing Lemma, if neither proposal attempt succeeded the
President will not choose a ...nal policy at random so the status quo q again continues. Part
2, the Bureaucrat'
                 s policy proposal. The Bureaucrat makes her proposal before knowing


                                                  39
whether the President'
                     s proposal e¤ort succeeded. And, if the Bureaucrat succeeds, the util-
ity value of her proposal is veri...able for the President. Given these facts and the President'
                                                                                               s
...nal policy choice strategy in the prior Proposition, an successful zealous Bureaucrat has
a weakly dominant strategy to make a proposal as if she were the proposer in a Romer-
Rosenthal TILI game (the strategy is strictly dominant when eR < 1). That is, a successful
                                                               B
zealous Bureaucrat o¤ers the proposal that maximizes               (x) among those proposals that
the President will accept if his proposal e¤ort failed but B '
                                                             s succeeded, namely the set of
policies [minfq; ti g; maxfq; ti g]. The indicated o¤ers follow (see Romer and Rosenthal 1978).
If the Bureaucrat'
                 s proposal e¤ort failed the President will not accept any proposal from the
Bureaucrat other than q so the Bureaucrat may as well propose q (no proposal is equiva-
lent to recommending q ). Note that if P is an L-President, there is no proposal other than
q that the Bureaucrat could recommend that L would accept so B might as well propose
q . If B is a slacker she does not care about policies and may as well follow the indicated
strategy; if the slacker undertakes no e¤ort, she can only propose q (which is equivalent to
no recommendation).

    The proposal strategy is e¤ectively unique in the following sense. Unsuccessful bureau-
crats (which will include all slackers in equilibrium) could propose a random policy knowing
that their proposal will be rejected by the President who will understand that it is a random
proposal; but a random proposal is thus equivalent to proposing q .
    The following Corollary indicates the path of play with respect to exits.

Corollary 6. (Equilibrium exits in Period 2) If P 's proposal e¤ort fails, B does not exit. If
L's proposal e¤ort succeeds, B exits. If R's proposal e¤ort succeeds, Region 1 B 's exit but
Region 2-4 B 's do not.

Proof. Follows from the Stay/go Proposition and the Policy Choice Proposition. That is, if
                                     B
 s e¤ort succeeds, xF = ` and
L'                                       (`) = ` < 0 while exiting brings B a utility of 0; if R'
                                                                                                s
                              B                                              B
e¤ort succeeds xF = r and         (r) = 2b    r < 0 for Regime 1 B , but         (r) = 2b   r > 0 for


                                                  40
                     B
Regime 3 B and           (r) = r > 0 for Regimes 3 and 4 B . If President'
                                                                         s e¤ort fails then either
                                        B
 s search fails and xF = q and
B'                                          (q ) = 0 for all B (so don'
                                                                      t exit), or B '
                                                                                    s e¤ort succeeds
                     B
and xF = b with          (b) = b > 0 for all B .

       Reaction Functions in E¤ ort in Period 2.-- In light of the above results the ex-
pected utility of a zealous B after the election but prior to undertaking proposal e¤ort is:
(B1)
                              8
                              >
                              > (1 eR      B
                                                      eB
                                                           2
                                                               if i = R and b in Region 1
                              >       2 ) e2 b         2
                              >
                              >
                              >
                              >                                                   2
                              >
                              > eR (2b r) + (1        eR    B
                                                       2 ) e2 b              eB       if i = R and b in Region 2
                              >
                              < 2                                             2
                                                                2
EuB   B i
  2 (e2 ; e2 ; p; b; = 1) =     eR
                                 2 r + (1    eR    B
                                               2 )e2 b     eB        if i = R and b in Region 3
                              >
                              >
                                                            2
                              >
                              >
                              >
                              > eR           eR    B
                                                               eB
                                                                    2
                                                                         if i = R and b in Region 4
                              >  2 r + (1      2 )e 2r          2
                              >
                              >
                              >
                              :         2
                                    eB
                                     2    if i = L


       The similar expected utility of a slacker B is:


                                                                         2
                                      EuB   B
                                        2 (e2 ; = 0) =              eB
                                                                     2




       The expected utility of R is:
                                  8
                                  >
                                  >                              2
                                  >
                                  > eR
                                     2 r + (1   eR    B
                                                  2 )e2 b    eR
                                                              2    if b in Regions 1 or 2
                                  <
                                                                         2
           EuR   R B
             2 (e2 ; e2 ; r; b) =   eR
                                     2 r + (1   eR    B
                                                  2 )e2 (2r   b)     eR    if b in Region 3
                                  >
                                  >
                                                                      2
                                  >
                                  >
                                  : eR r    eR
                                                2
                                                   if b in Region 4
                                     2        2



       The expected utility of L is


                                                                         2
                                      EuL   L         L
                                        2 (e2 ; `) = e2 j`j         eL
                                                                     2




       Using these expected utilities one may straightforwardly derive reaction functions in
e¤ort for the actors. These are:




                                                    41
                                    8
                                    >
                                    >   (1 eR2 )b
                                    >
                                    >      2
                                                     if i = R,         = 1, and Regions 1, 2, or 3 B
                                    <
(B2)            eB   i
                 2 (e2 ; b; r ) =             (1        eR
                                                         2 )r if i = R,       = 1, and Region 4 B
                                    >
                                    >
                                    >
                                    >
                                    :                                  0 otherwise



                                          8
                                          >
                                          >    r eB2 b
                                          >
                                          >      2
                                                          if     = 1 and b in Regions 1 and 2
                                          <
                                               r eB
(B3)                   eR   B
                        2 (e2 ; r; b) =
                                                  2 (2r b)
                                                                 if     = 1 and b in Region 3 B
                                          >
                                          >         2
                                          >
                                          >
                                          :    r
                                                   if     = 0 or        = 1 and b in Region 4 B
                                               2




                                                                        j`j
(B4)                                                       eL
                                                            2 (`) =
                                                                         2

       The reaction functions eB   i        i B
                               2 (e2 ) and e2 (e2 ) (Equations B2, B3, and B4) may be solved

simultaneously to derive the equilibrium proposal e¤orts:

                             8
                             >
                             >      2r b2 b(2 r)
                                         ; 4 b2           if i = R,        = 1; and b in Regions 1 and 2
                             >
                             >      4 b2
                             >
                             >
                             >
                             <       2r+b2 2br
                                               ; b(2 r)
                                     4+b2 2br 4+b2 2br
                                                                      if i = R,   = 1; and b in Region 3
(B5)         ei    B
              2 ; e2     =
                             >
                             >            r r(2 r)
                             >
                             >            2
                                            ; 2                if i = R,      = 1; and b in Region 4
                             >
                             >
                             >
                             :                     p
                                                   2
                                                     ;0    otherwise (i = L and/or          = 0)


       Note that these values require 0                    b < 2 and 0            r   1. The former is the duopoly
stability condition (see e.g.,Dixit 1986). The latter is necessary to restrict eB
                                                                                2 in [0; 1].



                                          C        The Game in Period 1

       We ...rst consider B '
                            s expected utility conditional on the outcome of the Period 2 election
and the expenditure of e¤orts ei    B
                               2 ; e2 . Call this expected utility EuB
                                                                     2 jP . First, if L is

elected EuB
          2 jL = 0 since B will quit if L'
                                         s proposal e¤ort succeeds and only q can prevail


                                                                  42
             B'           s Continuation Value from Staying (V(0))
              s Location B'
                                          b2 (2 r)2
               Region 1                    (4 b2 )2
                                               2b5 br4 4b3 (2+r)+b2 (4+3r2 )+16br 8r2
                 Region 2                                       (4 b2 )2
                                          b4 r 4b3 r2 +b2 (4+3r2 +4r3 ) 4br2 4br2 (2+r)+8r2
                 Region 3                                    (4+b2 2br)2
                                                             r 2 (6 4r +r 2 )
                 Region 4                                           4

Table 1: Continuation Values to Bureaucrat From Remaining in Government Employment

if L'
    s proposal e¤ort fails (since B will not have expended e¤ort, reecting the fact that L
will not accept any proposal B prefers to q ). Second, if B is a slacker then her expected
utility is also 0 since she receives no utility for policy and will not exert proposal e¤ort.
Third, if R is elected and B is a zealot, then B '
                                                 s expected utility varies by region as shown
in Equation B1. Substituting Period 2 equilibrium e¤orts (Equation B5) in the appropriate
portions of Equation B1 yields a zealous B '
                                           s expected utility conditional on the election of
                                                  2      2                      5   4     3      2    2 )+16br
                                                   b (2 r)             2b br 4b (2+r)+b (4+3r                    8r2
R. Via algebra EuB     2 jR are: Region 1: (4 b2 )2 ; Region 2:                      (4 b2 )2
                                                                                                                       ;
          b4 r 4b3 r2 +b2 (4+3r2 +4r3 ) 4br2 4br2 (2+r)+8r2                 r2 (6 4r+r2 )
Region 3:                     (4+b2 2br)2
                                                            ; and Region 4:       4
                                                                                          .
     We now consider the continuation value to B at the end of Period 1. The continuation
value of the game to B at the end of Period 1 depends on her stay/go decision in Period 1
(g1 ). If she goes (g1 = 1), then her continuation value V (1) = 0. Similarly, if she is a slacker
she stays (g1 = 1) but her continuation value V (0) = 0. However if she is a zealot who stays
in Period 1, her continuation value V (0) =                  EuB
                                                               2 jR + (1                )EuB
                                                                                           2 jL (recall that       is
the probability an L-president is elected). As noted immediately above, EuB
                                                                          2 jL = 0 hence

V (0) =     EuB
              2 jR :The continuation values V (0) of the game for zealous B are shown in

Table 1.

Remark 7. In Table 1, V (0)          0:

Proof. V (0) reects optimal stay/go and work decisions by a zealous Bureaucrat in Period 2.
B can always assure herself zero net utility in Period 2 by not working and quitting for any
election realization or equilibrium policy e¤ort by R or L. Hence, any equilibrium choices
in Period 2 by B must a¤ord B expected net utility of at least 0 prior to Period 2.

                                                      43
Proposition 8. (Stay/go strategy in Period 1). The Bureaucrat's stay/go strategy in Period
1 is:                                     8
                                          >
                                          < 1 if   B
                                 F
                                                       (xF
                                                         1 ; b) + V (0) < 0
                            g1 (x1 ; b) =
                                          >
                                          :            0 otherwise

Proof. B '
         s Period 1 e¤ort costs are sunk at the stay/go decision, hence only the policy
impact of xF
           1 and the continuation value matters. If B quits (g1 = 1) her policy utility is 0
                                                                              B
and her continuation value V (1) = 0. If she stays (g1 = 0) she receives          (xF
                                                                                    1 ) + V (0): The

comparison of these two utility values determines the strategy.

Proposition 9. (Policy Choice and Recommendation in Period 1) The President's ...nal
policy selection strategy and the Bureaucrat's policy proposal strategy in Period 1 are the
same as in Period 2.

Proof. Given a future-is-now president, the President'
                                                     s ...nal policy choice in Period 1 must
be the same as in Period 2. In addition, no deviation from B '
                                                             s Period 2 proposal strategy
could be pro...table for B in Period 1, as B recommends the most pro...table policy that an
unsuccessful P will accept. Hence the earlier Proposition also describes Presidential ...nal
policy choice and Bureaucrat'
                            s policy proposal strategies in Period 1.

        Given the two previous propositions and the fact that V (0) > 0, the following corollary
is straightforward.




                                                   44
Corollary 10. (Actual Stay/Go in Period 1). In Period 1
     8      8
     >
     >      >
            < L is president, L succeeded and j`j > V (0)
     >
     >
     >
     > 1 if
     >
     >      >
     >
     >      : R is president, R succeeded, b lies in Region 1 and 2b r + V (0) < 0
     >
     >      8                     8
     >
     >
     >
     >      >
            >                     >
                                  < L'failed
     >
     >      >
            >
     <      >
            > L is president and
            >
            >                     >
g1 =        >
            >                     : L succeeded but j`j V (0)
     >
     >      >
            <                     8
     >
     >
     >
     > 0 if                       >
                                  >
     >
     >      >                     >
                                  >  R failed
     >
     >      >
            >                     <
     >
     >      >
            >
     >
     >      >
            > R is president and     R succeeded but b lies in Regions 2-4
     >
     >      >
            >                     >
                                  >
     >
     >      >
            >                     >
                                  >
     :      :                     : R succeeded, b lies in Region 1 but 2b r + V (0)                             0

                                                    B
Proof. Recall that B will exit if and only if           (xF
                                                          1 )+ V (0) < 0. Recall as well that V (0) > 0:
                                                                           B                             B
                       s proposal e¤ort failed, xF
If L is president and L'                         1 = q so                      (xF
                                                                                 1 ) = 0 and thus            (xF
                                                                                                               1)+
                                                                  B
               s proposal e¤ort succeeded, xF
V (0) > 0. If L'                            1 = ` and                 (xF
                                                                        1 ) = ` < 0 for all B . So B stays

or goes as j`j                                   s proposal e¤ort failed, either xF
                 > V (0). If R is president and R'                                1 = q (when

 s e¤ort failed), xF
B'                                                          F
                   1 = b for a successful Region 1-3 B; or x1 = 2r for a successful Region
                            B                 B
4 B . In all these cases        (xF
                                  2)   0 so       (xF
                                                    2 ) + V (0) > 0 so B stays. If R is president and
                                                                      B
 s proposal e¤ort succeeded, xF
R'                            1 = r . By construction                     (r )    0 for all B in Regions 2-4
                 B                                                                        B
so for such B        (xF
                       1 ) + V (0) > 0 and they stay. And, by construction,                   (r) = 2b        r<0
for all B in Region 1. Region 1 B then stays or goes as 2b                 r + V (0)    < 0. These exhaust
all the cases.

     The corollary identi...es two situations in which Period 1 zealous B might quit: 1) when
L is president, L'
                 s proposal e¤ort succeeded, and ` + V (0) < 0, and 2) when R is president,
R'
 s e¤ort succeeded, b lies in Region 1, and 2b            r + V (0) < 0:The comparative static results
in the text on when quitting is "more likely" consider the e¤ects of changes in exogenous
variables on the magnitudes of ` + V (0) and 2b             r + V (0), respectively.

Remark 11. (WTO) For b in all four regions, ` + V (0) is increasing in                         and decreasing
in j`j.


                                                     45
Proof. From inspection of Table 1, V (0) is increasing in                   in all four regions. V (0) is not a
function of ` and ` < 0 so ` + V (0) is decreasing for b in all four regions.

Remark 12. (IMD) A small group of bureaucrats in Region 1 do not exit when R's proposal
e¤ort succeeds.

Proof. In Region 1 the stay condition after a successful R imposes xF
                                                                    1 = r is 2b                                      r+
                                                     b2 (2 r)2                                           b2 (2 r)2
V (0)        0:Recall that in Region 1 V (0) =        (4 b2 )2
                                                                 : Note that limb! r
                                                                                   2
                                                                                     2b             r+    (4 b2 )2
                                                                                                                      =
4(2 r2 )r2
(16 r2 )2
               > 0, so as b approaches the upper bound of Region 1 (r=2) there is a group of
bureaucrats who do not exit. A closed form solution for b such that b                               r + V (0) = 0 is
intractable but numerical solutions indicate that for plausible parameter values the range of
staying bureaucrats is very small.

Remark 13. (IMD) For b in Region 1, 2b                     r + V (0) is increasing in , increasing in b,
and decreasing in r.

                                                                    b2 (2 r)2                             2      2
Proof. Recall that 0         b < 2; 0         r   1, and V (0) =     (4 b2 )2
                                                                                :Hence   @
                                                                                          @
                                                                                              (2b    r + b(4(2 b2r))2 ) =
b2 (2 r)2           @             b2 (2 r)2            2b(4+b2 )(2 r)2               @                   b2 (2 r)2
 (4 b2 )2
               0;   @b
                       (2b   r+    (4 b2 )2
                                              ) = 2+       (4 b2 )3
                                                                         > 0; and    @r
                                                                                        (2b         r+    (4 b2 )2
                                                                                                                     )=
        2b2 (2 r)
  1     (4 b2 )2
                     < 0:

      We now consider expected utilities in Period 1 in order to derive reaction functions.
Assume an R president. Recall we assume a zealous B in Period 1. From above, B in
Regions 2-4 will not quit in Period 1. Hence, prior to undertaking e¤ort, the expected utility
for B in Regions 2-4 is:
                             8
                             >
                             >                                             2
                             >
                             > eR
                                1 (2b   r) + 1 eR      B
                                                  1 e1 b + V (0)     eB1      if b is in Region 2
                             <
                                                                     2
      EuB   B R
        1 (e1 ; e1 ; r; b) =       eR r + 1 eR   eB  b + V (0)   eB      if b is in Region 3
                             >
                             >
                                    1          1   1              1
                             >
                             >
                             :    eR         eR  B
                                                                  eB
                                                                      2
                                                                          if b is in Region 4
                                   1r+ 1      1 e1 2r + V (0)      1



      For B in Region 1 there are two possibilities: 1) If R is successful, B exits; 2) If R is




                                                         46
successful, B stays. Hence:
                       8
                       >
                       < eR (2b r) + 1 eR eB b + V (0)                                    2
  B B R                   1                1   1                                     eR
                                                                                      1       if Region 1 B stays when R succeeds
Eu1 (e1 ; e1 ; r; b) =
                       >
                       :       1 eR    B
                                                    eR
                                                                                 2
                                                                                     if Region 1 B quits when R succeeds
                                   1 (e1 b + V (0))  1



    For R:
                                 8
                                 >
                                 >                                               2
                                 >
                                 >  eR
                                     1r+ 1  eR   B
                                              1 e1 b                        eR
                                                                             1       if b is in Region 1 or 2
                                 <
                                                                                          2
       EuR
         1 (e R B
              1 ; e 1 ; r; b ) =   eR
                                    1r+ 1  eR   B
                                            1 e1 (2r                        b)       eR       if b is in Region 3
                                 >
                                 >
                                                                                      1
                                 >
                                 >
                                 :         eR     eR
                                                                    2
                                                                            if b is in Region 4
                                            1r      1



    Assume an L President. For B there are two possibilities: 1) If L is successful, B exits;
2) If L is successful, B stays. Hence:
                                    8
                                    >
                                    <                               2
                                          eL
                                           1 ` + V (0)         eB
                                                                1           if b stays when L succeeds
         EuB   B L
           1 (e1 ; e1 ; `; b)   =
                                    >
                                    : 1          eL            eB
                                                                        2
                                                                             if b quits when L succeeds
                                                  1 V (0)       1



    For L:
                                                                                      2
                                    EuL   L B               L
                                      1 (e1 ; e1 ; `; b) = e1 j`j                eL
                                                                                  1


    Using these expected utilities one may straightforwardly derive reaction functions in
e¤ort for the actors. These are:


                                    8
                                    >
                                    >   (1 eR1 )b
                                    >
                                    >      2
                                                    if i = R and b is in Regions 1, 2, or 3
                                    <
(C1)            eB   i
                 1 (e1 ; b; r ) =           (1      eR
                                                     1 )r if i = R and b is in Region 4
                                    >
                                    >
                                    >
                                    >
                                    :                          0 if i = L




                                                          47
                                           8
                                           >
                                           >       r eB1 b
                                           >
                                           >         2
                                                             if b is in Regions 1 and 2
                                           <
                                                     r eB
(C2)                    eR   B
                         1 (e1 ; r; b) =
                                                        1 (2r b)
                                                                          if b is in Region 3
                                           >
                                           >              2
                                           >
                                           >
                                           :                 r
                                                                 if b is in Region 4
                                                             2




                                                                      j`j
(C3)                                                 eL
                                                      1 (`) =
                                                                       2

       The reaction functions ei (eB ) and eB (ei ) (Equations C1 , C2 and C3) may be solved
simultaneously to derive the equilibrium policymaking e¤orts:

                           8
                           >
                           >   2r b2 b(2 r)
                                    ; 4 b2              if i = R,           = 1; and b is in Regions 1 and 2
                           >
                           >   4 b2
                           >
                           >
                           >
                           <    2r+b2 2br
               i   B
                                          ; b(2 r)
                                4+b2 2br 4+b2 2br
                                                                   if i = R,         = 1; and b is in Region 3
(C4)          e ;e     =
                           >
                           >         r r(2 r)
                           >
                           >         2
                                       ; 2                if i = R,            = 1; and b is in Region 4
                           >
                           >
                           >
                           :                   p
                                               2
                                                 ;0       otherwise (i = L and/or                       = 0)


       As in Period 2, these values require 0                    b < 2 and 0             r       1.
       Expected policy in a period is simply ei p +(1 ei )eB xB and may readily be calculated
using the above results.
       Finally, consider the expected utility of an R President at the beginning of Period 1.
                                                                      R                      i                              2
As noted in the text this is EuR   R    B
                               1 (e1 ; e1 ; b) =                          (r)(eR ) +             (xB ) 1    eR   eB    eR       .
Using the de...nition of policy utility and optimal policy recommendations and choices, this
is:
                          8
                          >
                          > reR    eR
                                               2
                                                    if b < 0 (L                side Bureaucrat)
                          >
                          >
                          >
                          >
                          >
                          < reR + b 1                                           2
        R R      B
                                                   eR     eB              eR        if 0 < b < r (Regions 1 and 2)
      Eu1 (e1 ; e1 ; b) =
                          >
                          > reR + (2r          b) 1              eR       eB        eR
                                                                                             2
                                                                                                 if r   b   2r (Region 3)
                          >
                          >
                          >
                          >
                          >
                          : reR                2
                                   eR               if b > 2r (Region 4)


                                                             48
    and using Equation C4
(C5)                  8
                      >
                      >   r2
                               if b < 0 (L   side Bureaucrat)
                      >
                      >   4
                      >
                      >
                      >
                      <   8b2 (1 r) b4 (1r)+4r2
                                    2
                                  (b 4)2        if 0 < b < r (Regions 1 and         2)
EuR   R    B
  1 (e1 ; e1 ; b) =
                      >
                      >     b (1 r)+16b(1 r)r+4b3 (1 r)r+4r2 +4b2 ( 2=2r r2 +r3 )
                             4
                                                                                if r     b   2r (Region 3)
                      >
                      >                        (4+b2 4br)2
                      >
                      >
                      >
                      :   r2
                          4
                               if b > 2r (Region 4)


    Equation C5 is displayed by the heavy line in the left-hand panel of Figure 6.


                                             REFERENCES

Aberbach, Joel, Robert Putnam, and Bert Rockman. 1981. Bureaucrats and Politicians in
Western Democracies. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Aghion, Phillipe and Jean Tirole. 1997. "Formal and Real Authority in Organizations,"
Journal of Political Economy 105(1): 1-29.

Baker, George, Robert Gibbons, and Kevin Murphy. 1999. "Informal Authority in Organi-
zations," Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15:56-73.

Bertelli, Anthony. 2007. "Determinants of Bureaucratic Turnover Intention: Evidence from
the Department of the Treasury," Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory 17:
235-258.

Bertelli, Anthony M., and David E. Lewis. 2013. "Policy Inuence, Agency-Speci...c Exper-
tise, and Exit in the Federal Service."Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory
23(2): 223-45.

Bolton, Alex, John De Figueiredo, and David Lewis. 2016. "Elections, Ideology, and Turnover
in the U.S. Federal Government," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
#22932.



                                                      49
Bueno de Mesquita, Ethan and Matthew Stephenson. 2007. "Regulatory Quality Under
Imperfect Oversight," American Political Science Review 101(3): 605-620.

Bulow, Jeremy, John Geanakoplos, and Paul Klemperer. 1985. "Multi-market Oligopoly:
Strategic Substitutes and Strategic Complements," Journal of Political Economy 93:488-
511.

Burke, John P. 1992. The National Security Advisor and Presidential Decision Making. Col-
lege Station, TX: Texas A&M University Press.

Callander, Steven. 2011. "Searching for Good Policies," American Political Science Review
105(4): 643-662.

Cama, Timothy. 2017. "White House details plan to roll back environmental regs," The
Hill, July 20, 2017, found at: http://thehill.com/policy/energy-environment/342910 -white-
house-details-environmental-deregulatory -plan

Cameron, Charles M. 2000. Veto Bargaining; Presidents and the Politics of Negative Power.
Cambridge University Press.

Cameron, Charles M., John M. de Figueiredo, and David E. Lewis. 2016. "Public Sector
Personnel Economics: Wages, Promotions, and the Competence-Control Tradeo¤," Advances
in Strategic Managment, forthcoming.

Chappell,   Bill.   2017.   National   Public    Radio,   November   3,   2017,   found   at:
https://www.npr.org/sections/ thetwo- way /2017/11/03/561797675/ im-the-only-one-that-
matters-trump-says-of-state-dept-job-vacancies

Chiou, Fang-Yi and Lawrence S. Rothenberg. 2017. The Enigma of Presidential Power.
Cambridge University Press.




                                                50
Clinton, Joshua D., Anthony Bertelli, Christian Grose, David E. Lewis and David C. Nixon.
2012. "Separated Powers in the United States: The Ideology of Agencies, Presidents and
Congress." American Journal of Political Science 56(2): 341-354.

Cohen, Roger. 2017. "The Desperation of our Diplomats," New York Times, July 28,
2017, found at https://www.nytimes.com /2017/07/28/opinion/sunday/trump-tillerson-
state-department-diplomats.html

Cooper,      Helen.   2018.    "Jim     Mattis,     Defense    Secretary,       Resigns    in
Rebuke     of    Trump'
                      s       Worldview,"     New     York    Times,        December      20.
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/20/us/politics/jim-mattis-defense-secretary-
trump.html

Cooper, Phillip J. 2002. By Order of the President: The Use and Abuse of Executive Direct
Action. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas.

Davidson, Joe. 2017a. "EPA won'
                              t be able to do the `
                                                  right thing' under Trump,
says latest protesting o¢ cial," Washington Post,         August 1,     2017,     found at:
https://www.washingtonpost.com /news/powerpost/ wp/2017/08/01/epa-doing-the-right-
thing-is-not -possible-under-trump-says-resigning-o¢ cial/ ?utm_term=.f9c7d302ac93

Davidson, Joe. 2017b. "EPA Sta¤er leaves with a bang, blasting agency policies under
Trump," Washington Post, April 7, 2017, found at: https://www.washingtonpost.com/news
/powerpost/wp/2017/04/07/epa-sta¤er -leaves-with-a-bang-blasting- agency-policies-under-
trump/ ?utm_term=.317ae66cdbb4

Deering, Christopher J. and Forrest Maltzman. 1999. "The Politics of Executive Orders:
Legislative Constraints on Presidential Power," Political Research Quarterly 52(4):767-83.

de Figueiredo, John M. and Edward H. Stiglitz. 2017. "Signing Statements and Presiden-
tializing Legislative History," Administrative Law Review 69(4): 841-868.


                                            51
Dewatripont, Mathias, Ian Jewitt, and Jean Tirole. 1999. "The Economics of Career Con-
cerns, Part II: Application to Missions and Accountability of Government Agencies," Review
of Economic Studies 66:199-217.

Dickinson, Matthew J. 1997. Bitter Harvest: FDR, Presidential Power and the Growth of
the Presidential Branch. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Dixit, Avinash. 1986. "Comparative Statics for Oligopoly," International Economic Review
107-122.

Doherty, Kathleen, David E. Lewis, and Scott Limbocker. 2016. "Politics or Performance in
Executive Turnover: Politicizing Agency Choke Points," USC Price School of Public A¤airs
Working Paper.

Downs, Anthony. Inside Bureaucracy. Boston: Little, Brown.

Epstein, David, and Sharyn O'
                            Halloran. 1999. Delegating Powers. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.

Fisher, Louis. 2000. Congressional Abdication on War and Spending. College Station, TX:
Texas A&M University Press.

Gailmard, Sean. 2002. "Expertise, Subversion, and Bureaucratic Dscretion," Journal of Law,
Economics, and Organization 18(2): 536-555.

Gailmard, Sean and John Patty. 2007. "Slackers and Zealots: Civil Service, Policy Discretion,
and Bureaucratic Expertise," American Journal of Political Science 51: 873-889.

Hart, John. 1992. The Presidential Branch: From Washington to Clinton. Chatham, NJ:
Chatham House.

Higgs, Robert. 1987. Crisis and Leviathan: Critical Episodes in the Growth of American
Government. Oxford University Press.


                                             52
Hirschman, Albert O. 1970. Exit, Voice, and Loyalty: Responses to Decline in Firms, Orga-
nizations, and States. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Howell, William. 2003. Power Without Persuasion: The Politics of Direct Presidential Ac-
tion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Huber, John D., and Charles R. Shipan. 2002. Deliberate Discretion? New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Kessler, David. 2002. A Question of Intent: A Great American Battle with a Deadly Industry.
Public A¤airs.

Kranz, Gene. 2001. Failure Is Not An Option: Mission Control from Mercury to Apollo 13
and Beyond. Simon and Schuster.

Lee, Soo-Young, and Andrew B. Whitford. 2008. "Exit, Voice, Loyalty, and Pay: Evidence
from the Public Workforce." Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory 18(4):
647-71.

Lewis, David E. 2008. The Politics of Presidential Appointments: Political Control and
Bureaucratic Performance. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Lewis,     David      E.        and    Mark   Richardson.    2017.     "Personnel     System     Under
Stress:     Results        of    the   2014   Survey    on   the     Future   of    Government    Ser-
vice," Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions Working Paper 2-2017
http://www.vanderbilt.edu/csdi/research/lewis_richardson_2014sfgs.pdf (accessed April
30 2017)

Light, Paul. C. 1982. The President's Agenda. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University
Press.

Lowi, Theodore. J. 1985. The Personal President: Power Invested, Promise Unful...lled.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

                                                   53
Lynch,   Colum and Robbie Gramer.           2017.   "With Departure of      Top Lawyer,
State Department Exodus Continues," Foreign Policy,            August 30,    2017,   found
at:   http://foreignpolicy.com/2017/08/30/with-departure-of-top-lawyer-state-department-
exodus-continues/

Matthews, Steven. 1989. "Veto Threats: Rhetoric in a Bargaining Game," Quarterly Journal
of Economics 104(2):347-369.

Mayer, Kenneth R. 2001. With the Stroke of a Pen: Executive Orders and Presidential
Power. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Milkis, Sidney M. and Michael Nelson. 2012. The American Presidency: Origins and Devel-
opment, 1776-2011, 6th ed. Washington, DC: CQ Press.

Moe, Terry. 1985. "The Politicized Presidency," in John Chubb and Paul Peterson (eds) The
New Direction in American Politics. Brooking Institution Press.

Moe, Terry. 2013. "Delegation, Control, and the Study of Public Bureaucracy," pp. 1148-
1181 in Gibbons and Roberts (eds) The Handbook of Organizational Economics, Princeton
University Press.

Nathan, Richard P. 1975. The Plot that Failed: Nixon and the Administrative Presidency.
New York, NY: John Wiley.

Neustadt, Richard E. 1954. "Presidency and Legislation: The Growth of Central Clearance,"
American Political Science Review 48(3):641-71.

Perry, James L. and Lois R. Wise. 1990. "The Motivational Bases of Public Service," Public
Administration Review 50:367-373.

Polsby, Nelson W. 1984. Political innovation in America: The Politics of Policy Initiation.
Yale University Press.



                                            54
Richardson, Mark D. 2017. "Politization and Expertise:                Exit, E¤ort, and In-
vestment,"   Manuscript,   Department    of    Political   Science,    Vanderbilt   University
(https://media.wix.com/ugd/dfd831_d827d4e9c77641ce90c73e2bb3799c18.pdf,              accessed
April 4, 2017).

Romer, Thomas and Howard Rosenthal. 1978. "Political Resource Allocation, Controlled
Agendas, and the Status Quo," Public Choice 33: 27-43.

Rudalevige, Andrew. 2002. Managing the President's Program: Centralization and Legislative
Policy Formulation, 1949-1996. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Rudalevige, Andrew. 2005. The New Imperial Presidency: Renewing Presidential Power
after Watergate. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.

Schlesinger, Arthur M. 1973. The Imperial Presidency. Boston, MA: Houghton Mi- in Co.

Shapiro, Carl and Joseph Stiglitz. 1984. "Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline
Devise," American Economic Review 433-444.

Stephenson, Matthew C. 2007. "Bureaucratic Decision Costs and Endogenous Agency Ex-
pertise," Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 23(2):469-98.

Stephenson, Barbara. 2017. "Time to Ask Why," Foreign Service Journal 94(10): 10.

Steinzor, Rena. 2012. "The Case for Abolishing Centralized White House Regulatory Re-
view," University of Michigan Journal of Environmental & Administrative Law 1(1): 209-86.

Waterman, Richard W. 2009. "The Administrative Presidency, Unilateral Power, and the
Unitary Executive Theory." Presidential Studies Quarterly 39(1):5-9.

Weko, Thomas J. 1995. The Politicizing Presidency: The White House Personnel O¢ ce,
1948-1994. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas.




                                              55
                                              Notes

       We thank Scott Ashworth, Alex Bolton, Ernesto Dal Bo, Bob Gibbons, Keith Krehbiel,
Bob Powell, Ken Shepsle, Pablo Spiller, Steve Tadelis, Oliver Williamson, seminar partic-
ipants at the University of Chicago Harris School, Stanford Graduate School of Business,
the Institute for Advanced Study, the Haas/Sloan Conference on the Law and Economics
of Organizations at the University of California Berkeley, and the Vanderbilt Conference on
Political Institutions, and in particular, David Lewis for astute comments and his leadership
in a larger project of which this paper is a part. We gratefully acknowledge the ...nancial
support of the National Science Foundation (SES 1262230, SES 1061512, SES 1061600, ACI
1443014) and the Smith Richardson Foundation. Cameron thanks K. Shoji for gracious
hospitality during the initial drafting of the paper; de Figueiredo thanks the Institute for
Advanced Study for support during the early drafting of the paper. Neither author has a
conict of interest with respect to the research reported here.
   1
       Cohen 2017 quoting Dana Shell Smith, former ambassador to Qatar.
   2
       Davidson 2017b quoting a letter from Mike Cox.
   3
       The model in the present paper di¤ers from that in Aghion and Tirole 1997 in four re-
spects: it features two periods not one, spatial policy preferences rather than goods-oriented
preferences, heterogeneous agents rather than homogeneous one, and agents have the ability
to quit their jobs.
   4
       On the motivation of public sector bureaucrats, see inter alia Bertelli 2007; Dewatripont
et al. 1999; Downs 1967; Gailmard and Patty 2007; Perry and Wise 1990.
   5
       Policy sabotage is a su¢ ciently complex, analytically distinct topic to deserve its own
analysis, see e.g., Gailmard 2002.
   6
       The policy making literature is replete with case studies of policy innovation, though
most focus on successful attempts, e.g., Polsby 1984. Kessler 2002 examines a failed attempt.
   7
       This simple technology also conveniently sidesteps di¢ cult problems of information ex-
propriation and policy learning that arise in spatially-based principal-agent models. Callan-

                                                56
der 2011 provides a discussion.
   8
       For further discussion of stay/go decisions in policy contexts, see inter alia Bertelli and
Lewis 2013; Hirschman 1970; Lee and Whitford 2008.
   9
       We assume all zealous bureaucrats in a given agency have the same ideal policy. If one
zealot with ideal point b prefers to depart, all other zealots in the agency will as well. Hence,
the replacement must be a slacker.
  10
       Close readers will note that we abstract from wages. We return to wages, briey, in
Section VI.
  11
       On forward-looking bureaucrats see inter alia Lewis 2008; on the present orientation of
presidents, see Light 1982 and Lowi 1985.
  12
       The expected utility of zealous Bureaucrats to an R president is detailed in Equation
C5 in Appendix C and shown by the dark line in the left-hand panel of Figure 6.
  13
       If L is su¢ ciently close to 0, then fewer Region 1 zealous bureaucrats will quit after
the L president'
               s e¤ort succeeds, than after the R president'
                                                           s e¤ort succeeds. The relevant
conditions are: 1) V (0) + `      0 and 2) V (0) + ` > V (0) = 2b    r, for 0   b < r=2. Because
V (0) is so small for Region 1 bureaucrats, the ...rst requirement is quite stringent.
  14
       See the third line in Equation C4 in Appendix C.
  15
       See Equation A2 in Appendix A.
  16
       There is an additional scenario in which r < v r (where v r denotes the ideal policy of
the veto pivot) so the President is not constrained by Congress but some Region 3 and 4
Bureaucrats may be, if the president'
                                    s policy e¤ort fails but their'
                                                                  s succeeds.




                                                 57
