                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  AVOIDING TRAFFIC CONGESTION EXTERNALITIES? THE VALUE OF URGENCY

                                       Antonio Bento
                                        Kevin Roth
                                     Andrew R. Waxman

                                     Working Paper 26956
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26956


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2020




The authors thank Lawrence Goulder, Edson Severnini, Lowell Taylor, and Hendrik Wolff for
helpful comments as well as seminar participants at AERE 2015, Arizona State University,
Carnegie Mellon University, Cornell University, John Hopkins University, Kraks Fond Managing
Congestion Seminar, NBER Summer Institute, Simon Fraser University, Stanford University,
University of California at Davis, University of California at Irvine, University of Maryland,
Penn State University, and the University of Texas at Austin, WCERE 2018, ZEW. Finally, we
thank Stephanie Wiggins and Kathleen McCune at LA Metro for access to ExpressLanes
transaction data and Arthur T, Degaetano for weather data. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Antonio Bento, Kevin Roth, and Andrew R. Waxman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Avoiding Traffic Congestion Externalities? The Value of Urgency
Antonio Bento, Kevin Roth, and Andrew R. Waxman
NBER Working Paper No. 26956
April 2020
JEL No. D47,D61,D62,H23,L51,L91,Q58,R41

                                          ABSTRACT

In Becker (1965) and neoclassical microeconomic theory the value of time is a constant fraction
of the hourly wage. When taken to data, however, this value departs from theoretical predictions,
and appears to vary with the amount of time saved. By observing drivers on freeways opting to
enter toll lanes with high-frequency, time-varying prices that secure a minimum level-of-service,
we uncover a new and fundamental aspect of preferences for travel time savings related to
urgency. The presence of preferences for urgency, which reflect the fact that individuals often
face discrete penalties for being late, allows us to reconcile the pattern observed in the data with
neoclassical theory. Using a rich, repeated-transaction data and individual-level hedonic
estimation, we show that the value of urgency accounts for 87 percent of total willingness-to-pay
for time savings. As a result, ignoring the value of urgency in cost-benefit analysis severely
underestimates the true value of time savings that projects deliver, as such omission will typically
ignore non-trivial welfare gains to a potentially large number of individuals.

Antonio Bento                                    Andrew R. Waxman
Sol Price School of Public Policy                University of Texas at Austin
and Department of Economics                      awaxman@utexas.edu
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0626
and NBER
abento@usc.edu

Kevin Roth
Laurits R. Christensen Associates
800 University Bay Dr., Suite 400
Madison, WI 53705-2299
kdroth@lrca.com




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26956
                     Avoiding Traffic Congestion Externalities?
                                         The Value of Urgency

                    By ANTONIO BENTO, KEVIN ROTH, ANDREW WAXMAN*



         In Becker (1965) and neoclassical microeconomic theory the value
         of time is a constant fraction of the hourly wage. When taken to data,
         however, this value departs from theoretical predictions, and
         appears to vary with the amount of time saved. By observing drivers
         on freeways opting to enter toll lanes with high-frequency, time-
         varying prices that secure a minimum level-of-service, we uncover a
         new and fundamental aspect of preferences for travel time savings
         related to urgency. The presence of preferences for urgency, which
         reflects the fact that individuals often face discrete penalties for being
         late, allows us to reconcile the pattern observed in the data with
         neoclassical theory. Using a rich, repeated-transaction data and
         individual-level hedonic estimation, we show that the value of
         urgency accounts for 87 percent of total willingness-to-pay for time
         savings. As a result, ignoring the value of urgency in cost-benefit
         analysis severely underestimates the true value of time savings that
         projects deliver, as such omission will typically ignore non-trivial
         welfare gains to a potentially large number of individuals.
         JEL Codes: D47, D61, D62, H23, L51, L91, Q58, R41




   *
     Bento: University of Southern California and NBER (email: abento@usc.edu); Roth: Laurits R. Christensen Associates
(email: kdroth@lrca.com); Waxman: University of Texas at Austin (email: awaxman@utexas.edu). The authors thank
Lawrence Goulder, Edson Severnini, Lowell Taylor, and Hendrik Wolff for helpful comments as well as seminar participants
at AERE 2015, Arizona State University, Carnegie Mellon University, Cornell University, John Hopkins University, Kraks
Fond Managing Congestion Seminar, NBER Summer Institute, Simon Fraser University, Stanford University, University of
California at Davis, University of California at Irvine, University of Maryland, Penn State University, and the University of
Texas at Austin, WCERE 2018, ZEW. Finally, we thank Stephanie Wiggins and Kathleen McCune at LA Metro for access
to ExpressLanes transaction data and Arthur T, Degaetano for weather data.
                                                 I.         Introduction

   Since Becker (1965), the value of time has been defined as the opportunity cost
of time, and it is a fraction of an individual's hourly wage (Johnson, 1966; DeSerpa,
1971; Gronau, 1973). The value of time is also a key parameter used in cost-benefit
analysis and project evaluation, including in areas such as recreational demand
(Smith, 1981; Bockstael and McConnell, 1981; Phaneuf, Kling and Herriges,
2000), health improvements (Grossman, 1972; Murphy and Topel, 2006), road
infrastructure, pricing and the value of public transportation (Keeler and Small,
1977; Parry and Small, 2005; Anderson, 2014; Yang, Purevjav, and Li, 2020), and
of a variety of other government regulations, including those related to the use of
seatbelts and speed limits (Ashenfelter and Greenstone, 2004, Wolff, 2014; van
Benthem, 2015, Fisher and Gallagher, 2020).
   A direct consequence of Becker's (1965) framework is that the value of time is
constant. Does this theoretical conjecture hold empirically when taken to the
marketplace? Panel A of Figure 1 plots the kernel-smoothed estimates of the
willingness-to-pay (WTP) per hour against travel time saved for drivers that use
ExpressLanes in California. ExpressLanes allow for the possibility of entering a
faster lane in a freeway that secures a minimum speed, upon the payment of a toll
that varies almost in real-time.1 The Becker framework suggests that this estimate
of the WTP for time savings per hour should be a flat line, and equal to a fraction
of the hourly wage. In sharp contrast, data from the `marketplace' reveals a
surprising hyperbolic shape. Consistent with estimates found in the literature, when




   1
      In Panel A of Figure 1, the WTP per hour is calculated as the ratio of the toll paid and travel time saved (by taking the
trip in the ExpressLanes as opposed to an unpriced regular lane in the freeway). For presentation purposes, the figure is
truncated at $120 per hour but continues to substantially higher values. Appendix Figure B.1 shows the evolution of average
toll per mile over the AM peak during the first, third and sixth month of our sample, demonstrating considerable variation
individuals save substantial amounts of time, this WTP per hour tends towards fifty
percent of the hourly wage, roughly $10 per hour in the Los Angeles metropolitan
area (Small, 2012). But as the time saved decreases, the value of the WTP per hour
increases dramatically. Panel B of Figure 1 shows that these observations with
unusually high WTP for time savings are not outliers ­ rather, they form the bulk
of all uses of ExpressLanes. Seen on a per-hour basis, this WTP appears to be
absurd, and many orders of magnitude above widely accepted estimates of the value
of time (Small, 2012). For example, for the 10% of observations with time savings
less than 0.39 minutes, the implied WTP per hour, is $1,977.44, nearly 200 times
the standard estimate of the value of time.2
   For the shape of the WTP per hour displayed in Panel A of Figure 1 to be
plausible, either the valuation of time changes with the amount of time saved, which
is inconsistent with neoclassical microeconomic theory, or the simple Becker
(1965) framework for recovering the value of time misses important aspects of the
structure of individuals' preferences. Implicit in neoclassical microeconomic
theory is the assumption that all time is fungible. There are at least two potential
competing explanations that suggest otherwise: First, much of the recent behavioral
economics literature has demonstrated that not all dollars are fungible (Thaler and
Shefrin, 1981; Hastings and Shapiro, 2013; Sahm, Shapiro, and Slemrod, 2012),
and time should be no different than money (Leclerc, Schmitt, and Dubé, 1995).
Second, the presence of schedule constraints and resulting penalties for late arrival
may also make the valuation of time depart from a constant, and depend on the
context of trips (Small, 2012).




   2
     Appendix Table C.1 shows the distribution of average willingness-to-pay per hour in the data by decile of travel time
savings.




                                                             3
  The purpose of this paper is twofold: First, we aim to provide a potentially
plausible explanation for the observed pattern of the willingness to pay for travel
time savings observed in Panel A of Figure 1, and to reconcile this pattern with the
classical framework proposed by Becker (1965). Second, we aim to learn about the
structure of individual preferences, and to decompose the determinants of their
willingness to pay for time savings, while inferring their relative importance.
  We demonstrate that the bulk of the willingness to pay for travel time savings
when accessing ExpressLanes comes from what we term the value of urgency, as
opposed to the value of time or the value of reliability widely studied in the
literature (Small, 2012; Small, Winston and Yan, 2005; Brownstone and Small,
2005; Calfee and Winston, 2001; Calfee and Winston, 1998). As a consequence,
when schedule constraints are prevalent, failure to account for the value of urgency
in cost-benefit analysis severely underestimates the true value of time savings that
projects deliver. As we will document, such omission will typically ignore non-
trivial welfare gains to a potentially large number of drivers.
  We define the value of urgency as a discrete WTP to meet a schedule constraint,
recognizing that individuals often face penalties for being late that do not
necessarily scale up with the amount time that they are late. In other words, the
value of urgency reflects the valuation that drivers place in avoiding a penalty for
failing to meet a schedule constraint. For example, individuals face large penalties
when failing to arrive at the airport on time and, as a consequence, missing their
flights. Intuitively, in this case, saving one minute has a substantially different value
depending on whether the individual misses the plane or not. The value of that
minute needed to meet the schedule constraint can be substantial. Similarly,
because the structure of payments for daycare or lawyers' appointments are
typically made on an hourly basis, individuals pay for the hour whether they arrive
on time or late. Therefore, when faced with important schedule constraints and
penalties, individuals are likely willing to pay a substantial toll to enter the




                                            4
ExpressLanes as they help to ensure on-time arrival. Relative to an unpriced lane
of a freeway, the payment of this toll effectively allows drivers to `jump a queue'
and purchase the discrete amount of time needed to meet the schedule constraint
and avoid a penalty.3
   That individuals face schedule constraints is easy to appreciate and well
documented in the literature. Prior studies have attempted to estimate the value of
early, late and on-time arrivals (Small, 2012; Noland and Small, 1995). In fact,
Small (1982) notes that: "it can also be shown that the valuation of time savings
will vary by time of day depending on the interaction between scheduling
considerations and time-varying price or service quality" (p. 467). Still, we are the
first to recover estimates for the value of urgency for at least four reasons.
   First, most earlier studies that recover drivers' preferences for travel time savings,
including the value of time and reliability, rely on stated preference surveys,
sometimes combined with revealed preference data covering limited time periods,
usually just a few months (Small, Winston and Yan, 2005; Train and Wilson, 2008;
Brownstone and Small, 2005). Stated preference surveys typically solicit drivers'
WTP for travel time savings from choosing tolled over untolled lanes on an
`average day.' The fundamental problem with these surveys is that the value of
urgency may not emerge on a hypothetical `average' day or `average' trip, but
rather depend on the purpose of a specific trip and the penalty associated with
failing to meet specific schedule constraints.4




   3
      The value of urgency does not emerge exclusively in the context of transportation. Yet, it seems to have been largely
overlooked in the economics literature. Other examples where individuals may exhibit preferences for urgency include organ
donation, where individuals would likely reveal the value of urgency to pay for an organ that would save their life, especially
the closer they are to organ failure that threatens survival. Premium payments for faster processing of visas and passports
also provide another mechanism for individuals to reveal preferences for urgency.
    4
      More broadly Calfee, Winston and Stempski (2001) warn about the limitations of recovering value of time estimates
from stated preference data, particularly using overly restrictive models such as ordered probit, where the recovered values
of time may be implausibly small. A broader class of studies in environmental and natural resource economics considers the




                                                                5
   Second, even if a survey could recover an individuals' likelihood of being late
and the value of avoiding lateness to meet a schedule constraint, one should be
concerned whether respondents of stated preference surveys would be able to
precisely reveal valuations for rather small travel time savings like those
documented in Panel A of Figure 1.5 We overcome these two fundamental survey
design issues and data limitations of earlier studies by relying on a purely revealed
preference setting where we observe the actual repeated behavior of drivers in the
ExpressLanes with almost real-time varying tolls and different levels of congestion.
   Third, most prior studies that examined the value of tolled lanes have relied on
theoretical models often supplemented with simulations (Verhoef, et al., 1996;
Light, 2009; Hall, 2018; Hall, 2020; Hall and Savage, 2019) or econometric studies
of toll lanes on separate routes with limited variation in prices (Small, Winston and
Yan, 2005; Brownstone and Small, 2005).6 In both cases, tolls differ, at best, during
peak and off-peak periods leaving aggregate demand, and resulting levels of
congestion, unknown. Our concern is that, with such structure of tolls, drivers may
not be able to take advantage of tolled lanes to meet schedule constraints.
   The Los Angeles ExpressLanes program is novel because its tolls vary in almost
real-time, and importantly are set to assure that speeds never fall below a minimum
threshold. This toll structure resembles Vickrey's (1971) quality-of-service pricing
(which is analogous to level-of-service pricing in transportation), and the approach
laid out in De Vany (1976), De Vany and Saving (1977), Chao and Wilson (1987).




limitations and challenges of stated preferences approaches (Kling, Phaneuf and Zhao, 2012; Johnston, et al., 2017; Carson
and Hanemann, 2005).
   5
     Indeed, many surveys usually cap travel time savings to at least 10 minutes, making it easier for respondents to mentally
process time savings and their valuations, but precluding valuation of short time savings which may be more common.
   6
      ExpressLanes and other forms of high-occupancy tolling (HOT), called "managed lanes" by transportation planners,
have been used in 11 states in the US in major metropolitan areas such as Atlanta, Minneapolis-St Paul, Washington, DC
and the San Francisco Bay area. The programs vary in their design and implementation with some being administered by
private contractor while others, like the LA ExpressLanes, managed by a metropolitan authority. These types of lanes have
been studied more recently by Janson and Levinson (2014) and Brent and Gross (2016).




                                                               6
This type of optimal pricing design offers a menu of contingent contracts for the
distribution of scarce space on the road. In addition, by securing a minimum level
of speed, it allows drivers to assess whether the time savings from entering the
ExpressLanes are sufficient to recover lost travel time, and still meet a schedule
constraint. The flexibility of the price mechanism ensures that in instances where
the value of urgency outweighs the cost of the toll, individuals are able to obtain a
guaranteed minimum speed. At the level of the market, the price ensures that drivers
with the highest willingness-to-pay effectively can move to the front of the traffic
queue, which offers the potential for large welfare gains.
  Fourth, earlier work using discrete choice models has recovered drivers'
preferences, including the value of time and reliability, even under peak and off-
peak varying prices (Small, Winston and Yan, 2005; Brownstone and Small, 2005).
Recovering the value of urgency with these models would require explicitly
modeling discrete penalty functions, which, for the same individual, are likely to
vary depending on the circumstances of a particular trip. Moreover, time-varying
prices are an endogenous function of contemporaneous congestion and so
identifying their impact on demand at an individual level poses a substantial
econometric challenge (Timmins and Murdock, 2007). Therefore, instead of
explicitly modeling individual schedule constraints, our strategy is to rely on the
equilibrium identifying assumptions of a hedonic-style price function (Rosen,
1974; Roback, 1982). Given the repeat-transaction nature of our data, with the same
drivers observed with varying prices and congestion levels, we are able to recover
lower-bound estimates of the value of urgency and this first-stage hedonic price
regression constitutes a `sufficient statistic' for welfare measurement (Banzhaf,
2019a). In fact, as noted in Bishop and Timmins (2018), who estimate the marginal
willingness to pay (MWTP) for air quality improvements, observing individuals




                                          7
repeatedly is sufficient to recover a linear demand function separately for each
individual, with no need for additional functional form assumptions.7
   Hedonic estimation, nevertheless, presents its own methodological challenges
(Bishop, et al., 2019). However, given the nature of our data, we are able to address
all these classical challenges, including potential confounding due to measurement
error of key attributes, omitted variables, and functional form misspecification. We
are also able to assess the extent to which drivers sorting by attributes in their use
of the ExpressLanes biases our estimates and find no evidence of sorting.
   Our baseline estimate of the value of urgency is $3.24, with half of all account
holders' estimates of the value of urgency falling between $2.30 and $4.05. The
estimate of the value of time is $8.19 per hour, only slightly lower than half the
local hourly wage, and the estimate of value of reliability is $17.61 per hour,
consistent with the literature (Small, 2012). With an average time-varying toll of
$3.71 and an average travel time savings of 3.79 minutes, this implies that the value
of urgency represents 87% of the average toll and, as a consequence, is the first-
order missing parameter in a cost-benefit analysis of road infrastructure, such as
ExpressLanes, with level-of-service real-time pricing.




   7
     With the exception of Bishop and Timmins (2018), most other hedonic studies of housing markets rely on repeated sales
of the same house, rather than repeated purchases by the same individual. Without this individual-level variation in prices
and amenities, relatively strong assumptions need to be made so that the estimates of the MWTP can be used for welfare
measurement (Abbott and Klaiber, 2011; Bajari, Fruehwirth and Timmins, 2012; Currie, Davis and Greenstone, 2015).




                                                              8
                                    II. Program Background and Data

                                         A. The ExpressLanes Program

   On February 23rd, 2013, Los Angeles converted the High Occupancy Vehicle
(HOV) lanes on the I-10 into a High Occupancy Toll (HOT) facility, as part of the
ExpressLanes program.8 The goal of the program was to increase the total
throughput of these roads and to raise funds to maintain the corridors.9 Maximum
throughput is maintained along the ExpressLanes through a level-of-service system
that adjusts prices every five minutes. The policy is designed to minimize costs to
pre-existent carpoolers, who are ensured free-flow conditions by the mandated
minimum speed of 45 mph and the continued ability to use the ExpressLanes free
of charge.10 Drivers may enter or exit the ExpressLanes at 6 separately-priced
locations along the I-10 W.11 At these entry points drivers see posted toll rates,
ranging between $0.55 and $14.70 in our sample, and once a vehicle enters the lane
the corresponding toll rate is locked in for the duration of its trip even if the price
for subsequent vehicles changes.12
   Compared with fixed- or peak-toll lanes, the ExpressLanes program has two
unique features that present a unique opportunity for individuals to make a last-




   8
      This was the second such conversion in Los Angeles, the first being the I-110 ExpressLanes, which opened on November
10th, 2012. We limit the scope of our study from the pre-policy expansion of the HOV lanes on December 1st, 2012 to
December 31st, 2013. More details on the timing of ExpressLanes implementation can be found in Appendix A.
   9
      The program opened the lanes to Single Occupant Vehicles (SOV) who were charged a per-mile toll ranging from $0.10
to $15.00, debited from a FasTrak® account linked to a required transponder in the vehicle. The ExpressLanes function such
that once the maximum price is reached the lane is closed to further SOV traffic. The lane was never closed during the period
considered on the I-10 W.
   10
       Carpools are required to use a transponder but are not charged when it is set to HOV 3+ during peak times or HOV 2
during off-peak hours.
   11
       These exit and entry points are indicated by arrows in Appendix Figure B.2.
   12
       Between entry points the ExpressLanes are separated from the mainline lanes by a solid double white lane marker that
drivers may not cross. Crossing this marker is a moving violation. The program funds cameras at entry and exit points that
read license plates to toll vehicles without transponders and California Highway Patrol officers that patrol the road segment.




                                                               9
minute choice that offers the potential for on-time arrival in the face of a schedule
constraint. First, the ExpressLanes adjust prices to maintain a minimum 45 mph
speed. While other toll lanes may, generally, provide faster travel than an untolled
alternative, the ExpressLanes can guarantee congestion-free driving. Second the
ExpressLanes allow drivers multiple points of entry and exit. This allows them
flexibility to change their decisions based on conditions and consume exactly the
amount of distance desired. This is often only a few miles--considerably shorter
distances than other toll roads where drivers must commit to a decision and are
unable to opt out of the lane if conditions improve.13 In practice, these two features
help drivers solve much of the uncertainty in travel time, allowing them to purchase
the time needed to meet schedule constraints with a high level of precision.



                                                         B. Data

   Our empirical demonstration of the value of urgency is conducted with a unique
confidential dataset that reveals how individuals trade time for money. Our data
combine transponder-level travel information of all ExpressLanes trips provided by
Los Angeles Metropolitan Transportation Authority (Metro) with travel times
observed in mainline lanes from the California Department of Transportation's
(CALTRANS) Freeway Performance Measurement System (PeMS) traffic detector
data. This section describes each data source and presents some key summary
statistics related to the value of urgency.




   13
       Varied subsegment use by drivers is substantial, with a large proportion of observed trips exiting either at mid-way
points along the corridor or at the end as documented in Appendix Table C.2.




                                                             10
Sample Composition.--The dataset of ExpressLanes trips along the I-10 westbound
from LA Metro allows us to observe individual trips associated with the same
transponder account.14 Our data include information on times, points of entry and
exit, the toll charged, the primary vehicle registered to it and the zip code for the
billing address.15 Our full dataset contains 982,056 observations on this route
spanning the period from February 22nd, 2013 to December 31st, 2013.16
  We focus on the 466,232 trips that occur during the AM peak on accounts
registered to private households. We focus on the AM peak period (5-9 AM) for
three reasons. First, this is the peak window of usage because the road is traveling
towards downtown Los Angeles. Second these trips are likely work commutes with
comparable penalty functions for late arrival, and finally the congestion levels
allow drivers less opportunity for passing which increases measurement error in
calculating the (hypothetical) mainline travel time had the driver not used the
ExpressLanes and instead drove along the mainline of the freeway.


Key Variable Construction.--Sorting of individuals across roads and freeways
implies that the travel time in the mainline lane of the I-10 can serve as a close
approximation of the travel time it would take in any other travel option. We
construct an estimate of the hypothetical mainline travel time from road segment
average speeds reported by detectors in the I-10 W mainline lanes from the




   14
       With the exception of the final set of regressions, all regressions can be replicated without account level information,
therefore we remove this identifier to honor the confidentiality agreement signed with Metro and assure the anonymity of
program users. We focus on the I-10 W corridor as it has one of the highest PeMS detector counts per mile, one every 0.18
miles on average, and the westbound direction is the predominant commuting direction during the AM peak. Our focus on
the AM peak is motivated by the fact that drivers faced with congested roads during this period have little discretion to
deviate from the average speed on the road, which is not true when it is in free flow.
   15
       For ExpressLanes trips, we compute travel time based on the difference between the timestamp for entry and exit to
the lanes.
   16
       We do not include data past Dec 31st, 2013 to avoid contamination of our estimates from the Clean Air Vehicle Decals
program that granted access to single occupant vehicles driving low emissions vehicles which was begun January 1st, 2014.
Bento, et al. (2014) studied the impact of this program during an earlier period of operation (2004-2011).




                                                               11
California Department of Transportation's Freeway Performance Measurement
System (PeMS).17 Travel time in the mainline lanes is calculated as the distance
traveled in the ExpressLanes divided by the average speed from PeMS speed
detectors on a parallel stretch of the mainline lanes during the same 5 minute
interval as the start of the trip.18 This is done by matching each ExpressLanes trips
observed in our transponder data to the average speeds observed in the mainline
lanes from PeMS for the same starting time. Trip-level travel time savings in our
analysis is then the difference between the realized travel times in the ExpressLanes
and that for the hypothetical same distance trip taken at the same time along a
parallel stretch of the mainline lanes of the I-10 W.19 In most figures and regressions
below, we omit the 6.2% of trips where the mainline speed implies negative time
savings but include these observations in robustness checks.20
  Reliability is a willingness to pay for reduced uncertainty in travel time when
choosing between routes, and empirical evidence suggests that drivers particularly
dislike longer delays (Brownstone and Small, 2005).21 When arriving at the
entrance to the ExpressLanes, the driver already perceives differences in travel




    17
       PeMS generates real-time 5-minute speed and flow data for HOV and mainline lanes from loop-detectors embedded
in all major California divided highways based on calibrated flow and occupancy observations taken every 30 seconds.
    18
       That individuals would infer travel times in the mainline based on contemporaneous speeds is consistent with the fact
that the speed data from PeMS as well as other sources is widely available from news outlets, and mobile technology like
Waze that tracks the speed of users provides extremely accurate travel time predictions based on contemporaneous travel
conditions.
    19
        This is the appropriate comparison to make because during the peak commuting period, the Nash Equilibrium in
routing serves to equalize average travel times between substitute commuting routes, so travel times in the mainline of the I-
10 W are consistent with the lowest possible travel time commutes for any untolled route in the transportation system. We
focus our analysis on accounts registered to private individuals for whom travel time savings likely correspond to trips to
work.
    20
       Trips with negative travel time savings appear to occur when mainline speeds are abnormally high, suggesting passing
is possible and our measure of counterfactual mainline speed is subject to error. Median mainline speeds are in excess of 65
mph for these negative trips, while those with positive time savings have a median mainline speed less than 45 mph.
   21
        A large literature in transportation has considered how commuters value reliability of travel time savings (Fosgerau
and Karlström, 2010). Nevertheless, it is not immediately obvious how to measure preferences for over the cost of uncertain
travel times in stated preference surveys for hypothetical trips, when the value of resolving uncertainty may depend on trip-
specific factors (Small, 2012).




                                                              12
conditions suggesting there is limit uncertainty at that point in the trip. If this is
truly the case, individuals' willingness to pay to enter the ExpressLanes is unlikely
to reflect insurance or an option value in case conditions deteriorate since there is
no longer any uncertainty. To the extent that some uncertainty remains, this will be
the most onerous in the right tail of the travel time distribution and so we construct
a measure following Brownstone and Small (2005) and Small, Winston and Yan
(2005). This variable measures the difference in the difference between the 80th and
50th quantile of travel time savings between the mainline lanes and the
ExpressLanes. This measure varies by time of day and is calculated based on a
random sample of weekdays during the year when their study was conducted.
     We note two important differences in our reliability measure. First, given the
institutional features of the program, our measure of reliability varies by road
segment, reflecting portions of the roadway where slowdowns in mainline lanes
may be more likely. Second, unlike prior studies, we observe individuals making
repeated choices over the course of a year and therefore construct reliability
measures that reflect changing realizations of the travel time distribution.
Therefore, we calculate this measure for each hour and day of the week, using a
moving average of the same weekday hour for the preceding 30 days and segment
of trips, reflecting the fact that expectations of travel time savings are likely formed
based on recent performance.22 An important feature of this variable is that, unlike
prior literature, there is considerable variation across observations in reliability by
hour, date and segment where the trip is taken as shown in Appendix Figure B.3.




    22
       In order to remove the influence of infrequent times when travel times are longer in the ExpressLanes (times with
fewer cars when driver discretion results in slower speeds), we restrict the sample for constructing reliability to positive
travel time differences. In Appendix Table C.6, we include these infrequent occurrences of negative travel time savings and
find no impact on our estimates. In Appendix Table C.7, we test the robustness of our estimates to changes in the calculation
of reliability via the choice of window and quantile of travel time differences.




                                                              13
                  C. Suggestive Evidence of Urgency and Schedule Constraints

Urgent Drivers.--We have argued that preferences for urgency may explain the
unusually high WTP for travel time savings found in Panel A of Figure 1.
Heterogeneity in the valuation of time may provide an alternative explanation for
this pattern. However, Table 1 shows that even these high value users infrequently
use the lane at 8.8 times per month--a frequency that inexplicably increases as
WTP per hour decreases across the deciles.23 If these users in the first decile truly
valued their time at this level, we would expect them to appear in the lane a lot
more frequently, and for nearly every commute.24


Schedule Constraints.--Panel A of Figure 3 depicts the kernel smoothed density of
demand over the morning peak, when schedule constraints are likely to be relatively
more binding. Vertical lines indicate the key hours of 7:00, 8:00, and 8:30 AM
when work start times or morning appointments may be common. It is clear from
the figure that demand for the ExpressLanes rises 10-15 minutes before these times,
and then falls immediately afterwards. This evidence is suggestive that drivers may
be using the ExpressLanes to ensure on-time arrival based on scheduling needs.25
   Further, in Panel B of Figure 3, we confirm that exit time is narrowly centered
around the average exit time (calculated based on the distribution of repeated users
by account) in the morning peak in the upper two plots. The bottom two plots show




   23
       As noted in Appendix Table C.3, the most common vehicles in this first decile are the Honda Accord, Honda Civic,
and Toyota Camry--surprisingly inexpensive vehicles. Appendix Table C.4 shows that there is wide spread in monthly use
frequency across the travel time distribution, with most usage in 2-5, 6-10 and 11-20 time per month bins.
   24
       And, if this were the case, the implied hourly wage would have been $640, corresponding to an annual wage of $1.3
million. It is highly unlikely that an individual with this income would drive the types of cars we observe most frequently
associated with the use of the lane.
   25
       While it is useful to characterize demand patterns to understand the causes of urgency, the empirical framework laid
out section III does not require us to estimate demand for ExpressLanes use explicitly, but rather infer the implied willingness
to pay through a revealed preference framework.




                                                               14
this same distribution for times during the afternoon peak when drivers typically
have more discretion over arrival times and when lateness penalties may be non-
existent or less severe. For these plots the distribution of exit times is substantially
wider suggesting less repeated use of the lanes around a common afternoon desired
arrival time.26 Together Figures 2 and 3 and Table 1 begin to create the basis for
understanding the mechanisms that lead drivers to value of urgency.


                 III.       Conceptual Framework and Econometric Methods

        A. Conceptual Framework for Recovering Drivers' Preferences for Travel
                                                        Time Savings

  Earlier studies have modeled drivers' behavioral decisions, including departure
times, and the choice of routes and lanes in freeways. Schedule constraints have
been incorporated in two strands of the literature: Bottleneck models (Vickrey,
1969) and generalizations of the value of time framework with schedule constraints
(Noland and Small, 1995).
  In the classical bottleneck model, first developed by Vickrey (1969), and
formalized in Arnott, de Palma, and Lindsey (1993), individuals choose departure
times, given a desired time of arrival. Because of its deterministic nature, there is
no uncertainty in travel time in the bottleneck model. As a result, individuals can
always adjust departure times to meet any underlying schedule constraint.
  The argument that a failure to meet scheduling constraints can generate
measurable welfare costs is made in Small (1982), who notes that cost-benefit




   26
      In Table C.5 in the Appendix, we consider the correlation between exit times and the quantity of the ExpressLanes
used suggesting that commuters consume more of the ExpressLanes the later they expect to arrive at their destination. This
provides further suggestive evidence that urgency arises from schedule constraints.




                                                            15
analysis of infrastructure pricing policies may contain inaccuracies by omitting
costs and/or benefits in the form of altered schedules. The framework developed in
Noland and Small (1995) does explicitly define a penalty function for late arrival
for a more general commuting cost function incorporating a discrete penalty for
late arrival in the context of assessing optimal departure time.
   Building on Noland and Small (1995), the impact of scheduling constraints can
be introduced in a stylized conceptual framework that also highlights the role of
penalties that do not scale up linearly in the amount of time. Consider a commuter
traveling to work during the morning peak. The driver forms expectations about
congestion levels and decides on a departure time. Once on the road where
previously uncertain travel times become realized, the probability that the driver
will arrive late and fail to meet a schedule constraint is largely resolved.27 Presented
with the option of purchasing the time needed to avoid late arrival, the driver
decides whether or not to enter the ExpressLanes.28 As discussed above,
ExpressLanes assure them a minimum level-of-service (in the form of secured
minimum speed), upon the payment of a toll. In other words, when faced with the
likelihood of late arrival, drivers can prevent penalties from being late by taking
advantage of the ExpressLanes.
   In a general setting, a driver's utility can be represented as:


                                                    -  if on time
(1)                                 () = {
                                                    -      if late




   27
       While theoretically there may still be some uncertainty left, in practice, for ExpressLanes programs with a varying toll
system that guarantee a minimum speed and where drivers obtain information via signage uncertainty is dramatically
reduced.
   28
       In principle, it would be possible for the driver to leave the house early in order to lower the probability of late arrival.
This then reflects the trade-off between this benefit and the cost of potentially arriving at work earlier than desired. In practice,
drivers may find themselves running late for a variety of reasons. The most straightforward case is where an individual faces
an idiosyncratic shock (e.g., left briefcase at home) and now has to re-evaluate commuting decisions without the ability to
leave the house earlier.




                                                                  16
where  denotes time commuting,  the value of time, and  and  the gross
benefits of arriving on time and late, respectively, where  >  .
  Let  and  denote the probability of arriving on time if the driver chooses the
regular, untolled lane and ExpressLanes, respectively. Given uncertainty in travel
time, the driver's expected utility can be represented as:


(2)          ((  )) =  [ -   (  )] + (1 -  )[ -   (  )] - 


when the driver takes the ExpressLanes, and


(3)          ((  )) =  [ -   (  )] + (1 -  )[ -   (  )]


when the driver takes the conventional, untolled lanes. In this case, the driver pays
a toll in the amount of  .29
  Faced with this decision, the driver opts for the ExpressLanes if the expected
utility of choosing the ExpressLanes is higher than that of the regular lane. Or, in
other words, the driver enters the ExpressLanes and pays a toll C when:


(4)                    < ( -  )[ -  ] +   [  -   ]


where   and   denote the travel times in the ExpressLanes and the regular lane,
respectively.




   29
       This representation of uncertainty of on-time arrival represents a relatively strong simplification, and should only be
considered for illustrative purposes. Here we assume that these probabilities are uncorrelated. We also assume that the toll C
is uncorrelated with T, whereas in reality it scales with the level of congestion in the untolled lanes (and therefore demand
for the tolled lanes). We assume that both probabilities, the valuation of travel time savings, , and the gross benefits of on-
time and late arrival are known to the driver.




                                                               17
  Equation (4) provides an intuitive decision rule for a driver choosing to enter the
ExpressLanes when the toll paid is less than the sum of the expected relative penalty
of being late (first term in the right-hand side of equation (4)) and the value of travel
time savings from using the ExpressLanes (relative to the regular lane) (second
term in the right-hand side of equation (4)). Equation (4) also implies that the
expected penalty of being late is not directly linked with the amount of travel time
savings that the ExpressLanes generates, but rather by the disutility of being late,
which even in this simple framework is given by a discrete amount, a constant.30 In
Panel A of Figure 2, we plot the right-hand side of equation (4) to further highlight
the point that, even for negligible amounts of travel time savings drivers may
exhibit high willingness to pay to enter the ExpressLanes if, by entering the
ExpressLanes, they recover the time that is needed to secure on-time arrival. Figure
2 also suggests that, even when the researcher does not directly observe drivers'
underlying preferences and the structure of penalty functions they face depending
on trip purpose, treating the expected value of the penalty as a constant that does
not scale up with time may allow the econometrician to recover the bulk of the
structure of preferences, as well as estimates for the value of urgency.

                                   B. Estimating the Value of Urgency

  We now describe an approach to empirically implementing equation (4) and to
recover the first estimates of the components of willingness-to-pay for travel time
savings that incorporate the value of urgency. Earlier work that estimates drivers'
preferences for travel time savings relied on discrete choice models (Small,
Winston, and Yan, 2005), and recovered estimates for the value of time and



   30
       In a more general framework, one can allow the penalty function to also scale with the number of minutes late (or
early) as well, but, as we will demonstrate later, to explain the observed distribution of willingness-to-pay, this per-minute
late penalty would have to be highly non-linear so that it can be approximated by a constant.




                                                              18
reliability. Traditional discrete choice demand estimation becomes intractable in
the context of dynamic prices, which make it difficult to exogenously determine the
effect of prices on individual choices since they are simultaneously determined with
congestion delays.31 Further, it is not obvious how to incorporate schedule
constraints and penalty functions that vary by individual and trip purpose.
  An advantage of the hedonic approach as laid out in Rosen (1974) and Roback
(1982) is that with individual-level data, the simultaneity between market prices
and attributes (here the toll paid and travel time savings) does not confound
identification of the marginal valuation of attributes.32 However, as documented in
the literature (Bishop, et al., 2019) other confounders present themselves when
estimating hedonics: measurement error, omitted variable bias, functional form
misspecification, and sorting as considered in sections III.C and III.D.33
  In our data we observe driver a paying observed toll, ,, , on ExpressLane
segment  on date  to save expected travel time [,, ], corresponding to the
last term in equation (4). The simplest possible model of homogeneous preferences
decomposes the determinants of willingness-to-pay into components that scale up
with travel time savings and those that do not. This model is presented in equation




   31
       Even the use of instrumental variables that determine the delay in the mainline lanes would not allow us to separate
urgency from correlated, unobservable factors.
    32
        Consider the effect of an unobserved shock (e.g., an accident on a parallel freeway, the I-210) that induces a larger
number of drivers onto the I-10 and the ExpressLanes. This increase in demand increases ExpressLanes travel time savings
and the toll, but it will not alter the revelation of the value of urgency and time for these drivers and all other drivers on the
road because the quality of service of the ExpressLanes will be unaffected by this shock as the speed in the lanes never drops
below 45 mph by design.
    33
       One strand of the empirical hedonic literature has demonstrated the importance of various strategies in accounting for
omitted variable bias (Chay and Greenstone, 2004; Davis, 2004; Bento, et al., 2015; Black 1999). At the same time, a separate
strand has shown the limitations of using standard difference-in-difference approaches to obtain welfare-relevant measures
of willingness-to-pay for non-market amenities (Kuminoff and Pope, 2014). In the rare cases where the data make it possible
to estimate a second stage of the hedonic model, this would allow for consideration of a range of individual characteristics
that may help to better understand the distribution of individual MWTP such as preferred departure times, schedule
constraints, multi-model travel among others. While these patterns are clearly an interesting research topic, as the hedonic
literature has shown (Ekeland, et al., 2004), they are not necessary to credibly estimate the underlying hedonic price functions
and thus demonstrate the value of urgency.




                                                                19
(5) where we regress a price, the toll paid, on the driver's expected travel time
savings at the time entering the ExpressLanes and a constant:


(5)                    ,, =  + [,, ] + , + ,, .


Equation (5), by regressing a price on a vector of characteristics, is a first-stage
hedonic price function where the coefficients represent the marginal willingness to
pay for that characteristic.34 Note that because travel time savings should be directly
linked to the opportunity cost of wages, the simplest approach is to assume that they
enter the regression linearly.35 In our setting, the coefficient on travel time saved,
, represents the WTP that scales with time, while , the constant, is WTP that is
constant in the amount of time saved. Following Panel B of Figure 2, the value of
urgency for those who choose to enter the lane, which does not scale with the
amount of time saved, is captured by .36 A more restricted model would omit the
constant, implicitly assuming it is zero.




   34
       Here the relevant "market" as related to a standard hedonic model of housing is a five -minute interval on a particular
day. The choice is between the ExpressLanes and the mainline lines, and the alternative-specific attributes for which we will
recover hedonic price functions are travel time differences between the lanes, and in later models, reliability. The attributes
of the unchosen mainline lane alternative are constructed based on the hypothetical travel time the driver would have
experienced in the lane with the same time of entry. Here our identifying assumption is that a driver observed in the
ExpressLanes on a particular day during a particular five-minute interval would have been in the mainline lanes had we not
observed them in the ExpressLanes. As noted above, during peak commuting periods the Nash equilibrium of route choice
serves to make travel time in the mainline the lowest unpriced travel time alternative, though we do validate the robustness
of this assumption in Appendix Tables C.8 and C.9 by comparing travel times in the ExpressLanes to the I-210 W instead.
Note also that this requires no assumption about what lane or mode of transportation the driver might take on other days
when we do not observe them in the ExpressLanes.
    35
       We examine this assumption in detail later in the paper. A related issue is whether (5) should include realized travel
times rather than expected. We find that, in practice, estimates are largely the same with either variable, and that given the
sophistication of drivers in Los Angeles and the availability of real-time travel time prediction from apps like Google Maps
and Waze, using realized travel time is likely more appropriate. Further robustness checks of our construction of travel time
are discussed in section III.C.
    36
       There is also an implicit assumption that drivers using the ExpressLanes are not early. If drivers were early, the implied
value of time would be much lower than observed in our estimation. Traditional estimates of the value of time for early
individuals are roughly one-quarter of the wage (Small, 2012), which would be roughly $5 per hour in the Los Angeles area.
As we show in section IV models with and without urgency during the morning peak have market-clearing prices that are
well above this value. Furthermore, scheduling models suggest that the benefits from early arrival scale with time; our
detection of a statistically significant constant is evidence against this possibility.




                                                                20
  Given uncertain realization of travel time savings, drivers may also value higher
moments of the time distribution; in particular, they may dislike the possibility
longer delays. Following prior studies (Brownstone and Small, 2005; Small,
Winston and Yan, 2005), (5) also includes, , , a measure of the difference
in the dispersion of travel time savings between the mainline lanes and the
ExpressLanes that represents the reliability of travel time savings.37
  It is important to appreciate the difference between preferences for urgency and
reliability. By construction, in previous studies such as Small, Winston and Yan
(2005), where a single value of reliability for a given hour is often constructed for
the entire sample, there may be a concern that this measure is correlated with the
constant in (5), which represents the value of urgency. As explained in section II.B.,
while in the spirit of prior literature, our reliability measure is calculated using a
moving window and by sub-segments of the ExpressLanes. As a result, our measure
varies across days in the sample as well as within hours of the day as demonstrated
in Appendix Figure B.3, allowing us to disentangle preferences for urgency from
preferences for reliability. Because we pair a segment with the nearest mainline
detectors to measure speeds, we cluster the standard errors in all regressions by
segment.



                            C. Threats to Measuring Travel Time Savings

  Even if we have adequately controlled for unobserved determinants of
willingness-to-pay in equation (5), we may still be concerned that measurement




   37
      This variable measures the difference in the difference between the 80th and 50th quantile of travel time savings between
the mainline lanes and the ExpressLanes and is calculated for each hour, date and segment of trips in our data using a moving
average of the same weekday hour for the preceding 30 days. Our estimates are robust to the choice of quantile and window
as shown in Appendix Table C.7.




                                                               21
error in the construction of travel time savings may lead to biased estimates of both
the value of time and the value of urgency. This fact is easily visualized in Panel B
of Figure 2, where the dashed gray line reflects how underestimation of the slope,
the estimate of the value of time, affects the magnitude of the penalty function. An
underestimation of the slope means that the intercept, the estimate of the value of
urgency, is overestimated. This could occur if drivers perceive travel time savings
to be less than their realized amount so that their valuation is underestimated by our
model.
  There are two potential types of measurement error of time saved that may have
implications for our estimates: researcher measurement error and error due to
drivers' perception of travel time saved. While we have extremely detailed
information on individual speeds in the ExpressLanes, there is somewhat less
certainty about what speed the driver would have achieved outside of them. During
low demand hours the 5-minute average speed in the mainline lanes may obscure
the ability of drivers to pass and achieve travel times very different than the average.
Our main estimates, therefore, are for the morning peak because during these hours
the road is sufficiently congested to prevent substantial passing. This helps to
guarantee that the measured speed is reflective of what drivers in that lane would
have been forced to experience as they have less discretion over speed.38
  We may also be concerned that drivers do not accurately perceive their time
savings. First, we note that the ability of drivers to enter or exit the lanes at multiple




   38
       Using a side street during the morning peak is less likely to offer an improvement over mainline travel. When
congestion is high, a Nash equilibrium ensures that indirect routes will have faster speed but equal travel time to a direct but
congested route. As further robustness, we examine alternative specifications of travel time difference: In Appendix Table
C.10 Panel A, as a bounding exercise, we consider certain extreme driver miscalculations of travel times (e.g., twice the time
savings, random guess) and find almost no effect on the value of urgency. In Appendix Table C.8, we control for periods
when the I-210 W, an imperfect substitute for the I-10 W was traveling at or below its average speeds. In Appendix Table
C.9 we construct travel time difference between the I-10 W ExpressLanes and the I-210 W mainline lanes (rather than those
on the I-10), and in Appendix Table C.10 Panel B, we calculate travel time difference based on past realizations of mainline
speeds. In all cases, our estimates of the value of urgency remain close to the $3.24 baseline estimate.




                                                               22
points makes substantial errors unlikely. If a driver saves less time than anticipated
it is possible to leave the lanes. Second this error must be substantial to explain the
magnitude of the constant.39 We can also eliminate trips with relatively small travel
time savings, which may be occasions where the individual mistakenly took the
ExpressLanes. Furthermore, we can examine the time period after October 20th,
2013. On this date, signs were posted giving the expected travel time savings from
using the ExpressLanes alongside the value of the toll. This measure would help to
resolve any ambiguity that may have existed. Studies that measure the
capitalization of critical information on housing values find non-trivial effects
(Davis, 2004; Figlio and Lucas, 2004). Therefore, if this information yields new
information for drivers, we would expect drivers' estimates for the value of time
and urgency to change.
 Even with improved information, drivers might still misperceive actual travel
time savings. So, we also consider an instrumental variables approach constructed
in the spirit of Aizer, et al. (2018) where future realizations of travel time serve as
an instrument for contemporaneous travel time. For our account-by-account
regressions, this involves IV estimation following the split sample approach
developed by Angrist and Krueger (1995).



                                     D. Heterogeneous Agent Model

 While equation (5) provides an intuitive framework for decomposing willingness-
to-pay into its key components, it is somewhat limited in that it assumes a
homogeneous agent model. Further, in (5), we have not yet taken full advantage of




  39
       From our baseline estimates this misperception would have to be 23 minutes.




                                                            23
the variation that comes from observing drivers repeatedly in the ExpressLanes,
typically with varying levels of congestion and tolls. By observing the same
commuter repeatedly over different price and attribute levels, we are able to
estimate separate individual hedonic bid functions for each consumer and,
therefore, recover the entire distribution of the value of urgency and time for
participants in the program. Unlike much of the hedonic literature that uses repeated
housing transactions,40 observing the same commuter repeatedly enables us to
estimate the hedonic price function without assuming a constant average marginal
willingness-to-pay for the population. 41
   We estimate individual bid curves with account level measures of the value of
urgency and time by estimating the regression


(6)                       ,, =  +  ,, +  , + ,,


separately for each account with multiple trips.42 An advantage of this approach
relative to the homogeneous agent model from equation (5) is that if high-income
individuals self-select into trips with small time savings while low-income
individuals sort into trips with longer time savings, the assumption of a single
preference structure may bias our estimates and render the homogeneous agent
model of equation (5) useless for welfare analysis.




   40
       The exception is Bishop and Timmins (2018), who utilize a preference inversion technique that imposes limited
assumptions on the elasticity of demand for the measured amenity with the benefit of minimized endogeneity problems.
   41
      While other studies have examined repeated sales data for hedonic estimation, they examine the repeat sale of the same
item, such as a home, exposed to different levels of an amenity (for example pollution or school quality) to different
individuals.
   42
      Consistent standard errors are estimated using the bootstrap.




                                                             24
                       E. Correlation with Omitted Variables

  Consistent estimation of equations (5) and (6) is confounded to the extent that
any unobserved factors may co-vary with the observed characteristics (Chay and
Greenstone, 2004; Davis, 2004; Bento, et al, 2015). In our setting, the concern is
rather that any other time-invariant amenity such as smoother pavement or a feeling
of superiority of being in the lane would also be captured by the constant,
potentially leading to an overestimate of the value of urgency. In section IV.C, we
employ an empirical strategy to compare time invariant and time variant
determinants of willingness-to-pay during the weekday morning peak to that during
weekend morning for the same accounts to determine the extent to other factors
may confound estimation of the value of urgency. Importantly, if what drivers value
is related to the pavement of the lane, such valuation should be present both in
weekdays and weekends independently of the purpose of the trip and schedule
constraints.



                                      IV. Results

                    A. Mean Estimates of the Value of Urgency

 Table 2 presents account-by-account estimates of equation (6) based on
individual bid functions, consistent with a model of heterogeneous preferences. It
also reports in Column I estimates from a single regression using the homogeneous
agent framework of equation (5). Each subsequent column gives the mean,
bootstrapped standard error, and interquartile range of estimated coefficients from
an account-by-account regression for each of the 9,053 accounts with more than 10
transactions. This assumes that each account holder has their own value of urgency,
value of time, and value of reliability.




                                           25
  Comparisons of the first and second columns reveal that estimates are somewhat
different depending on whether we use expected versus realized travel time savings,
but that this difference is not substantive. In column III, we present our central
estimates of the determinants of willingness-to-pay for the ExpressLanes. We find
that the mean value of urgency in the population is $3.24 with bootstrapped
standard errors in parentheses. In brackets we give the interquartile range of
estimates showing that across accounts there is substantial heterogeneity in the
value of urgency, suggesting likely heterogeneity in penalty functions.43
Interestingly, half of all account holders' estimates of the value of urgency fall
between $2.30 and $4.05.

                                 B. Relevance of the Value of Urgency

  The results provided above give estimates of the value of urgency, value of time,
and value of reliability but they do not assess the relative contribution of each
component to the welfare generated for these drivers. To decompose this effect,
we can compare the value of urgency with the average toll, which is $3.71. The
value of urgency at $3.24 represents 87% of the value for the average toll. In
comparison, the value of time evaluated at the mean time savings of 3.79 minutes
is $0.51, while the value of reliability of $17.61 per hour evaluated at the mean
value of reliability of 2.1 minutes is $0.62.
  It is important, however, to stress again that while we obtain a mean estimate of
the value of urgency of $3.24, there is no reason to believe that the value of urgency
is constant across our sample. Indeed, in Figure 4, we plot the value of urgency and
the value of time across accounts in our sample. These demonstrate considerable




   43
      We also estimate the values of urgency and time during the afternoon peak and on other corridors of the ExpressLanes
in Appendix Table C.11. We find that while there is heterogeneity, the qualitative results remain.




                                                            26
heterogeneity across drivers. Interestingly, the distributions of the value of urgency
and value of time have a symmetric shape approximating a normal distribution,
centered around the estimates found in the homogeneous model, based on equation
(5). Variation in the value of urgency over the course of the morning peak are also
plotted in Appendix Figure B.4, with the highest values between 7 and 8AM.



                                          C. Threats to Identification

Measurement Error in Travel Time Savings.--One particular concern with the
estimates from equation (6) is that if the econometrician incorrectly measures travel
time savings perceived by drivers, then this error may bias both the estimates of the
value of time and the value of urgency. This bias can be visualized as
mismeasurement of the horizontal axis in Figure 2, resulting in a downwardly
(upwardly) biased slope parameter for , consequently also biasing the estimate 
up (down).
   Only if all drivers systematically mistook their time savings by 23 minutes,
regardless of travel time savings would the constant be reduced to zero.44 Therefore,
it is unlikely that, even with some bias, the estimate of the value of urgency will
disappear. Nonetheless, to address these concerns, in column III of Table 2, we
restrict our analysis to the subset of trips taken after October 20th, 2013, when signs
were set up at each ExpressLanes entrance indicating the travel time savings that
drivers could expect based on real-time data in the lanes. If nothing, these estimates
suggest that the value of urgency only goes up when drivers have better
information, indicating that measurement error is unlikely to be upwardly biasing




   44
       This is based upon the additional quantity of travel time savings at a value of time of $8.19 per hour that would equate
to the value of urgency in our main results: $3.24.




                                                               27
our estimates. Also of note is that the value of reliability is now almost half as much,
which may reflect the fact that with information about travel time differences at the
point of ExpressLanes entry, an even greater amount of uncertainty about the
distribution of travel time difference is resolved. In housing markets where the
difficulty of measuring the quality of many amenities and the heterogeneity of
access to information means that new information about amenities has a profound
effect on prices (Davis, 2004; Figlio and Lucas, 2004). In contrast, here, perhaps
through the use of real-time technologies such as Waze and Google Maps, there is
less of a measurable effect, probably because information about quality is
unambiguous and readily available.
   As previously noted there may be concerns that systematic mismeasurement of
what drivers perceive to be the time saved may downwardly bias the coefficient on
the value of travel time and therefore cause us to overstate the value of urgency. A
standard approach to address concerns about attenuation bias from measurement
error is instrumental variables (IV). We follow the approach of Aizer, et al. (2018)
to take advantage of repeated measurements of travel time savings for the same
time of day and segment over time. The logic of this approach is that if our measure
of travel time savings is noisy compared to what drivers actually perceive,
measurement error between any two trips are likely to be independent across drivers
driving at the same time of day.
   Our instrument set consists of three variables that are the average time savings
one hour, one week and two weeks after the trip by hour of day, day of week and
road segment.45 We use leads, as opposed to lags, in travel time, because these are
likely to be highly correlated to contemporaneous time savings during a given hour,




   45
     With three instruments and a single endogenous variable (travel time savings), we are able to estimate the split sample
IV model using an overidentified system of equations.




                                                             28
day of week and road segment, but unlikely to be affected by any unobserved
contemporaneous factor affecting the driver when a particular trip is taken. Our IV
estimates using a heterogeneous agent model are reported in column IV of Table 2
and do not meaningfully depart from our central estimates.46


Time-Invariant Unobserved Attributes of ExpressLanes.--A separate concern may
be that the constant will capture not only the value of urgency but also any other
time-invariant amenity in the ExpressLanes. If such an amenity exists it cannot take
the form of congestion, which would generate travel time savings, but could be a
belief that the ExpressLanes are safer or a smoother ride than the mainline lanes.47
To address this concern, we take advantage of the fact that trips taken in the off-
peak likely have a lower penalty for late arrival. If this is the case, then comparing
the determinants of willingness-to-pay for weekday morning peak trips to weekend
morning trips can help to separately identify the value urgency from amenities of
the ExpressLanes present during lower levels of congestion.48 And, while trip
purpose can differ between weekend and weekday morning, the value of time-




   46
       To estimate our IV model in our account-level regressions, we follow the split-sample IV approach of Angrist and
Krueger (1995). This is done by estimating the first stage regression of travel time savings on our instruments and reliability
using all accounts except for one. Then in the second stage we regress the toll paid by the excluded account on a constant,
reliability for the trips that account took, and the first stage predicted value of time savings. This is repeated for all accounts.
As with our other account-level regressions, confidence intervals are constructed based on a 500 iteration bootstrap. In
principle, since reliability is positively correlated with travel time savings, we would want to also instrument for reliability.
In practice, however, given the limited explanatory power of reliability in our model and the fact that theory does not give a
clear rationale for how drivers form expectations in this context, the case for an instrument is less clear.
    47
       If such an unobserved amenity was valued by commuters, then estimation of  in (6) would be biased. Note that this
travel time invariant amenity cannot be lower congestion as congestion in the mainline lanes is what generates a travel time
differential.
    48
       Formally, we decompose the constant into a component during the weekday morning peak,  , and a component that
is always there, , so that (6) now becomes

  ,, =  , + , 1( ) + , ,, 1( ) + , ,, + , , 1( ) + , , +
 + ..

  where 1( ) is an indicator for trip  taken during the weekday morning peak, and   ,  and  now vary between
weekend and morning peak periods. The coefficient , measures the weekday morning peak urgency premium--how
much extra punishment failure to achieve on time arrival has--compared with a weekend trip.




                                                                 29
invariant road characteristics, such as pavement quality, are unlikely to be related
to the trip purpose, making the weekend an appropriate control group. We pool trips
during weekend mornings and the weekday morning peak to estimate separate
coefficients for weekday morning peak and relative to the weekend.
 If commuters experience no value of urgency during weekend trips, then an
indicator variable for weekday morning peak trips will be an unbiased estimate of
the value of urgency. However, to the extent that there is urgency during both time
periods, the coefficient on this variable will be downwardly biased, and for this
reason we consider it a lower bound estimate of the value of urgency.
 In Table 3, we present estimates of the model using the weekend as a control
group.   In column I, we use the subset of 1,121 accounts with 5 or more
observations on the weekend and 5 in the morning peak to bound the value urgency
of individual accounts from below. By introducing the weekend as a control group,
the morning peak indicator gives the lower bound on morning peak urgency as a
statistically significant $2.42, on average. While this estimate will exclude many
potentially confounding factors, we view this lower bound as overly conservative.
In column II, we introduce reliability and note that our estimates do not change
meaningfully. In column III, we restrict the sample to the period where signs
displayed true travel time savings, and we note that, while the small sample of 62
accounts is too low for inference about all accounts, the value of urgency remains
substantial.


Sorting.--It is well known that the hedonic envelope may obscure substantial
heterogeneity in bid functions across individuals (Chay and Greenstone, 2004;
Bento, et al., 2015; Timmins and Murdock, 2007; Kuminoff and Jarrah, 2010). The
concern is that our findings may be the result of sorting by income where high
income individuals use the road for short time savings, while low income
individuals use the road for larger time savings. Such a pattern could give rise to




                                         30
the hyperbolic shape and when estimated assuming homogeneity in the bid curve it
would give rise to a statistically significant constant.
  We address this concern through several ways. First, we note that the drivers who
consume small time savings, and have the highest VOT in a model without urgency,
use the lane infrequently. Returning to Table 1, we note that drivers in the lowest
decile of time savings use the lane on average 8.8 times per month, less than any
other group. Although not impossible, it seems unintuitive that agents with
extremely high values of time would consume so little of the ExpressLanes and less
frequently than groups with a lower valuation. While these lanes are often derided
as `Lexus Lanes' we find that the most common vehicles in this lowest decile,
Toyota Corollas and Honda Accords, are not typically driven by people we would
anticipate earning roughly $8 million a year.49
  Nevertheless, the repeated sales nature of our data allows us to run account-by-
account regressions, which directly address this concern by estimating individual
bid functions rather than assuming a uniform value of time and urgency. Comparing
estimates from a model with heterogeneous preferences to that with homogeneous
ones can offer suggestive evidence of whether our results are affected by sorting
due to heterogeneity. If high value of time drivers sort into particular subsections
of the roadway, we would expect to see estimates that are meaningfully different,
but comparing columns I and II in Table 2 we find that they are statistically
indistinguishable.
  An ideal test of sorting might be to regress our estimates on demographic
information of the drivers. In the absence of this kind of data, which is a common
limitation of most hedonic studies, in Appendix Table C.12, we regress values of
urgency and values of time on the list price of the car registered to each account in




  49
       See Appendix Table C.3.




                                           31
our data, with price of the car approximating (imperfectly) individuals' income.
We find that drivers of inexpensive vehicles tend to have lower VOT, consistent
with Becker (1965), but have higher value of urgency. One explanation of this
pattern is that these drivers may be shift workers who face strict penalties for late
arrivals, while drivers of more expensive vehicles have a higher value of time but
are less likely to be penalties for only a few minutes of delay. We also note from
the last row of column I in Appendix Table C.12 that higher values of urgency are
actually negatively correlated with values of time. We believe this reflects the fact
that, unlike the value of time, higher values of urgency in this context may be less
well-explained by driver characteristics such as income, but may relate more to the
circumstances of a particular trip and the penalty function. This is again suggestive
that if sorting is going on among drivers, it is not of the form that is likely to bias
our estimates from equation (6).



                                     D. Further Robustness Checks

   In the Appendix, we consider a variety of robustness checks. Misspecification of
functional form may bias our hedonic estimates (Cropper, Deck, and McConnell,
1988), so we consider many variations of functional form in Appendix Table
C.13.50 This includes models without a constant, and we find that these often lead
to results that fit the data less well and often do not align with intuition and basic
theory. To gauge the extent to which certain high (or low) demand hours affect our
estimates, we include quarter, month, day-of-week, quarter by day-of-week and
month by day-of-week fixed effects in Appendix Table C.15 and find no



   50
      In Appendix Table C.14, we estimate models with higher order measures of travel time savings without the constant
and find that the models have AIC and BIC values indicating a worse fit to the data and which imply a reduction in
willingness-to-pay as travel time savings get very large, which is counterintuitive.




                                                           32
meaningful effect on our estimates.     In Appendix Table C.16, we estimate the
homogeneous agent model by segment of the ExpressLanes and find that some
segments exhibit higher values of urgency than others, ranging from $1.37 to $4.51.
Finally, in Appendix Table C.17, we build on studies that have explored the
connection between driving behavior and gasoline prices (Burger and Kaffine,
2009) and weather (Leard and Roth, 2019) to show that there is no meaningful
difference in the value of urgency on days where gasoline prices are lower or
weather is better.
  Standard errors in our baseline regressions are clustered by road segment traveled
for each trip observation. In Appendix Table C.18, we examine other levels of
clustering including two-way clustering (Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller, 2011) to
address the spatial and temporal correlation (Anderson, 2014). Of these, clustering
at the segment level produces the largest standard errors.

                         E. Relation to Previous Findings

 In Table 4, we present models that approximate the findings of previous studies
to illustrate why we are able to recover preferences for urgency while others have
not. Because the mean estimates from the heterogenous model are identical to the
point estimates from the homogeneous model, for simplicity, here we rely on the
homogeneous model. And, to perform comparisons with the literature, we run
models with and without the constant. We also run separate models, broken down
by different minimum threshold values of time savings. Further sample restrictions
to travel time savings are considered in Appendix Table C.19, which demonstrate
only moderate variation in the value of urgency.
 A direct comparison with Small, Winston and Yan (2005) can be made by
contrasting the estimates in column III for the model without the constant with their




                                          33
estimates based exclusively on the revealed preference model.51 Our model yields
estimates of the value of time and the value of reliability of $21.56 and $23.36
respectively, which are not statistically different than those reported in Small,
Winston and Yan (2005). One should note, however, that the estimate of the value
of time is substantially higher than half the local wage, the estimate generally found
in the literature (Small, 2012). When we add back the constant, our estimates in
column III, we recover estimates for the value of time ranging from $8.02 to $4.58
per hour, always at a minimum slightly lower than those in Small (2012).
  While a closer comparison with earlier studies is not possible, given that the
structure of tolls is fundamentally different across studies, two points are worth
noting. First, removing the constant from the model appears to decrease the fit of
the model using the AIC and BIC. Second, given the institutional features of
previous programs like the ExpressLanes, travel time savings presented to
respondents were capped at a minimum of 10 minutes. Based on Panel A of Figure
1, one can appreciate that visually it appears as if that part of the curve is relatively
flatter. However, by contrasting Column III with and without the constant, we
provide suggestive evidence that prior estimates of the value of time and reliability
may be severely overestimated, since even at portions of the curve in Panel A,
Figure 1 where time savings are greater than 10 minutes, drivers still exhibit
preferences for urgency.




   51
       Small, Winston and Yan (2005) estimate a joint revealed and stated preference model. Median estimates from the
former are $21.46 per hour for value of time and $19.56 per hour for the value of reliability. Stated preference estimates for
the value of time are lower $11.92 per hour and for reliability are not comparable because of survey phrasing.




                                                              34
                           V. Implications for Cost-Benefit Analysis

  Preferences for urgency and the estimates of the value of urgency have
fundamental implications for cost-benefit analysis of road infrastructure projects.
Following prior literature, proper ex-ante assessments of the benefit of the
ExpressLanes would require one to predict the time saved by agents using
ExpressLanes and multiply this value by the estimate of the value of time over the
program period studied here, February 22nd, 2013 to December 31st, 2013. In this
case, the projected benefits of the project would be $221,363, which barely
surpasses the infrastructure costs during that time period of $215,250.52 In sharp
contrast, the program actually generated $1.31 million during that period.
  Without the value of urgency, an ex-ante analysis of the project would
underestimate the total benefits by an order of magnitude during this time frame.
Even a value of time two or three times that of the standard, would be off by more
than 100 percent.

                                                      VI. Conclusion

  In an ideal setting where drivers are observed making choices of lanes depending
on varying tolls, level of congestion and schedule constraints, we study drivers'
willingness to pay to avoid congestion, and provide the first estimates of the value
of urgency. The value of urgency represents a discrete WTP to meet a schedule
constraint, recognizing that individuals often face penalties for being late that do
not necessarily scale up with the amount time that individuals are late. With
unusually rich data that tracks the same drivers on multiple occasions with different




  52
      Source: Correspondence with LA Metro, 04/15/14. This corresponds to the operation and maintenance costs of the
corridor including weekends, holidays, across all hours of the day.




                                                         35
levels of congestion and time-varying tolls, we recover preferences for travel time
savings in an hedonic price function, and overcome standard identification
challenges related to measurement error of key attributes, omitted variables, and
functional form misspecification (Bishop, et al., 2019; Chay and Greenstone, 2004;
Bento, et al., 2015; Black, 1999). Even more important, by estimating individual-
level bid functions, the implied marginal-willingness-to-pay estimates from the
first-stage hedonic price function constitute a `sufficient statistic' for welfare
measurement (Banzhaf, 2019a).
  Preferences for urgency and the value of urgency have three broad implications.
First, they can alter the direction of cost-benefit analysis for road infrastructure with
level-of-service pricing. In fact, we demonstrate that, because the value of urgency
represents roughly 87% of the toll paid to enter the ExpressLanes, ex-ante cost-
benefit analysis that ignore this value may misguide road infrastructure
investments. More generally, it is likely that amenities or externalities in contexts
different from ours do not scale with quantity or have thresholds that are more
relevant than just marginal improvements. Like in our application, by ignoring the
discrete nature of willingness to pay, studies of the value of such amenities may be
severely underestimated.
  Second, our results question the use of stated preferences surveys to infer drivers'
preferences for travel time savings. At a minimum, there is a need to reconsider the
way researchers solicit stated preferences and demand for projects that generate
time savings. Future survey work may improve prediction of the benefits of such
projects by soliciting willingness to pay to avoid being late and the frequency at
which individuals are late, as opposed to focusing on travel time saved from an
average trip. At the same time, this implication also means that survey respondents
will have to be trained to respond to questions related to specific, not average, trips,
since penalties will likely vary with the purpose of different trips.




                                            36
  Third, our results suggest that the structure of pricing to regulate congested
infrastructure matters, and was far from fully understood in prior literature (Small,
Winston, and Yan, 2005). Recent studies have used rich datasets to examine
congestion patterns in cities and derive the implied Pigouvian tolls that would
internalize the congestion externality (Yang, Purvevjav, and Li, 2000; Akbar et al.,
2018). While these findings are insightful, in practice, anything approaching
Pigouvian congestion pricing of entire road systems remains politically
challenging.
  In contrast to Pigouvian congestion pricing, the pricing structure here applies to
only one lane of a freeway, and resembles real-time, level-of-service pricing. With
a minimum speed guaranteed, drivers can re-optimize their decisions to still meet a
schedule constraint, especially in situations where otherwise they would be late and
would face a penalty. A potential advantage of this pricing scheme over Pigouvian
pricing is that it solves the uncertainty related to travel time that comes from the
drivers' inability to predict aggregate demand at any point in time. As documented
in theoretical models that examined the role of pricing and service quality in
regulated utilities and monopolies (De Vany, 1976; De Vany and Saving, 1977;
Chao and Wilson, 1987), level-of-service pricing offers a menu of contingent
contracts for the distribution of scarce space on the road, adjusting utilization of
capacity to match supply and demand. Further, and importantly, the secured
minimum speed, which is dependent on the real-time response of the toll price to
changing congestion conditions, removes uncertainty in travel time. As a result, it
creates the ideal setting for drivers to reveal their preferences for urgency.
  More broadly, we note that others have implemented cleanly identified
econometric methodologies, such as regression discontinuity designs or
randomized control trials, to identify short-run effects to infrastructure investments
to uncover underlying preferences for travel time savings (Anderson, 2014;
Krindler, 2018). It may be less certain that the full benefits of congestible




                                           37
infrastructure will be fully identified in studies where welfare calculations are based
on an average estimated effect across a narrow time window. Indeed, the unusually
rich data used in this study provides suggestive evidence that it may be relatively
more important to observe variation in individual choices across different levels of
congestion over time-varying prices to uncover the full distribution of preferences
for meaningful welfare evaluation.




                                           38
                                REFERENCES

Abbott, Joshua K., and H. Allen Klaiber. 2011. "An embarrassment of riches:
 Confronting omitted variable bias and multi-scale capitalization in hedonic price
 models." Review of Economics and Statistics. 93(4): 1331-1342.
Aizer, Anna, Janet Currie, Peter Simon, and Patrick Vivier. 2018. "Do Low
 Levels of Blood Lead Reduce Children's Future Test Scores?" American
 Economic Journal: Applied Economics 10(1): 307-41.
Akbar, Prottoy, Victor Couture, Gilles Duranton, and Adam Storeygard.
 2018. "Mobility     and      congestion    in    urban     India."    http://real-
 faculty.wharton.upenn.edu/wp-content/uploads/~duranton/Duranton_Papers/
 Current_Research/CongestionIndia.pdf (Last accessed 03/06/2020).
Anderson, Michael L. 2014. "Subways, Strikes, and Slowdowns: The Impacts of
 Public Transit on Traffic Congestion." American Economic Review 104(9): 2763-
 96.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Alan B. Krueger. 1995. "Split-sample Instrumental
 Variables Estimates of the Return to Schooling." Journal of Business &
 Economic Statistics 13(2): 225-235.
Arnott, Richard, André de Palma, and Robin Lindsey. 1993. "A Structural
 Model of Peak-Period Congestion: A Traffic Bottleneck with Elastic Demand."
 American Economic Review. 83(1): 161­79.
Ashenfelter, Orley, and Greenstone, Michael. 2004. "Using mandated speed
 limits to measure the value of a statistical life." Journal of Political
 Economy. 112(S1): S226-S267.
Bajari, Patrick, Jane Cooley Fruehwirth, and Christopher Timmins. 2012. "A
 rational expectations approach to hedonic price regressions with time-varying
 unobserved product attributes: The price of pollution." American Economic
 Review. 102(5): 1898-1926.
Banzhaf, Spencer. 2019a. "Panel-Data Hedonics: Rosen's First Stage as a
 `Sufficient Statistic.'" International Economic Review. Forthcoming.
Banzhaf,     Spencer.      2019b.        "Difference-in-Difference      Hedonics."
 http://hsbanzhaf.gsucreate.org/Papers/Diff-in-Diff%20Hedonics%20Aug%
 202019.pdf (accessed 12/27/19).
Becker, Gary. 1965. "A Theory of the Allocation of Time." The Economic Journal
 75 (299): 493-517.
Bento, Antonio, Matthew Freedman, and Corey Lang. 2015 "Who benefits from
 environmental    regulation?      Evidence    from     the    Clean     Air      Act
 Amendments." Review of Economics and Statistics. 97(3): 610-622.
Bento, Antonio M., Daniel Kaffine, Kevin Roth, and Matthew Zaragoza-
 Watkins. 2014. "The Effects of Regulation in the Presence of Multiple Unpriced
 Externalities: Evidence from the Transportation Sector." American Economic
 Journal: Economic Policy. 6(3): 1-29.
Kelly C. Bishop, Nicolai V. Kuminoff, H. Spencer Banzhaf, Kevin J. Boyle,
 Kathrine von Gravenitz, Jaren C. Pope, V. Kerry Smith, and Christopher
 D. Timmins. 2019. "Best Practices in Using Hedonic Property Value Models for
 Welfare Measurement." Review of Environmental Economics and Policy.
 Forthcoming.
Bishop, Kelly C., and Christopher Timmins. 2018. "Using panel data to easily
 estimate   hedonic   demand    functions." Journal     of    the   Association    of
 Environmental and Resource Economists. 5(3): 517-543.
Black, Sandra E. 1999. "Do better schools matter? Parental valuation of
 elementary education." The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 114(2): 577-599.
Bockstael, Nancy E., and Kenneth E. McConnell. 1981. "Theory and estimation
 of the household production function for wildlife recreation." Journal of
 Environmental Economics and Management. 8(3): 199-214.




                                         40
Brent, Daniel A., and Austin Gross. 2018. "Dynamic road pricing and the value
 of time and reliability." Journal of Regional Science. 58(2): 330-349.
Brownstone, David, and Kenneth A. Small. 2005. "Valuing Time and Reliability:
 Assessing the Evidence from Road Pricing Demonstrations." Transportation
 Research Part A: Policy and Practice 39 (4): 279-93.
Burger, Nicholas E., and Daniel T. Kaffine. 2009. "Gas Prices, Traffic, and
 Freeway Speeds in Los Angeles." Review of Economics and Statistics. 91(3):
 652­57.
Calfee, John, and Clifford Winston. 1998. "The Value of Automobile Travel
 Time: Implications for Congestion Policy." Journal of Public Economics 69(1):
 83-102.
Calfee, John, Clifford Winston, and Randolph Stempski. 2001. "Econometric
 issues in estimating consumer preferences from stated preference data: a case
 study of the value of automobile travel time." Review of Economics and
 Statistics. 83(4): 699-707.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller. 2011 "Robust
 Inference with Multiway Clustering." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics
 29(2): 238-249.
Carson, Richard T., and W. Michael Hanemann. 2005. "Contingent
 valuation." Handbook of Environmental Economics. 2: 821-936.
Chao, Hung-po, and Robert Wilson. 1987. "Priority service: Pricing, investment,
 and market organization." The American Economic Review. 899-916.
Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone. 2005. "Does air quality matter?
 Evidence from the housing market." Journal of Political Economy. 113(2): 376-
 424.
Cropper, Maureen L., Leland B. Deck, and Kenneth E. McConnell. 1988. "On
 the choice of functional form for hedonic price functions." The Review of
 Economics and Statistics: 668-675.




                                        41
Currie, Janet, Lucas Davis, Michael Greenstone, and Reed Walker. 2015.
 "Environmental health risks and housing values: evidence from 1,600 toxic plant
 openings and closings." American Economic Review. 105(2): 678-709.
Davis, Lucas W. 2004. "The Effect of Health Risk on Housing Values: Evidence
 from a Cancer Cluster." American Economic Review 94 (5): 1693-1704.
De Vany, Arthur. 1976. "Uncertainty, waiting time, and capacity utilization: A
 stochastic theory of product quality." Journal of Political Economy. 84(3): 523-
 541.
De Vany, Arthur, Thomas R Saving. (1977). Product quality, uncertainty, and
 regulation: The trucking industry. The American Economic Review. 67(4): 583-
 594.
DeSerpa, Allan C. 1971. "A Theory of the Economics of Time." Economic
 Journal: 828-46.
Ekeland, Ekeland, Ivar, James J. Heckman, and Lars Nesheim. 2004.
 "Identification and Estimation of Hedonic Models." Journal of Political
 Economy 112 (1): 60-109.
Figlio, David N., and Maurice E. Lucas. 2004. "What's in a grade? School report
 cards and the housing market." American Economic Review 94(3): 591-604.
Fosgerau,     Mogens,    and   Anders   Karlström.     2010.   "The    value    of
 reliability." Transportation Research Part B: Methodological. 44(1): 38-49.
Gallagher, Justin and Paul J. Fisher. 2020. "Criminal Deterrence when there are
 Offsetting    Risks:   Traffic Cameras,     Vehicular Accidents,     and   Public
 Safety." American Economic Review. Forthcoming.
Gronau, Reuben. 1973. "The intrafamily allocation of time: The value of the
 housewives' time." The American Economic Review. 63(4): 634-651.
Grossman, M. 1972. "On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for
 Health." Journal of Political Economy. 80(2): 223-255.




                                        42
Hall, Jonathan D. 2018. "Pareto Improvements from Lexus Lanes: The Effects of
 Pricing a Portion of the Lanes on Congested Highways." Journal of Public
 Economics 158: 113-125.
Hall, Jonathan D. 2019. "Can tolling help everyone? Estimating the aggregate and
 distributional consequences of congestion pricing." Journal of the European
 Economic Association. Forthcoming.
Hall, Jonathan D. and Ian Savage. 2019. "Tolling roads to improve
 reliability." Journal of Urban Economics, 113: 103187.
Hanna, Rema, Gabriel Kreindler, and Benjamin Olken. 2017. "Citywide effects
 of high-occupancy vehicle restrictions: Evidence from `three-in-one' in
 Jakarta." Science. 357(6346): 89-93.
Hastings, Justine S., and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2013. "Fungibility and consumer
 choice: Evidence from commodity price shocks." The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics. 128(4): 1449-1498.
Janson, Michael, and David Levinson. 2014. "HOT or not: Driver elasticity to
 price on the MnPASS HOT lanes." Research in Transportation Economics 44:
 21-32.
Johnson, M. Bruce. 1966. "Travel Time and the Price of Leisure." Western
 Economic Journal. 4(2): 135-45.
Johnston, Robert J., Kevin J. Boyle, Wiktor Adamowicz, Jeff Bennett, Roy
 Brouwer, Trudy Ann Cameron, W. Michael Hanemann, Nick Hanley,
 Mandy Ryan, Riccardo Scarpa, Roger Tourangeau, and Christian A.
 Vossler. 2017. "Contemporary guidance for stated preference studies." Journal
 of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists. 4(2): 319-405.
Keeler, Theodore, and Kenneth A. Small. 1977. "Optimal Peak-Load Pricing,
 Investment, and Service Levels on Urban Expressways." Journal of Political
 Economy 85 (1): 1-25.




                                        43
Kling, Catherine L., Daniel J. Phaneuf, and Jinhua Zhao. 2012. "From Exxon
 to BP: has some number become better than no number?" Journal of Economic
 Perspectives. 26(4): 3-26.
Krindler, Gabriel. 2019. "The Welfare Effect of Road Congestion Pricing:
 Experimental Evidence and Equilibrium Implications." Working Paper.
Kuminoff, Nicolai V., and Abdul Salam Jarrah. 2010. "A new approach to
 computing hedonic equilibria and investigating the properties of locational
 sorting models." Journal of Urban Economics 67(3): 322-335.
Kuminoff, Nicolai V., and Jaren C. Pope. 2014. "Do `capitalization effects' for
 public goods reveal the public's willingness to pay?" International Economic
 Review. 55(4): 1227-1250.
Leard, Benjamin and Kevin Roth. 2019. "Voluntary Exposure Benefits and the
 Costs of Climate Change." Journal of the Association of Environmental and
 Resource Economists. Forthcoming.
Leclerc, France, Bernd H. Schmitt, and Laurette Dube. 1995. "Waiting time
 and   decision   making:     Is    time    like    money?" Journal   of   Consumer
 Research. 22(1): 110-119.
Light, Thomas. 2009. "Optimal highway design and user welfare under value
 pricing." Journal of Urban Economics. 66(2): 116-124.
Murphy, Kevin M., & Topel, Robert H. 2006. "The value of health and
 longevity." Journal of Political Economy. 114(5): 871-904.
Noland,       Robert,         and          Small,       Kenneth       A.      1995.
 "Travel-time uncertainty, departure time choice, and the cost of morning
 commutes." Transportation Research Record. 1493: 150-158.
Parry, Ian W.H., and Antonio M. Bento. 2002. "Estimating the Welfare Effect
 of Congestion Taxes: The Critical Importance of Other Distortions within the
 Transport System." Journal of Urban Economics 51 (2): 339-65.




                                            44
Parry, Ian W.H., and Kenneth A. Small. 2005. "Does Britain or the United States
 Have the Right Gasoline Tax?" American Economic Review. 95(4): 1276-89.
Phaneuf, D. J., Kling, C. L., & Herriges, J. A. 2000. "Estimation and welfare
 calculations in a generalized corner solution model with an application to
 recreation demand." Review of Economics and Statistics. 82(1): 83-92.
Roback, Jennifer. 1982. "Wages, rents, and the quality of life." Journal of
 Political Economy. 90(6): 1257-1278.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1974. "Hedonic prices and implicit markets: product
 differentiation in pure competition." Journal of Political Economy. 82(1): 34-55.
Sahm, Claudia R., Matthew D. Shapiro, and Joel Slemrod. 2012. "Check in the
 mail or more in the paycheck: does the effectiveness of fiscal stimulus depend on
 how it is delivered?" American Economic Journal: Economic Policy. 4(3): 216-
 50.
Small, Kenneth A. 1982. "The Scheduling of Consumer Activities: Work Trips."
 American Economic Review. 72 (3): 467­79.
Small, Kenneth A. 2012. "Valuation of Travel Time." Economics of
 Transportation. 1(1-2): 2-14.
Small, Kenneth A., Clifford Winston, and Jia Yan. 2005. "Uncovering the
 Distribution of Motorists' Preferences for Travel Time and Reliability."
 Econometrica. 73(4): 1367­82.
Smith, V. Kerry. 1981. "Congestion, travel cost recreational demand models, and
 benefit    evaluation." Journal     of        Environmental   Economics      and
 Management. 8(1): 92-96.
Thaler, Richard H., and Hersh M. Shefrin. 1981. "An economic theory of self-
 control." Journal of Political Economy. 89(2): 392-406.
Timmins, Christopher, and Jennifer Murdock. 2007. "A revealed preference
 approach to the measurement of congestion in travel cost models." Journal of
 Environmental Economics and Management. 53(2): 230-249.




                                          45
Train, Kenneth, and Wesley W. Wilson. 2008. "Estimation on stated-preference
 experiments constructed from revealed-preference choices." Transportation
 Research Part B: Methodological. 42(3): 191-203.
Van Benthem, Arthur. 2015. "What is the optimal speed limit on freeways?"
 Journal of Public Economics. 124: 44-62.
Verhoef, Erik, Peter Nijkamp, and Piet Rietveld. 1996. "Second-best congestion
 pricing: the case of an untolled alternative." Journal of Urban Economics. 40(3):
 279-302.
Vickrey, William S. 1969. "Congestion Theory and Transport Investment."
 American Economic Review. 59(2): 251­60.
Vickrey, William S. 1971. "Responsive pricing of public utility services." The Bell
 Journal of Economics and Management Science. 337-346.
Wolff, Hendrik. 2014. "Value of time: Speeding behavior and gasoline
 prices." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management. 67(1): 71-88.
Yang, Jung, Avralt-Od Purevjav, and Shanjun Li. 2020. "The Marginal Cost of
 Traffic Congestion and Road Pricing: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in
 Beijing." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy. 12(1): 418-53.




                                         46
FIGURES AND TABLES




     FIGURE 1. WILLINGNESS-TO-PAY PER HOUR AND DEMAND FOR TRIPS IN THE
                               EXPRESSLANES
Notes: Panel A displays our lower bound estimate of willingness-to-pay for use of the ExpressLanes calculated
using kernel-weighted local polynomial smoothing for the ratio of the total toll paid for each trip over the travel
time difference between the mainline lanes and the ExpressLanes. Panel B displays the smoothed distribution
of the trip-level travel time difference between the mainline lanes and the ExpressLanes. The smoother for both
panels uses an Epanechnikov kernel with a bandwidth of 0.05. Travel times are calculated based on mainline
speeds from PeMS and ExpressLanes time stamps and the actual distance traveled for each trip in the
ExpressLanes. Both panels are generated using trip-level transponder data for the morning peak hours of work
days in the first 10 months of the policy, excluding holidays. Panel A considers (for illustrative purposes) only
trips for travel time difference greater than 90 seconds, while panel B considers the entire travel time
distribution. An unrestricted version of panel A can be found in Appendix C. Trips with zero distance traveled
and the 6.2% of observations with negative time saving, are removed. Transponders registered to public sector,
corporate or unknown accounts are dropped. Observations from PeMS where any of the 30 second observations
are missing are also dropped.




                                                         47
               FIGURE 2. CONCEPTUAL BASIS FOR THE VALUE OF URGENCY
Notes: The figures present the relationship between willingness-to-pay as measured by the toll paid to the travel
time saved by entering the ExpressLanes as compared to the conventional untolled lanes. Willingness-to-pay
is reflected by a penalty function in Panel A, which grows dramatically initially for extremely small travel time
savings, reflecting the high cost of being late, but then changes slope dramatically above the black horizontal
line, reflecting the cost of longer travel times in terms of the value of time. Panel B, reflects the empirical
analogue measuring the penalty function, where      approximates the discrete cost of late arrival associated with
               
urgency and  measures the value of travel time savings. The dashed gray line illustrates an empirical estimate
where measurement error in travel time savings would mean that the slope parameter is underestimated so that
the constant is overestimated.




                                                        48
                                           Panel A. Trip Distribution




                                                                                                                                                         1.5
                                                                                                                                                                   7:15-7:30AM




                                                                                            1.5
                                                                                                    6:45-7:00AM




                                                                                                                                                             1.0
                                                                                             1.0
                                                                                       Density




                                                                                                                                                      Density
                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                    0.5     0.0




                                                                                                                                                         0.0
                                                                                                  5:00AM         6:00AM 7:00AM 8:00AM 9:00AM                 5:00AM    6:00AM 7:00AM 8:00AM 9:00AM
                                                                                                                 Exit Time for All AM Peak Trips                       Exit Time for All AM Peak Trips
                 1.5




                                                                                          1.5
                             4:03-4:18PM
                                    Panel                                  4:33-4:48PM
                                                   B. Distribution of Repeated  Appearance
                                                                                         1.5       7:15-7:30AM
                    1.5




                                                                                        1.5




                                                                                                                                                         1.5
                             6:45-7:00AM                                                            7:45-8:00AM                                                    8:15-8:30AM
                                                                                             1.0
                      1.0




                                                                                            1.0




                                                                                                                                                             1.0
                Density




                                                                                      Density
                                                                                     Density




                                                                                                                                                      Density
             1.0




                                                                                   1.0
                                                                                   0.5
             0.5




                                                                                  0.5




                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                0.0




                                                                                       0.0
            Density




                                                                                   Density
                                                                                      0.0




                                                                                                                                                         0.0
                       5:00AM           6:00AM 7:00AM 8:00AM 9:00AM                         5:00AM
                                                                                             5:00AM 6:00AM
                                                                                                     6:00AM 7:00AM
                                                                                                                7:00AM 8:00AM
                                                                                                                          8:00AM 9:00AM
                                                                                                                                     9:00AM                  5:00AM    6:00AM 7:00AM 8:00AM 9:00AM
                                        Exit Time for All AM Peak Trips                             Exit
                                                                                                     ExitTime
                                                                                                          Timefor
                                                                                                               forAll
                                                                                                                   AllAM
                                                                                                                       AMPeak
                                                                                                                          PeakTrips
                                                                                                                               Trips                                   Exit Time for All AM Peak Trips
                 1.5




                                                                                        1.5
                 0.5




                                                                                        0.5




                                   4:03-4:18PM
                             7:45-8:00AM                                                           8:15-8:30AM
                                                                                                           4:33-4:48PM
                       1.0




                                                                                            1.0
                              Density




                                                                                                       Density
                Density




                                                                                     Density
             0.5




                                                                                  0.5
                 0.0 0.0




                                                                                        0.0 0.0




                     3:00PM             4:00PM 5:00PM 6:00PM 7:00PM                          3:00PM 4:00PM 5:00PM 6:00PM 7:00PM
                      5:00AM            Exit Time for
                                        6:00AM        All PM Peak
                                                   7:00AM         Trips 9:00AM
                                                              8:00AM                                 Exit Time 7:00AM
                                                                                            5:00AM 6:00AM      for All PM8:00AM
                                                                                                                          Peak Trips 9:00AM
                                        Exit Time for All AM Peak Trips                             Exit Time for All AM Peak Trips



          FIGURE 3. I-10 W EXPRESSLANES TRIP DENSITY DURING AM PEAK
Notes: The figures plot the kernel smoothed density of trips on the I-10 W ExpressLanes over the morning
peak. In panel A, vertical lines correspond to times with a discernible trough in the distribution indicating
potential "bunching" around preferred arrival times of 7:00AM, 8:00AM and 8:30AM. In panel B, the figures
plot the kernel smoothed density of trip-level Exit Time for accounts with average Exit Time in 15 minute
window before 7:00AM, 8:00AM, 4:03AM and 4:33PM, where the latter two times are times displaying
bunching during the PM peak. Vertical lines indicate average exit time for trips in given subsample. Includes
accounts with 10 or more ExpressLanes trips. Trips with zero distance traveled and the 6.2% of observations
with negative time saving, are removed. Transponders registered to public sector, corporate or unknown
accounts are dropped. Observations from PeMS where any of the 30 second observations are missing are also
dropped.




                                                                                 49
Figure 4. ESTIMATED DISTRIBUTION OF VALUE OF TIME AND URGENCY
Notes: The figures depict smoothed kernel density estimates of the value of urgency and travel
time savings from account-specific regressions of the total toll on the travel time saved and a
constant and are consistent with the heterogeneous individual bid curve model. Time, measured
in hours, is the time saved by taking the ExpressLanes compared with mainline lanes, from
mainline line speeds reported by PeMS, for the chosen trip distance. Observations from morning
peak hours are included with weekends and holidays removed.




                                             50
            Table 1--Trip-Level Summary Statistics by Decile of Travel Time Savings
      I              II            III          IV                V                  VI
  Panel A. Trip-Level Characteristics
                       Time Savings
                                            Average                               Average
  Decile of                                                     Average
                                   in    ExpressLanes/                           Distance
   Time          in Hours                                Mainline Speed in
                              Minutes    HOV Speed in                          Traveled in
  Savings                                                       MPH
                                             MPH                                  Miles
      1            0.01           0.39         65.3              60.3                5.8
      2            0.02           1.01         67.4              55.9                6.1
      3            0.03           1.66         66.6              50.0                6.2
      4            0.04           2.37         66.1              44.7                6.1
      5            0.05           3.11         66.0              40.6                6.1
      6            0.06           3.88         65.8              37.7                6.3
      7            0.08           4.69         65.5              34.6                6.3
      8            0.09           5.64         64.7              32.7                6.7
      9            0.12           6.95         63.8              30.9                7.3
     10            0.18          11.04         62.0              25.8                8.1
   Average         0.07           4.08         65.3              41.3                6.5
  Panel B. Account-Level Characteristics
                               Average
  Decile of      Average                                    Modal Vehicle
                               Hourly     Average Toll                            Average
   Time         Uses per                                    Registered to
                              Wage in        Paid                             Vehicle Value
  Savings        Month                                        Account
                              Zip Code
      1             8.8         $19.35        $3.20         Honda Accord          $9,543
      2             9.5         $19.40        $3.10         Honda Accord          $9,512
      3             9.8         $19.47        $3.12         Honda Accord          $9,553
      4             9.9         $19.47        $3.17         Honda Accord          $9,443
      5             9.8         $19.65        $3.29         Toyota Camry          $9,477
      6             9.9         $19.71        $3.57         Honda Accord          $9,476
      7             9.8         $19.73        $3.81         Honda Accord          $9,523
      8             9.8         $19.76        $4.15         Honda Accord          $9,607
      9             9.8         $19.79        $4.49         Honda Accord          $9,793
     10             9.6         $20.00        $4.95         Honda Accord          $9,943
   Average          9.7         $19.63        $3.69         Honda Accord          $9,587
Notes: Data cover work days for the morning peak (5-9 AM) from February 25th, 2013 until December 30th, 2013. "Time
Savings" is travel time saved driving in the ExpressLanes, calculated as the difference between Metro transponder travel time
compared to travel times in mainline lanes from PeMS. "Average Uses per Month" excludes the first month that a transponder
appears in the data to control for learning behavior. "Average Hourly Wage in Zip Code" comes from the reported transponder
zip code and 2008-12 ACS Census mean zip code data, assuming an assumed average household with two wage-earners and
2,040 working hours per year. "Modal Vehicle Registered to Account" reports the most common vehicle registered to
accounts within each decile of time saving. The last row reports the modal vehicle for the whole sample. Trips with zero
distance traveled and the 6.2% of observations with negative time saving are removed. Transponders registered to public
sector, corporate or unknown accounts are dropped. Observations from PeMS where any of the 30 second observations are
missing are also dropped. Each decile for the full time period contains 46,624 trips, for February and March contains 3,261
trips, for June contains 4,615 trips and for September contains 7,001 trips.




                                                              51
                             Table 2--Account Level Regressions I-10 West
                                        I                     II                     III                     IV

                                                                                 After Oct.            Split Sample
                                 Full Sample            Full Sample
                                                                                 20th, 2013                  IV


Constant                           2.84***                3.24***                 3.62***                 2.81***
                                    (0.48)                 (0.01)                  (0.03)                  (0.01)
                                                        [2.30, 4.05]            [2.52, 4.65]            [2.03, 3.53]

Travel Time                         8.02**               8.19***                 7.16***                12.24***
                                    (3.00)                 (0.12)                 (0.27)                  (0.21)
                                                       [3.10, 12.79]          [-0.68, 14.32]           [4.40,19.67]

Reliability                          24.76***            17.61***                9.41***                22.34***
                                     (5.24)                (0.38)                 (0.62)                  (7.40)
                                                       [-1.43, 30.79]         [-7.59, 25.83]          [-1.59, 71.55]

Heterogeneous Agent
                                                              X                       X                       X
Model
Mean Toll Paid                       $3.73                  $3.71                  $4.01                   $3.60
Urgency's Share of
                                      76%                   87%                     90%                     78%
WTP
Mean Time Savings in
                                      4.08                  3.79                    4.20                    3.42
Minutes
Mean Reliability in
                                      0.83                   2.1                    1.02                    0.38
Minutes
Number of Accounts                  28,075                  9,053                  2,286                   6,422
Notes: Values shown are the coefficients of regressions of the toll paid on the regressands. Column I reports a single
regression of the toll on the expected travel time savings for which there are 433,623 observations, while the remaining
columns report statistics from account-level regressions. Column III reports estimates for the period during which signs
displaying travel time differences were installed at ExpressLanes entrances. Column IV reports estimates of account-
level split-sample IV using 1 hour, 1 week and 2 week leads of time savings by hour, day of week and segment. Values
shown in columns II-IV are the average coefficient across regressions, with the interquartile range of values given in
brackets. Standard errors of the mean, calculated by randomly sampling from the mean and standard error of individual
coefficients 500 times, are given in parenthesis. Time, measured in hours, is the time saved by taking the ExpressLanes
compared with mainline lanes, from mainline speeds reported by PeMS, for the chosen trip distance. Reliability,
measured in hours, is the difference between lanes in the spread of travel times between the 50 th and 80th quantiles.
Observations from morning peak hours (5-9AM) are included with weekends and holidays removed.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level. **Significant at the 5 percent level. *Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                           52
      Table 3--Account Level Regressions I-10 West: Weekend Control Group
                                                I                      II                       III

                                         Full Sample             Full Sample             After 10/20/13

Constant                                   0.79***                 0.79***                   0.50***
                                            (0.01)                  (0.02)                    (0.04)
                                         [0.50, 1.04]            [0.49, 1.07]              [0.26, 0.68]

1(Morning Peak)                            2.42***                 2.43***                   3.53***
                                            (0.02)                  (0.03)                    (0.12)
                                         [1.46, 3.35]            [1.46, 3.37]              [2.12, 4.69]

Travel Time                                3.46***                 3.47***                   5.49***
                                            (0.08)                  (0.11)                    (0.37)
                                         [1.29, 5.22]            [1.13, 5.24]              [3.69, 7.37]

Travel Time x Morning Peak                7.07***                  5.45***                  1.38***
                                            (0.24)                  (0.33)                   (0.87)
                                        [1.54, 11.06]            [0.55, 9.39]             [-6.31, 8.07]

Reliability                                                        2.42***                  2.83***
                                                                    (0.44)                   (0.43)
                                                                 [-5.05, 5.79]            [-0.09, 3.94]

Reliability x Morning Peak                                        12.60***                    -0.33
                                                                    (0.84)                   (1.91)
                                                                [-4.67, 28.83]           [-16.31, 19.06]

Number of Accounts                           1,121                    761                       62
Notes: Values shown are the coefficients of regressions of the toll paid on the regressands. The sample for
this regression includes trips taken during weekdays between 5-9AM and trips during all hours of the
weekend. Column II reports estimates for the period during which signs displaying travel time differences
were installed at ExpressLanes entrances. Values shown are the average coefficient across regressions, with
the interquartile range of values given in brackets. Standard errors of the mean, calculated by randomly
sampling from the mean and standard error of individual coefficients 500 times, are given in parenthesis.
Time, measured in hours, is the time saved by taking the ExpressLanes compared with mainline lanes, from
mainline speeds reported by PeMS, for the chosen trip distance. Reliability, measured in hours, is the
difference between lanes in the spread of travel times between the 50th and 80th quantiles.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level. **Significant at the 5 percent level. *Significant at the 10 percent
level.




                                                     53
           Table 4--Homogeneous Agent Models for External Validity
Panel A: Model with Constant
                                  I             II                 III
Constant                      2.84***        3.21***             3.87**
                               (0.48)         (0.98)             (1.36)
Time in hours                  8.02**        6.90***             4.58*
                               (3.00)         (1.88)             (2.08)
Reliability                  24.76***        17.70**              9.81
                               (5.24)         (5.66)             (8.74)

Trip Restriction                        > 0 minutes            > 4 minutes               > 8 minutes
Observations                              433,623                188,369                    42,277
AIC                                      1,510,246               695,318                   153,230
BIC                                      1,510,279               695,349                   153,255

Panel B: Model without Constant
Time in hours                 30.18***                          28.43***                   21.56***
                                (3.149)                          (2.915)                    (2.907)
Reliability                   44.18***                          29.55***                   23.36***
                                (8.305)                          (2.829)                    (1.585)

Trip Restriction                        > 0 minutes            > 4 minutes               > 8 minutes
Observations                              433,623                188,369                    42,277
AIC                                      1,923,834               792,574                   171,281
BIC                                      1,923,856               792,594                   171,298
Notes: Values shown are the coefficients of six regressions of the toll paid on the regressands. Time,
measured in hours, is the time saved by taking the ExpressLanes compared with mainline lanes, from
mainline speeds reported by PeMS, for the chosen trip distance. Reliability, measured in hours, is the
difference between lanes in the spread of travel times between the 50 th and 80th quantiles. AIC and BIC
are Akaike and Bayesian Information Criteria. Standard errors, clustered by road segment, are in
parentheses. Observations from morning peak hours (5-9AM) are included with weekends and holidays
removed.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level. **Significant at the 5 percent level. *Significant at the 10 percent
level.




                                                       54
