                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ISOLATING THE "TECH" FROM EDTECH:
    EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE ON COMPUTER ASSISTED LEARNING IN CHINA

                                          Yue Ma
                                      Robert W. Fairlie
                                      Prashant Loyalka
                                        Scott Rozelle

                                     Working Paper 26953
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26953


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2020




We would like to thank students at the Center for Experimental Economics in Education (CEEE)
at Shaanxi Normal University for exceptional project support as well as Dell Global Giving and
the TELOS Initiative at the GSE at Stanford for financing the project. We thank David Card,
Thomas Dee, Mark Duggan, Caroline Hoxby, Natalia Lazzatti, Hongbin Li, Bryan Pratt, Jon
Robinson, Sean Sylvia, and seminar participants at UC Berkeley, Stanford, UC Merced, and
Montana State University for comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Yue Ma, Robert W. Fairlie, Prashant Loyalka, and Scott Rozelle. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Isolating the "Tech" from EdTech: Experimental Evidence on Computer Assisted Learning
in China
Yue Ma, Robert W. Fairlie, Prashant Loyalka, and Scott Rozelle
NBER Working Paper No. 26953
April 2020
JEL No. I21,I25

                                           ABSTRACT

EdTech which includes online education, computer assisted learning (CAL), and remote
instruction was expanding rapidly even before the current full-scale substitution for in-person
learning at all levels of education around the world because of the coronavirus pandemic. Studies
of CAL interventions have consistently found large positive effects, bolstering arguments for the
widespread use of EdTech. However CAL programs, often held after school, provide not only
computer-based instruction, but often additional non-technology based inputs such as more time
on learning and instructional support by facilitators. In this paper, we develop a theoretical model
to carefully explore the possible channels by which CAL programs might affect academic
outcomes among schoolchildren. We isolate and test the technology-based effects of CAL and
additional parameters from the theoretical model, by designing a novel multi-treatment field
experiment with more than four thousand schoolchildren in rural China. Although we find
evidence of positive overall CAL program effects on academic outcomes, when we isolate the
technology-based effect of CAL (over and above traditional pencil-and-paper learning) we
generally find small to null effects. Our empirical results suggest that, at times, the "Tech" in
EdTech may have relatively small effects on academic outcomes, which has important
implications for the continued, rapid expansion of technologies such as CAL throughout the
world.

Yue Ma                                            Prashant Loyalka
Stanford University                               E413 Encina Hall
Center on Food Security and                       Stanford University
Environment at FSI                                Stanford, CA 94305
616 Jane Stanford Way                             loyalka@stanford.edu
Encina Hall E501
Stanford, CA 94305-6044                           Scott Rozelle
yma3@stanford.edu                                 Stanford University
                                                  Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies
Robert W. Fairlie                                 Encina Hall E407
Department of Economics                           Stanford, CA 94305-6055
Engineering 2 Building                            rozelle@stanford.edu
University of California at Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
rfairlie@ucsc.edu

A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at https://doi.org/10.1257/rct.3086-2.0
1 Introduction
Computer assisted learning (CAL), online courses, massive open online courses (MOOCs), and

other forms of educational technology (EdTech) are revolutionizing the way in which students are

educated. Billions of dollars are spent each year in the United States on software for K-12 students,

and the global EdTech industry was projected to grow to more than $250 billion by 2020 and $340

billion by 2025        (Escueta et al. 2017). With the large-scale, comprehensive movement of

schoolchildren and college students in China, Europe, the United States and most other countries

around the world to online platforms in response to the coronavirus outbreak (COVID-19), actual

expenditures on EdTech will be substantially higher. Although EdTech is rapidly being deployed

throughout the developed and developing world, the relatively limited evidence on whether and

how it affects academic outcomes is mixed (Bulman and Fairlie 2016).

         Bolstering arguments for the continuing expansion of EdTech in developing countries,

however, recent evaluations of supplemental learning CAL programs across a wide range of

software types have consistently found large positive effects on academic outcomes (Lai et al.

2013; 2015; Mo et al. 2014; Muralidharan et al. 2019; Bohmer, Burns, and Crowley 2014). 2 In

these studies, the effects are identified through randomized experiments in which the treatment

group that receives supplemental CAL (and in some cases additional inputs) is compared to a

control group that receives no inputs. Although often attributed to the EdTech component, the

estimated effects of the supplemental use of CAL, however, include other non-technology based



2
  Earlier studies of computer-based programs find large positive effects (Banerjee et al. 2007; Linden 2008), but the
evidence is not always clear (Rouse and Krueger 2004; Rockoff 2015). For the less common use of computer-assisted
learning as a direct substitute for regular teacher instruction in the classroom the evidence tends to show null effects
(Dynarski et al. 2007, Campuzano et al. 2009; Linden 2008; Barrow et al. 2009; Carillo et al. 2011) but this might
depend on how computers are used (Falck, Mang, and Woessmann 2018). Finally, the less structured provision of
computers and laptops for home and/or school use among schoolchildren tends to show null effects (e.g. Malamud
and Pop-Eleches 2011; Fairlie and Robinson 2013; Beuermann et al. 2015; Cristia et al. 2017; Malamud et al. 2019;
Hull 2019). For recent reviews, see Glewwe et al. (2013), Bulman and Fairlie (2016), and Escueta et al. (2017).

                                                           2
inputs in educational production. These inputs include more time learning academic material,

additional instructional support by facilitators, more attention to students, and potential crowd out

effects on homework time. Thus, a fundamental question for making decisions over investments

of educational resources is whether the "Tech" in EdTech is driving the supplemental educational

program effects or whether another input is driving the effects. This represents a more general

problem in evaluating and interpreting the impacts of any supplemental education intervention

program (e.g. after-school tutoring and community technology centers) because those programs

also consist of additional inputs such as more learning time.

         In this paper, we first create a theoretical model to carefully explore the possible channels

by which supplemental CAL might affect academic outcomes among schoolchildren. We then

estimate several key parameters from the theoretical model including the technology-based effect

of CAL. To generate exogenous variation in CAL and other inputs, we design and conduct a

randomized controlled trial (RCT) involving more than four thousand 4th to 6th grade students

across 352 math classes in 130 schools in rural China. Of the 185 million schoolchildren in China

roughly 75 percent live in rural areas (Chen et al. 2015; UNESCO 2020). The RCT includes three

treatment arms: i) supplemental CAL, ii) traditional supplemental learning (i.e. solving problems

using pencil and paper workbooks), and iii) a pure control that receives no supplemental learning.

The traditional supplemental learning sessions were designed to have identical content and

duration as the supplemental CAL sessions so that they could be used to isolate the technology

effects of CAL from the overall program effects. To further isolate effects, the RCT was also

designed so that the CAL treatment does not provide any additional inputs and is not part of a

larger program. 3


3
  A recent study (Johnson et al. 2018) evaluates a pilot program that involves training teaching assistants to deliver a
structured package of literacy materials to groups of 3-4 young children in England. They cross-randomize the TA

                                                           3
        The theoretical model demonstrates that there are multiple channels by which a

supplemental CAL program can effect educational outcomes, but does not provide a prediction on

whether the isolated technology component of the program improves or worsens educational

outcomes. Estimates from the field experiment indicate that, for the average student in rural China,

the supplemental CAL program increases students' math grades However, when we isolate the

technology-based effects of CAL we find point estimates that are small and statistically

indistinguishable from zero. The differential between the estimated overall CAL program effect

and the estimated CAL technology specific effect is also statistically significant. We find no

evidence of positive effects of the CAL Program for math test scores, however, suggesting the

program improves non-cognitive more than cognitive skills.

        Given well-documented gender differences in computer use and achievement (Eble and Hu

2019; Xu and Li 2018; Algan and Fortin 2018; Hannum and Park 2007), we examine effects for

boys and girls separately. Focusing on boys, we find that the CAL program increases math grades

by 3.4 percentile points and math test scores by 0.10. Isolating the technology-effects from CAL,

however, we find point estimates for the CAL technology effect that are notably smaller and

statistically indistinguishable from zero. For girls, we do not find positive estimates of the CAL

program effect or the isolated CAL technology effect.

        Turning to other measures, we find no evidence of time substitution effects from the CAL

and workbook sessions: neither type of session crowds out homework time in math. On the other

hand, the CAL program and isolated CAL technology effect increase how much students like their

math class.



teaching with ICT or paper equivalent sessions and find positive effects for both (slightly larger for non-ICT).
However, the emphasis on the teaching assistant intervention, small group assignment, and implementation of this
program in the classroom make it difficult to isolate the technology-based effects of the ICT session.

                                                       4
        In addition to contributing to the literature on whether and how CAL programs work, the

findings from our experiment provide novel evidence on whether the isolated technology

component of CAL improves academic outcomes. To our knowledge, only one previous study

addresses this question. 4 Muralidharan et al. (2019) find large positive effects of after-school

Mindspark Center programs in India which include both extensive software use and instructional

support. To rule out the effects of the instructional support and extra learning time inputs of the

program they compare their impact estimates to those from of an after-school private tutoring

program that did not include a technology component but was conducted in the same location and

student age group, and for more time (Berry and Mukherjee 2016). The comparison program has

no impacts on student outcomes suggesting that additional instructional time and tutoring were not

the key drivers of the Mindspark impacts (Muralidharan et al. 2019). Building on the use of this

comparison, our experiment provides the first estimate in the literature directly identifying the

technology-based effects of CAL on educational outcomes. It is the first experiment to use a second

comparison group to remove additional inputs such as more time learning, instructional support

from teachers and aides in the sessions, more attention to students, and crowd out of homework

time. Isolating the technology-based effects is fundamental to understanding how CAL works, and

whether the "Tech" in EdTech positively affects educational outcomes.

        Our paper also contributes to the broader literature on the effects of computer technology

in education and the labor market by providing a new "Pencil Test." The seminal paper by DiNardo

and Pischke (1997) found that workers who use pencils at work experience a wage premium that




4
 The general finding of null effects when CAL substitutes for regular teacher instruction in the classroom provides
some indirect evidence on the question (Dynarski et al. 2007, Campuzano et al. 2009; Linden 2008; Barrow et al.
2009; Carillo et al. 2011). However, the implementation of these programs within the classroom and the substitution
for several factors (not just learning time) such as teacher lecture time, in-class discussions and small group work
make it difficult to isolate the technology-related effects of CAL.

                                                         5
is similar to computer users. "Pencil skills" are not scarce, however, and cannot have a large return

in the labor market, raising the concern that the large estimated returns to computer skills in

previous studies were due to unobserved worker and job characteristics. Several recent studies

evaluating CAL programs rule out concerns about unobserved heterogeneity among students,

parents and schools by using RCTs, but ignore a related threat to interpretation. In a similar vein,

comparing CAL to pencil and paper workbook estimates provides evidence that the large positive

estimates of the effects of CAL programs commonly found in previous studies might be at least

partly due to other inputs such as more time devoted to learning material, which could have also

been achieved with a pencil and workbook. Taken together, the findings have particular relevance

to the questions of whether technology has a distinct advantage in improving student outcomes,

and what advantages and disadvantages it has over traditional "pencil and paper" forms of learning.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we create a theoretical

model to illustrate the channels by which CAL might affect academic outcomes among

schoolchildren relative to more traditional, "pencil and paper" forms of learning. Section 3

describes the design and implementation of the experiment. Section 4 presents our main results

and reports estimates of the structural parameters of the theoretical model. Section 5 concludes.



2 Theoretical Model of Investment in EdTech

A theoretical model illustrates the channels by which CAL might affect academic outcomes among

schoolchildren. The broad question of interest is whether parents, students and schools are

choosing optimal levels of technology inputs for education given constraints on financial resources,

information, and in-school and after-school time allocated to learning. Can academic achievement

be improved by investing in additional technology use? The answer to this question necessarily


                                                 6
involves a trade-off between inputs. Investment in technology likely offsets investment in

traditional resources. During after-school hours, the question of whether time spent using

computer-based learning offsets traditional learning is especially salient because of the flexibility

of this time.

           To illustrate these points, we start by adding computer resources such as CAL to a standard

model of education production. 5 In the context of after-school education production by students,

the binding constraints in such a model are the amount of after-school time available for learning

and the budget for parental or school resources for after-school learning. The focus of the model

is on how CAL investment affects various math time inputs, but we also discuss the theoretical

implications of how CAL programs, more generally, might provide additional instructional support

by teachers or aides and more attention to students during sessions. We consider a value-added

model of education and focus on academic performance in math. 6

                                        =  ,  ,  ,   . .                                                    (2.1)

                                              =  + 

                                              +   

                                           +     ,

           A measure of academic performance in math,  , is assumed to depend on the

characteristics of a student and his or her family (including prior academic performance),  ,

school and teacher characteristics,  , total time allocated to learning math,  , and time allocated

to learning math on the computer,  . Time allocated to learning math on the computer is

essentially entered twice to allow for a direct technology effect and a separate time learning math



5
    See Hanushek (1979, 1986); Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain (2005); Figlio (1999) for examples.
6
    See Hanushek (1979) for an early discussion of value-added models in the economics of education literature.

                                                           7
effect. Total time allocated to learning math consists of traditional learning,  , and CAL,  .

The amount of time spent on learning math is constrained by total available after-school learning

time  which includes time spent after-school on all other activities,  . Investments in

traditional and CAL are subject to costs ( and  ) and per student budget  for after-school

learning expenditures on math.

        If students, parents and schools do not make optimal choices of CAL, possibly due to not

having access to technology, or other resource and information constraints, then an exogenous

reallocation toward CAL could be positive. On the other hand, if students, parents, and schools

already optimally allocate time then an exogenous reallocation toward CAL and away from other

more productive forms of learning will result in a negative or zero effect on math performance. 7

From Equation (2.1) the total marginal effect of CAL on academic achievement is:

                                                                                                           (2.2)
                                       =  +
                                            

The total effect is comprised of a direct effect of increasing CAL time on math and an indirect

effect through increasing total time spent learning math.

        CAL might have a direct or "technology" effect on academic achievement independent of

                             
more time on math (i.e.    0). CAL is video-based, and often game-based, and thus might be

more engaging than traditional learning. The game-based features of educational software might

increase learning interest as well as learning performance (Ebner and Holzinger, 2007; Burguillo,

2010). CAL might also provide faster feedback on problems compared to the feedback associated

with traditional modes of learning (Van der Kleij et al., 2015). On the other hand, the game-based

nature of CAL might reduce interest in completing traditional homework or learning in class and


7
 Parents and students might limit time on computers for after-school learning because of concerns over distraction,
safety, and other issues.

                                                        8
hence decrease achievement. In addition, solving math problems on a computer instead of writing

them down on paper with a pencil could commit them less to memory (Vincent, 2016). The net

technology effect of these potentially offsetting mechanisms is theoretically ambiguous.

       Using the total time on math constraint in (2.1) we can rewrite the total marginal effect of

CAL on math achievement.

                                                                                              (2.3)
                               =  +  1 +   
                                          

Here we can view the indirect effect (the second term in equation 2.3) as having two parts. The

first part is the effect of a one-to-one increase in math time by increasing CAL time. As discussed

in detail below, this part of the effect of introducing educational technology is important and often

overlooked in the previous literature. Introducing CAL in a subject implicitly increases time spent

learning that subject. The second part of the indirect effect of CAL captures the possibility of

crowd out (or crowd in) of traditional learning in math. CAL might displace some of the time a

student normally devotes to traditional forms of learning such as homework or independent

                                                         
studying because of the overall time constraint (i.e.       < 0). Crowd out of homework time might
                                                         

result because of the time constraint and/or the student viewing traditional learning as less fun or

engaging compared to learning math on the computer (which is often game-based). Working in

the opposite direction, however, there could be crowd in where CAL might increase a student's

interest and confidence in math and ultimately increase independent time studying math.

       To make the theoretical model more tractable we approximate with a linear education

production function. We modify (2.1) and (2.3) as:

                                =  X +  +  +                                                  (2.1)

                                                                                              (2.3)
                                        =  + (1 + ).
                                     



                                                  9
       Arguably, the parameter of most interest is the direct or technology-based effect of CAL

on academic performance, . It captures how CAL affects achievement stripped of any mechanical

effects through increased hours learning math or any crowd out or crowd in effects on traditional

forms of learning math. Policymakers, however, might not be as concerned about removing crowd

out or crowd in effects, but want to know the net reduced form effect that captures the relative

returns to different investments in math learning. In this case, the budget constraint and relative

prices would also play an important role. The crowd out or crowd in parameter, is also of interest

because it provides a sense of the behavioral response to different technology investment policies.

For example, a better understanding of whether investing in CAL, that makes traditional forms of

learning less interesting (crowd out) or builds confidence (crowd in), is useful.

       The total effect of implementing a CAL program, captured by (2.3'), captures everything:

time learning math on the computer, total time learning math, and potential crowd out effects on

homework. Although the focus here has been on time effects, as discussed in more detail below,

implementing a CAL program often includes additional inputs such as providing learning new

material outside the standard curriculum, additional instructional support by teachers or aides

running the sessions, and more attention to schoolchildren in sessions.



2.2 Interpreting Estimates from Previous CAL Program Evaluations

As noted above, several previous studies estimate the effects of supplemental CAL on academic

outcomes and find large positive effects. For example, Lai et al. (2013; 2015) and Mo et al. (2014)

find large positive effects of supplemental CAL programs for Chinese schoolchildren (0.12 to

0.18 in math) from 40 minutes of instruction, 2 times a week. Muralidharan et al. (2019) find

large positive intent-to-treat effects of after-school Mindspark Center programs in India which


                                                10
include software use and instructional support (0.37 in math and 0.23 in Hindi) from 90 minutes

per session, six sessions a week. Bohmer, Burns, and Crowley (2014) find large positive effects

from an after-school program providing CAL and student coaches in South Africa (0.25 in math)

for 90 minutes, biweekly. These studies essentially estimate (2.3') without identifying the

technology parameter,  . Because (2.3') includes the total effects from an increase in   in

addition to an increase in   , it favors finding positive effects on academic outcomes. Outside of

the theoretical model, many of the CAL programs evaluated in the previous literature include

additional educational inputs such as coaches and tutoring sessions which further complicate the

interpretation of CAL effects on academic outcomes.

       Muralidharan et al. (2019) recognize this concern and note that the impact estimates from

the after-school Mindspark program intervention include a combination of the computer program,

group-based instruction, and extra instructional time. Although their experiment is not designed to

distinguish between these different channels of impact, they address the concern by comparing

their CAL program estimates to estimates from a contemporaneous experimental study of the

impacts of an after-school tutoring program in the same location and with similarly-aged students

(Berry and Mukherjee, 2016). Although the tutoring program was longer (3 hours per session, six

days per week instead of 1.5 hours per session, six days per week) no impacts on academic

outcomes were found. Muralidharan et al. (2019) note that the null impacts from this program

suggest that the additional instructional time or group-based tutoring on their own may have had

limited impacts without the CAL program provided at the Mindspark Centers.

       The markedly different findings from evaluations of the two programs is important. We

build on these results by directly estimating the technology parameter,  , in (2.3') using our




                                                11
experiment. Specifically, we make use of two treatment arms and a control group to isolate the

effects of the different inputs.



3 Estimation, Experimental Design, and Data

Estimating the parameters from the theoretical model is complicated for two primary reasons. First,

academic performance and CAL use is likely to be correlated with unobservables leading to biased

estimates, especially if there is positive selection bias. Second, the multicollinearity of total math

time and CAL time makes it difficult to identify the separate effects of math time and CAL time

on academic performance. To address both concerns we designed and implemented a field

experiment in which students are randomly assigned to either a control group, a treatment group

that receives supplemental CAL sessions, or a treatment group that receives supplemental

traditional workbook sessions. As discussed in more detail below, the supplemental traditional

workbook sessions were designed to provide similar content, time learning math, and other

characteristics as the CAL sessions. Production of math achievement in the control, CAL treatment,

and workbook treatment groups can be represented, respectively, by:
                                             _0
                                    0
                                     =  +  + 
                                                                                               (3.1)

                               =  +  +  + _0 + 1 +                                             (3.2)


                                   =  +  + _0 + 1 +  ,                                         (3.3)

where _0 is the base or control level of traditional homework time, and  and  are the

potential crowd out (or crowd in) responses of math homework time to CAL and workbook

sessions, respectively. To normalize time units and simplify the notation, the CAL treatment sets




                                                 12
 = 1 and the extra time allocated to learning math to 1. The workbook treatment, which is of

the same duration of time, also sets the extra time allocated to learning math to 1.

       The parameters of these three equations can be recovered by using adjusted means and the

following two equations:

                              =   -   - ( -  )                                               (3.4)

                                            - 0                                              (3.5)
                                       =
                                         1 + 

 -  can be estimated from the difference in total hours learning math between the CAL

treatment group and the workbook treatment group,  can be estimated from the difference in total

hours learning math between the CAL treatment group and the control group, and  can be

estimated from the difference in total hours learning math between the workbook treatment group

and the control group. If these hours substitution effects are small then we are essentially

identifying  from the CAL-workbook difference, and  from the workbook-control difference.

The RCT, in expectation, holds constant student, teacher, and school characteristics and the base

or control level of traditional learning time on math, _0.

       We estimate the parameters of the theoretical model represented in Equations (2.11), (2.12)

and (2.13) using the following regression equation:

                = 0 + 1 (-1 ) + 2 (-2 ) + Xij  + Sij  +  +                                   (3.6)

where  is the academic outcome of interest measured at endline for student i in school j; 1 is

a dummy variable indicating the treatment assignment for the control condition of class j, 2 is a

dummy variable indicating the class treatment assignment for the workbook condition of class

j; Xij is a vector of baseline student control variables, Sij is a vector of baseline teacher and

classroom control variables, and  is a set of county-grade (strata) fixed effects. Both the control


                                                 13
and workbook dummy variables are entered with negative signs to capture relative differences

with the CAL treatment (which is the left-out condition in the equation). In this case 1 captures

the CAL-control difference, which is the overall program effect or the "CAL program" effect, and

2 captures the CAL-workbook difference, which is the isolated technology-based effect of CAL

or the "CAL technology" effect. In all specifications, Xij includes the baseline value of the

dependent variable (when available). We also estimate treatment effects with an expanded set of

baseline controls including student age, gender, whether each parent finished junior high school

or not, teacher gender, teacher experience, whether the teacher attended college, number of

boarding students in the class, and total class size. In all regressions, we adjust standard errors for

clustering at the class level.



3.2 Experimental Design

We designed the field experiment to generate exogenous variation in both supplemental CAL as

well as supplemental traditional learning with the purpose of estimating the parameters from the

theoretical model. The field experiment involves more than four thousand 4th to 6th grade students

across 352 school-grades (with one math class per school-grade) in 130 schools in rural China.

The RCT includes three treatment arms: a supplemental CAL arm, a supplemental traditional

learning (pencil and paper workbook) arm, and a pure control arm. The supplemental learning

offered by the first two treatment arms is identical in terms of content and duration.

        The experiment was conducted among rural primary schools in Northwest China (Shaanxi

Province). Specifically, 130 schools from 9 impoverished counties were sampled to participate in

the experiment. In each school, we randomly sampled one fourth, fifth, and sixth grade class that

had at least 4 boarding students. All students in the sampled classes were surveyed, but the


                                                  14
experimental sample includes only boarding students. Altogether, we sampled and surveyed 4,024

boarding students and their 352 math class teachers. 8 We focused on boarding students because

there was no time at which to provide after-school CAL and workbook sessions to non-boarding

students. Boarding students represent 37 percent of students in our schools. There are 32 million

primary and junior high boarding students in China representing 32 percent of all students

(Ministry of Education 2017).

           The experiment took place in four stages. First, in October 2017 (near the start of the school

year), we conducted a baseline survey of students, teachers and principals. Second, after we

collected the baseline data, we randomized the 352 classes into the three different treatment

conditions. Third, we began conducting the interventions with boarding students in the treated

classes in the first half of November 2017. Fourth, in June 2018 (at the end of the school year), we

returned to the same classes to conduct a follow up (or endline) survey.



3.3 Baseline Survey

The baseline survey collected information on students, teachers, and school principals. The student

survey collected information about student and household characteristics (age, gender, father

completed junior high school (yes/no), mother completed junior high school (yes/no), the degree

to which they liked math class). Students also took a 35 minute standardized exam in math. The

teacher survey collected information on teacher gender, experience, and college attendance.

Finally, we collected data on the number of boarding students in the class and class size.



3.4 Randomization


8
    We find that boarding and non-boarding students are similar across numerous characteristics.

                                                          15
We designated each of 27 county-grades (9 counties and 3 grades) in our sample as strata or blocks.

We then randomly allocated classes within these strata to one of three different treatment

conditions (T1 = Supplemental CAL, T2 = Supplemental Workbook, or C = Control). There were

116 classes in 88 schools for supplemental CAL (T1), 118 classes in 86 schools for supplemental

workbook (T2), and 118 classes in 85 schools for the control group.

         To ensure adequate sample sizes, power calculations were conducted before the beginning

of the trial (Spybrook et al., 2009). 9 We expected to lose a small amount of statistical power due

to student attrition. Based on our experience, we assumed an attrition rate of 5%. The actual

attrition rate from baseline to endline was only 2.4%.



3.5 Program (Treatment) Administration

The CAL and workbook programs were implemented by a university-based NGO in western China

that specializes in after-school programs. Program sessions were held once a week from October

2017 to June 2018. Sessions were held for 40-minutes on Sunday afternoon each week. In the

weekly sessions students were asked to complete math exercises taken from the (same) chapter of

the standardized math textbook that students were supposed to cover (according to the national

curriculum) in class each week. The programs had facilitators who were trained by our research

team to organize and supervise the supplemental learning time. The facilitators were instructed to

not provide instruction to the students, but rather to make sure that students stayed on task in terms

of doing supplemental exercises particular to the week. Facilitators were only allowed to assist

students with scheduling, computer hardware issues, software operations, and handing out and


9
 We conservatively used the following parameters to estimate the sample size for the study: (a) intraclass correlation
coefficient (adjusted for strata fixed effects): 0.10; (b) average number of boarding students per class: 11; (c) R-
squared of 0.40 (controlling e.g. for baseline math achievement). With alpha = 0.05 and beta = 0.8, we estimated that
we would need 115 classes per treatment arm for a minimum detectable effect size (MDES) of 0.14 SDs.

                                                         16
collecting workbooks. They were instructed to not answer questions regarding the material.

According to our observations, there was little instruction-based communication during the CAL

sessions. The facilitators were, for the most part, not the regular math teachers for the students.

          The CAL and workbook programs were designed to be as similar as possible. For example,

the two programs were implemented by the same NGO, they were held on the same days of the

week, for the same amount of time, and number of times during the school year. They also had the

same curricular content each week, and same facilitator training and instructions. At endline we

found roughly similar attendance rates for CAL and workbook sessions for the two treatment

groups.

          The software is used in schools in China nationwide. Similar to most CAL software for

this age group, the software relied on vivid images and was gamified (see Appendix Figure 1). If

students answered an exercise correctly, they received virtual coins with which they could buy

virtual gear and outfits. When students did a problem incorrectly they would receive feedback that

it was incorrect and solutions if they got stuck. Instead of using computers, students assigned to

workbook sessions completed pencil-and-paper math exercises. As with any standard workbook,

students could check solutions for the odd-numbered exercises at the back of the workbook.

          The supplemental CAL and workbook content was aligned with the standardized,

government-mandated curricula for each grade. Unlike less developed countries, students in rural

China are much more likely to be on-grade level in terms of achievement outcomes (Li et al. 2018).

Students and teachers are rarely absent from class, and students are taught a standardized

curriculum at a regular pace.

          The CAL program that we evaluate in this study demonstrated positive effects on a range

of educational outcomes in previous studies in China (Lai et al. 2013; 2015; Mo et al. 2014, 2015).



                                                 17
Students receiving supplemental CAL increased math and language test scores, the degree to

which they liked school, self-efficacy, and interest in learning (Lai et al. 2015; Bai et al. 2018).

Although it is difficult to compare estimates across studies, effect sizes for supplemental CAL in

China are similar to the effects sizes for supplemental CAL in India once the lower levels of time

commitment are factored in. 10 The large positive effects in India may also be due to the CAL

program's adaptive component, which is critical for when students are below grade level and have

widely differing levels of preparation (Muralidharan et al. 2019). In countries where student

preparation is stronger, more regimented and more homogenous, such as China, regular CAL

appears to work well for supplemental learning (Mo et al., 2014; 2015). Additionally, in another

setting with more homogenous student preparation, Van Klaveren et al. (2017) who conduct an

RCT in Dutch secondary schools do not find significant differences between adaptive vs. non-

adaptive software and even find negative relative effects for higher ability students (0.08).

Software differs along many dimensions, however, and thus some caution is needed in generalizing

the results to different applications, but the software we evaluate here has been shown to work and

is widely used in China.



3.6 Endline Survey and Primary Outcomes

We conducted the endline survey with the students, teachers, and principals. As in the baseline,

students took a 35 minute standardized math exam. 11 In the analyses, we convert endline math


10
   The CAL program effect sizes ranged from 0.1 to 0.2 for sessions of from 40 minutes of instruction, 2 times a
week in rural China and the CAL program effect sizes were 0.37 from 90 minutes per session (for two subjects), six
sessions a week in India. The after-school program includes 45 minutes of software use and 45 minutes of instructional
support on two subjects each of six days per week. As noted above, Muralidharan et al. (2018) cite evidence in Berry
and Mukherjee (2016) showing no effects of a private tutoring program in India (run by Pratham) with similar aged
children and time frame suggesting that the effects are primarily driven by CAL.
11
   Like the baseline test, the endline math test was grade-appropriate, tailored to the national and provincial-level
mathematics curricula. Although grade-appropriate tests may present a problem in some developing countries (since
student learning is, on average, below grade level), this was not the case in our sample schools. Our baseline and

                                                         18
exam scores into z-scores by subtracting the mean endline math score of the control sample and

dividing by the standard deviation of the control sample. We also asked math teachers to provide

each student's math grades (as distinct from math test/exam/achievement scores). Separate from

test scores, grades capture other cognitive and non-cognitive dimensions of human capital and are

predictive of later life outcomes (Borghans et al. 2016). 12 Furthermore in the context of China,

grades are operationalized as the teacher's independent evaluation of a student's within-class

ranking in overall ability and are a less lumpy measure than letter grades provided in the United

States. For the analyses, we convert math grade ranks into percentiles based on class size. The

correlation between math test scores and math grades is 0.529. Although randomization was at the

class level, boarding students represent only a fraction of the students in the class thus providing

variation in ranks. We also asked students about the degree to which they liked math class, time

on math homework, as well as time on language homework.



3.7 Balance Check

Appendix Table 1 presents tests for balance on baseline observables across the treatment arms.

The table presents the results from a total of 36 tests comparing average variable values across the

treatment and control arms. These tests were conducted by regressing each baseline variable on a




endline math tests, which had anchor items, allowed us to produce vertically scaled scores. The scaled scores show
that the sample students, on average, made substantive achievement gains within each grade.
The tests were constructed by trained psychometricians in multiple steps. Mathematics test items tests were first
selected from standardized mathematics curricula for each grade (4, 5, and 6). The content validity of these test items
was checked by multiple experts. The psychometric properties of the test were then validated using data from extensive
pilot testing. The tests had good psychometric properties (Cronbach alphas of approximately 0.8, unidimensionality,
and a lack of differential item functioning by gender). An analysis of the pilot, baseline and endline test results also
indicated that the tests did not suffer from floor or ceiling effects.
12
    In conversations with teachers we found that grades in math courses were determined by homework, class
performance, understanding of material, exams, and final exam.

                                                          19
treatment group indicator and controlling for strata. For tests of student-level variables, standard

errors were adjusted for clustering at the class level.

         Out of the 36 tests, only one was statistically different from zero at the 10% level and one

at the 5% level. The results from Table A1 therefore indicate that balance was achieved across the

three arms, especially as a small number of significant differences is to be expected (by random

chance). Our key baseline covariates (baseline math test scores and grades) were not statistically

different between any of the three treatment arms (even at the 10% level).



4 Results

Estimates of Equation (3.6) are reported in Table 1. For the full sample, we find a positive and

statistically significant effect of the overall CAL program on the student's math grade although no

statistical evidence of a positive effect of the overall CAL program on math test scores. The

coefficient estimate on math grade indicates that the CAL program increased a student's ranking

in the class by 1.8 percentiles. After excluding very small classes, which create a high level of

variance because movements in grade-class rankings are amplified, we find that the CAL program

increased a student's ranking in the class by 1.9 percentiles. 13 Turning to isolating the technology

effect of CAL we find no effect on test scores and no effect on math grades. For math grades, even

in face of the positive CAL program estimate, we do not find a technology-based effect of CAL

that is statistically distinguishable from zero. Furthermore, the CAL technology estimate is

statistically different from the CAL program estimate (1.53 to 1.70 percentile points).




13
  The total sample size is only 2 percent smaller than the total sample size. The median class size in the sample is
36.

                                                          20
        The next step towards recovering the technology parameter, , from the theoretical model

defined in Equations (3.4) and (3.5) is to estimate whether homework time is affected by the two

treatments. As noted above, an additional complication regarding the interpretation of the overall

CAL program effect estimates is that they include the potential crowd out (or crowd in) of

homework time on the subject. Table 2 reports estimates of CAL and workbook treatment effects

for time spent on math homework (i.e. not during school and not during the CAL or workbook

sessions as part of the experiment). From Equation (3.4),  can be estimated from CAL treatment

­ control, and  can be estimated from workbook treatment - control. All of the point estimates

on homework time are small and statistically insignificant. We do not find evidence that students'

homework time is altered by either the CAL or workbook treatments. This is reasonable given that

teachers continued to require regular homework, and the CAL and workbook sessions were run

independently of the classroom. 14 Given these findings we can interpret the CAL technology

effects estimates presented in Table 1 as estimates of the theoretical parameter, , in Equations

(2.1') and (2.3').

        Taken together, the results suggest that even though the "EdTech" program may positively

influence student learning outcomes for the average student, part of the effect is due to additional

inputs such as time on instruction that supplemental workbook sessions (the "Ed" without the

"Tech") also offer. In fact, our estimates for performance in math class suggest that the entire effect

is due to additional inputs and that the isolated technology-based CAL effect is zero.

        Boys and girls use computers differently with much higher levels of video game use among

boys (Kaiser Family Foundation 2010; U.S. Department of Education 2011; Fairlie 2017; Algan




14
  We also find that the CAL or workbook sessions do not crowd out time on other subjects (in our case, the main
other subject students took in primary school ­ language).

                                                       21
and Fortin 2018). 15 Additionally, boys and girls differ substantially in academic performance in

schools in China (Eble and Hu 2019; Xu and Li 2018; Hannum and Park 2007). Thus, we estimate

impacts of CAL, which is video game based, separately for boys and girls. Tables 3 and 4 report

estimates of Equation (3.6) for boys and girls, respectively. The patterns for CAL program and

isolated technology effects are more apparent for boys. The CAL program has positive and

significant effects on both boys' test scores (0.10) and performance in math class (3.4 percentile

points). On the other hand, we find no evidence of positive CAL technology effects for boys. For

both test scores and grades, the point estimates are smaller and statistically indistinguishable from

zero. The estimates for math grades are also precise enough to show a statistically significant

difference between the CAL program and CAL technology estimates essentially at the 10 percent

level (p-value = 0.103). The results for boys provide additional evidence that the isolated CAL

technology effect might be small and that part of the positive CAL program estimate is due to

additional program inputs such as more time learning math. Estimates reported in Table 5 for

impacts on homework time show null effects similar to the results for the total sample. Thus, we

do not find evidence of substitutability for homework time for boys implying that the CAL

technology estimate can be interpreted as the theoretical parameter, .

        We find no evidence of significant effects of either the CAL program or CAL technology

effects on the learning outcomes of girls. Table 4 reports estimates of Equation (3.6) for girls. The

CAL program and CAL technology point estimates are small in magnitude, inconsistent in sign,

and not statistically significant. The estimated effects for CAL might differ by gender because

boys and girls engage differently with technology (U.S. Department of Education 2011; Kaiser

Family Foundation 2010; Fairlie 2017; Algan and Fortin 2018). Additional analyses do not reveal


15
  International PISA data indicate that 47 percent of boys compared with 16 percent girls play a computer game
every day (Algan and Fortin 2018).

                                                       22
any clear explanations for why our results differ, however. One possibility is there might have

been a small amount of substitutability away from homework time for girls. Estimates reported in

Table 5 for impacts on homework time show some evidence of negative effects for girls.

        A common argument for how CAL, or EdTech more generally, works is that it increases

engagement in subject material. If students enjoy learning math through CAL that enjoyment could

spill over to their math classes. Table 6 reports estimates of Equation (4.1) for whether students

report liking their math class. 16

        The results differ for liking math class. For all students, both the CAL program effect and

the CAL technology effect are positive and statistically significant. The CAL technology effect is

roughly 2.7 percentile points. Another key finding here is that the CAL program and CAL

technology effects sizes are essentially the same. Spending more time on math is not the underlying

cause of why the CAL program treatment has a positive effect on liking math and instead the vivid

images, gamification and other technology-based attributes of CAL might have increased overall

enjoyment of math. For boys, the CAL program effect is positive and statistically significant, but

the CAL technology effect is statistically insignificant. The difference in point estimates, however,

is small. For girls, the CAL technology effect is positive and statistically significant, but the CAL

program effect is not significant. The CAL program versus technology difference is larger than for

boys, but also not statistically significant. Overall, we find some evidence that the technology

component of CAL has a positive spillover effect on students liking their math class. This is

consistent with the argument that the use of technology can increase interest in subject material.

This increased interest may or may not translate into higher academic performance over the long-

run.


16
 The endline survey question was worded carefully to refer to the student's math class and not to the CAL or
workbook sessions.

                                                       23
4.2 Distributional Effects

The results from the treatment regressions provide some evidence of CAL program effects and

smaller or null CAL technology effects at the mean. Turning the focus to other parts of the

distribution, we first estimate models in which we create dependent variables indicating that the

student is above the median of the test score or grade distribution (Appendix Table 2). For test

scores (above the median), we find little evidence of significant effects for either the CAL program

or CAL technology. For grades (above the median), we find a positive and statistically significant

coefficient on the CAL program effect (0.036, se=0.018), but a small and statistically insignificant

coefficient on the CAL technology effect (0.009, se=0.018). These results are consistent with the

main regression results.

       We also estimate quantile treatment effects regressions to test for differential treatment

effects across the post-treatment outcome distribution. Appendix Figures 2 and 3 display estimates

and 95 percent confidence intervals for each percentile for the CAL Program and CAL technology

effects for math test scores and math grades, respectively. For test scores we find some evidence

of positive CAL technology effects at the bottom of the distribution. For most of the distribution

we find null estimates of CAL program and CAL technology effects. For math grades, the patterns

are consistent with the findings for mean treatment effects ­ larger positive CAL program effects

throughout the distribution, but essentially zero CAL technology effects throughout the

distribution. Although the quantile treatment estimates are not precisely measured they do not

change the conclusion from the mean impacts reported in Table 1. Mean impact estimates do not

appear to be hiding differential effects at different parts of the distribution. We thus focus on mean

impacts.


                                                 24
4.3 Heterogeneity on Initial Math Ability

We estimate CAL program and CAL technology effects by baseline math ability terciles.

Appendix Table 3 reports estimates of (4.1) separately by tercile defined by baseline math test

scores. Teachers do not assign class ranks at the beginning of the school year. For the bottom and

top terciles we find similar results as for the results for all students. We find positive CAL program

effects on endline math class rank, and CAL technology point estimates that are notably smaller

and are not statistically distinguishable from zero. We find no discernable effects on endline math

test scores. For the middle tercile we do not find statistically significant coefficients for either test

scores or grades. The main findings thus hold for both the lowest ability and highest ability students.



4.4 Robustness Checks

We conduct several robustness checks of our main results. First, we examine whether the lack of

evidence of a CAL technology effect is due to students not having any experience working on

computers in school. In contrast, we find that all of the schools in our sample have computer time

at school, and self-reported use by schoolchildren indicates that 87 percent have used computers

in school at baseline. Nevertheless, we estimate the test score and grade regressions with only

students who self-report using a computer at school as a check. We find similar results to those

reported in Table 1 (results not shown for the sake of brevity). The null finding for the CAL

technology effect is not due to schoolchildren not being familiar with using computers at school.

        Second, we examine whether the estimates for grade are sensitive to having a high

percentage of boarding students in the classroom. In classes with a high percentage of boarding

students and treatment being assigned at the class level, there could be an attenuated treatment


                                                   25
effect. To address this issue, we estimate the grade regression (reported in columns 3 and 4 of

Table 1) excluding classes with 90 percent boarding students, 80 percent boarding students and 70

percent boarding students. We find that the CAL program coefficients remain positive and roughly

similar in magnitude although they lose some statistical power (Appendix Tables 4-6). The CAL

technology coefficients remain small (often negative) and not close to statistical significance. The

robustness of results is consistent with boarding students representing a small share of students in

the classroom.



5 Conclusions

Although EdTech is rapidly expanding around the world and accelerating in response to recent

global health developments, relatively little is known about the advantages and disadvantages of

using technology in education. Is EdTech, as proponents argue, revolutionizing the way in which

students learn? Our theoretical model illustrates that the answer to this question is not

straightforward because there are several possible inputs to educational production that are often

entangled with the technology provided in CAL programs, making it difficult to isolate effects. To

estimate the technology effect of CAL and other key parameters from the theoretical model, we

design a field experiment in rural China that includes a novel "pencil and paper" workbook

treatment in addition to a regular CAL program treatment and a control group. Estimates from the

experiment indicate that, for the average student in rural China, the overall CAL program improves

math grades whereas the isolated technology component of CAL has no discernable effect on math

grades. The difference between the two estimated effects is statistically significant. We do not find

evidence of a CAL program or CAL technology effect for math test scores, which may be due to

the program having greater effects on non-cognitive than cognitive skills.


                                                 26
       Given gender differences in computer use, we examined effects for boys and girls

separately. For boys, we find that the CAL program increases math grades by 3.5 percentile points

and math test scores by 0.10. But, when we isolate the CAL technology effect, the point estimates

become noticeably smaller and statistically indistinguishable from zero. We also find no evidence

of substitution effects of the CAL and workbook sessions on homework time in math. For girls we

do not find positive effects of the CAL program or CAL technology component. On the other hand,

we find evidence suggesting that the both the CAL program and CAL technology affect how much

students report that they like their math class, which might or might not have longer-term effects.

       Our study provides a second generation "pencil test" (DiNardo and Pischke 1997). If

similarly timed, content and structured "pencil and paper" workbook sessions show roughly

similar effects on academic performance as the CAL program then it raises concerns that another

factor common to both is driving the results. In particular, the "pencil and paper" workbook

sessions, by construction, provide more time learning subject material, which might be the key

educational input that increases academic performance and not the new computer technology in

CAL programs. The technology-based effect of CAL might be relatively small and might not be

the primary driver of the estimated large positive effects of CAL programs found in many previous

studies.

           Another argument for the rapid adoption of EdTech around the world is that it has low

marginal costs. Once developed, copying software or providing it online is nearly costless to

provide access to the additional student. In our experiment, however, we find that the marginal

costs of pencil and paper workbooks are also low, and in fact, are lower. The costs of photocopying

workbooks are inexpensive. Furthermore, workbooks do not require the high fixed costs and

maintenance costs of computers, Internet connections, and extra space to house computers. Back-



                                                27
of-the-envelope calculations indicate that the workbook program has roughly 22 percent lower

costs (see Appendix B).

         More research is clearly needed on the effectiveness of EdTech and what underlies these

effects. In settings where students are substantially behind grade level or there is substantial

heterogeneity, the technology effects of adaptive CAL might be larger because technology can

personalize education. This is consistent with the large positive effects of an after-school program

in India that includes adaptive computer instruction (Muralidharan et al., 2019). 17 In educational

systems in which students are generally at grade level and there is less heterogeneity, however,

experimental evidence shows that adaptive CAL does not have an advantage over non-adaptive

CAL and might even be less effective for high-ability students (Van Klaveren et al. 2017).

Moreover, in comparison with the widely-used software we evaluate, adaptive software is much

more costly to develop and maintain. There may be no one-size adaptive algorithm, making it

difficult to generalize the benefits of adaptive software even across contexts where teaching at the

right level is important. 18 More research is needed on the tradeoffs between adaptive vs non-

adaptive software.

         Another area of promise is that we find evidence of a positive effect of CAL technology

on student interest in math whereas no effect on math interest from extra time learning math. More

research is needed on whether the technology in EdTech can spark an interest in math among

young children and generate longer-term interest and success in math. More research is also needed

on separating the effects of various inputs in educational production, especially the mechanical

effects extra time learning, in supplemental educational programs. The results of this study raise


17
   As compared to the null effects of a similar after-school program in India without adaptive computer instruction
found in Berry and Mukherjee (2016).
18
   Other components of EdTech could also be evaluated. For example, CAL might be improved with a component
that regularly informs teachers and parents of student progress (Bergman 2020).

                                                         28
concerns about the attribution of the effectiveness of key inputs in these programs and have broader

implications for evaluations of any supplemental educational program.

       Finally, more research is needed on whether and to what degree EdTech can substitute for

traditional learning. This is especially pertinent today in light of the full-scale, comprehensive,

global movement to EdTech at all levels of education in response to the coronavirus pandemic.

How much human capital accumulation will be lost or will CAL, online classes, remote learning,

and other forms of EdTech be able to substitute adequately for traditional teaching and learning

methods? These are important questions as we move forward with education in which limited

person-to-person contact is essential for health reasons.




                                                29
References

Algan, Yann, and Nicole M. Fortin. 2018. "Computer Gaming and the Gender Math Gap: Cross-
Country Evidence among Teenagers." In Transitions through the Labor Market: Work,
Occupation, Earnings and Retirement, pp. 183-228. Emerald Publishing Limited.

Bai, Yu, Bin Tang, Boya Wang, Di Mo, Linxiu Zhang, Scott Rozelle, Emma Auden and Blake
Mandell. 2018. "Impact of Online Computer Assisted Learning on Education: Evidence from a
Randomized Controlled Trial in China." REAP Working Paper.

Banerjee, Abhijit V., Shawn Cole, Esther Duflo, and Leigh Linden. 2007. "Remedying education:
Evidence from Two Randomized Experiments in India." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122
(3): 1235-1264.

Barrow, Lisa, Lisa Markman, and Cecilia Elena Rouse. 2009 "Technology's Edge: The
Educational Benefits of Computer-aided Instruction." American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy 1 (1): 52-74.

Bergman, Peter. 2020. "Parent-Child Information Frictions and Human Capital Investment:
Evidence from a Field Experiment," Journal of Political Economy (forthcoming).

Beuermann, Diether W., Julian Cristia, Santiago Cueto, Ofer Malamud, and Yyannu Cruz-Aguayo.
2015. "One Laptop per Child at Home: Short-term Impacts from a Randomized Experiment in
Peru." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 7 (2): 53-80.

Böhmer, Bianca. 2014. "Testing Numeric: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial of a
Computer Based Mathematics Intervention in Cape Town High Schools." University of Cape
Town Working Paper.

Bulman, George, and Robert W. Fairlie. "Technology and education: Computers, software, and
the internet." Handbook of the Economics of Education. Vol. 5. Elsevier, 2016. 239-280.

Burguillo, Juan C. 2010. "Using Game Theory and Competition-based Learning to Stimulate
Student Motivation and Performance." Computers & Education 55 (2): 566-575.

Campuzano, Larissa, Mark Dynarski, Roberto Agodini, and Kristina Rall. 2009. "Effectiveness of
Reading and Mathematics Software Products: Findings from Two Student Cohorts.
https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED504657.

Carrillo, Paul E., Mercedes Onofa, and Juan Ponce. 2011. "Information Technology and Student
Achievement: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Ecuador." IDB Working Paper 78.

Chen, L.J., Yang, D.L., & Ren, Q. (2015). Report on the state of children in China. Chicago, IL:
Chapin Hall at the University of Chicago.



                                              30
Cristia, Julian, Pablo Ibarrarán, Santiago Cueto, Ana Santiago, and Eugenio Severín. 2017.
"Technology and child development: Evidence from the one laptop per child program." American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics 9, no. 3: 295-320.

Dynarski, Mark, Roberto Agodini, Sheila Heaviside, Timothy Novak, Nancy Carey, Larissa
Campuzano, Barbara Means, Robert Murphy, William Penuel, Hal Javitz, Deborah Emery, Willow
Sussex. 2007. "Effectiveness of Reading and Mathematics Software Products: Findings from the
First Student Cohort." https://telearn.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-00190019/.

Escueta, Maya, Vincent Quan, Andre Joshua Nickow, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2017. "Education
Technology: an Evidence-based Review". NBER Working Paper w23744.

DiNardo, John, and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 1997. "The Returns to Computer Use Revisited: Have
Pencils Changed the Wage Structure Too?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (1): 291-303.

Ebner, Martin, and Andreas Holzinger. 2007. "Successful Implementation of User-centered Game
Based Learning in Higher Education: An Example from Civil Engineering." Computers &
education 49 (3): 873-890.

Eble, Alex, & Hu, Feng. 2019. "How important are beliefs about gender differences in math ability?
Transmission across generations and impacts on child outcomes." Columbia University Working
Paper.

Falck, Oliver, Constantin Mang, and Ludger Woessmann. 2018. "Virtually No Effect? Different
Uses of Classroom Computers and their Effect on Student Achievement." Oxford Bulletin of
Economics and Statistics 80 (1): 1-38.

Fairlie, Robert W. 2016. "Do Boys and Girls Use Computers Differently, and Does it Contribute
to Why Boys Do Worse in School than Girls?." The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy
16.1: 59-96.

Fairlie, Robert W., and Jonathan Robinson. 2013. "Experimental Evidence on the Effects of Home
Computers on Academic Achievement among Schoolchildren," American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics 5(3): 211-240.

Glewwe, Paul W., Eric A. Hanushek, Sarah D. Humpage, and Renato Ravina. 2013. "School
resources and educational outcomes in developing countries: A review of the literature from 1990
to 2010," in Education Policy in Developing Countries (ed. Paul Glewwe): University of Chicago
Press: Chicago.

Hull, Marie, and Katherine Duch. 2019. "One-to-One Technology and Student Outcomes:
Evidence From Mooresville's Digital Conversion Initiative." Educational Evaluation and Policy
Analysis 41.1: 79-97.
Kaiser Family Foundation. 2010. Generation M2: Media in the Lives of 8- to 18-Year Olds. Kaiser
Family Foundation Study.


                                               31
Lai, Fang, Linxiu Zhang, Xiao Hu, Qinghe Qu, Yaojiang Shi, Yajie Qiao, Matthew Boswell, and
Scott Rozelle. 2013. "Computer Assisted Learning as Extracurricular Tutor? Evidence from a
Randomised Experiment in Rural Boarding Schools in Shaanxi." Journal of Development
Effectiveness 5 (2): 208-231.

Lai, Fang, Renfu Luo, Linxiu Zhang, Xinzhe Huang, and Scott Rozelle. 2015. "Does Computer-
assisted Learning Improve Learning Outcomes? Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in
Migrant Schools in Beijing." Economics of Education Review 47: 34-48.

Levin, Henry M., and Clive Belfield. 2015. "Guiding the Development and Use of Cost-
effectiveness Analysis in Education." Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness 8 (3):
400-418.

Levin, Henry M., Patrick J. McEwan, Clive Belfield, A. Brooks Bowden, and Robert Shand.
2017. Economic Evaluation in Education: Cost-effectiveness and Benefit-cost Analysis. SAGE
Publications.

Li, Yanyan, Prashant Loyalka, Guirong Li, Chengfang Liu, and Scott Rozelle. 2019. Learning
Trajectories among Middle School Students in Developing Contexts: Evidence from Rural China."
REAP Working Paper.

Linden, Leigh L. 2008. "Complement or Substitute? The Effect of Technology on Student
Achievement in India," http://www.leighlinden.com/Gyan_Shala_CAL_2008-06-03.pdf.

Malamud, Ofer, and Cristian Pop-Eleches. "Home computer use and the development of human
capital." The Quarterly journal of economics 126.2 (2011): 987-1027.

Malamud, Ofer, Santiago Cueto, Julian Cristia, and Diether W. Beuermann. "Do children benefit
from internet access? Experimental evidence from Peru." Journal of Development Economics 138
(2019): 41-56.

McEwan, Patrick J. 2015. "Improving Learning in Primary Schools of Developing Countries: A
Meta-analysis of Randomized Experiments." Review of Educational Research 85 (3): 353-394.

Ministry of Education. 2011. 2010 National Statistical Report on Education Development. China
Geology Education, 2011(3): 93-96.

Ministry of Education. 2017. The Yearbook of Education Statistics in China. National Statistics
Press, Beijing, China. http://www.stats.gov.cn/tjsj/ndsj/2017/indexeh.htm (accessed March 19,
2019)

Mo, D., Swinnen, J., Zhang, L., Yi, H., Qu, Q., Boswell, M. and Rozelle, S., 2013. Can One-to-
one Computing Narrow the Digital Divide and the Educational Gap in China? The Case of Beijing
Migrant Schools. World Development, 46: 14-29.




                                              32
Mo, Di, Linxiu Zhang, Renfu Luo, Qinghe Qu, Weiming Huang, Jiafu Wang, Yajie Qiao, Matthew
Boswell, and Scott Rozelle. 2014. "Integrating Computer-assisted Learning into a Regular
Curriculum: Evidence from a Randomised Experiment in Rural Schools in Shaanxi." Journal of
Development Effectiveness 6 (3): 300-323.

Mo, Di, Weiming Huang, Yaojiang Shi, Linxiu Zhang, Matthew Boswell, and Scott Rozelle. 2015.
"Computer Technology in Education: Evidence from a Pooled Study of Computer Assisted
Learning Programs among Rural Students in China." China Economic Review 36: 131-145.

Muralidharan, Karthik, Abhijeet Singh, and Alejandro J. Ganimian. 2016. "Disrupting Education?
Experimental Evidence on Technology-aided Instruction in India." American Economic Review
109.4 (2019): 1426-1460.

Parente, Paulo MDC, and João MC Santos Silva. 2016. "Quantile Regression with Clustered
Data." Journal of Econometric Methods 5 (1): 1-15.

Rockoff, Jonah E. 2015. "Evaluation Report on the School of One i3 Expansion."
https://bit.ly/2OfPDXs.

Rouse, Cecilia Elena, and Alan B. Krueger. 2004. Putting Computerized Instruction to the Test: A
Randomized Evaluation of a "Scientifically Based" Reading Program," Economics of Education
Review 23(4): 323­338.

UNESCO 2020. "Indicators: Primary Education, pupils; Secondary Education, pupils," Institute
for Statistics, https://data.worldbank.org/indicator.

Van der Kleij, Fabienne M., Remco CW Feskens, and Theo JHM Eggen. 2015. "Effects of
Feedback in a Computer-based Learning Environment on Students' Learning Outcomes: A Meta-
analysis." Review of Educational Research 85 (4): 475-511.

Van Klaveren, Chris, Sebastiaan Vonk, and Ilja Cornelisz. 2017. "The Effect of Adaptive Versus
Static Practicing on Student Learning--Evidence from a Randomized Field
Experiment." Economics of Education Review 58: 175-187.

Vincent, Jane. 2016. "Students' Use of Paper and Pen versus Digital Media in University
Environments for Writing and Reading--A Cross-cultural Exploration." Journal of Print Media
and Media Technology Research 5 (2): 97-106.

World Bank. 2020. "Indicators: Primary Education, pupils; Secondary Education, pupils,"
data.worldbank.org/indicator/

Xu, Di, and Qiujie Li. 2018. "Gender achievement gaps among Chinese middle school students
and the role of teachers' gender." Economics of Education Review 67: 82-93.




                                              33
Table 1: CAL Program and Technology Effects on Math Test Scores and Grades
                                    (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)
                                                                                                 Grade Rank,
                                     Math Test Score               Grade (Rank)
                                                                                                Class N >= 10


 CAL Program                       0.033         0.032         1.743*         1.758*       1.866**        1.876**
                                  (0.039)        (0.039)       (0.919)       (0.922)        (0.925)       (0.929)
 CAL Technology                    0.059         0.061          0.212         0.155         0.234          0.178
                                  (0.044)        (0.044)       (0.996)       (0.999)        (1.013)       (1.017)
 Difference (Program - Tech)       -0.026        -0.029        1.531*         1.603*        1.632*        1.697*
                                  (0.046)        (0.046)       (0.877)       (0.876)        (0.895)       (0.894)
 Additional Controls                No            Yes            No            Yes            No            Yes
 N                                 3,928         3,928          3,829         3,829         3,750          3,750
 R-squared                         0.432         0.436          0.300         0.308         0.299          0.308
Notes:
    1) CAL program is the overall program effect (i.e. CAL treatment relative to control), and CAL technology is
       the isolated technology-based effect of CAL (i.e. CAL treatment relative to workbook session treatment).
    2) All columns control for baseline counterpart of dependent variable (baseline math score or baseline class
       rank in math).
    3) Even-numbered columns also control for the following baseline covariates: liking math (scale 1 to 100),
       student age (years), gender, father graduated junior high, mother graduated junior high, teacher experience
       (years), teacher gender, teacher attended college, number of boarding students in the class, class size.
    4) Cluster (class-level)-robust standard errors in parentheses.
    5) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Table 2: CAL Program and Workbook Treatment Effects on Time on Math Outside of
School (Homework Hours)
                                                                      (1)                        (2)
                                                                               All Students

 CAL Treatment ­ Control ( )                                        -0.149                     -0.154
                                                                    (0.199)                    (0.199)
 Workbook Treatment ­ Control ( )                                    0.128                      0.123
                                                                    (0.201)                    (0.201)
 Additional Controls                                                  No                         Yes
 N                                                                   3,930                      3,930
 R-squared                                                           0.099                      0.099
Notes:
    1) CAL treatment ­ Control and Workbook treatment ­ Control are reported for crowd out (in) estimates of
       the two treatments (see Equations 3.2 and 3.3).
    2) Math homework time (hours last week): control group mean = 3.36, SD = 2.70.
    3) All columns control for baseline math score.
    4) Even-numbered columns also control for the following baseline covariates: student age (years), gender,
       father graduated junior high, mother graduated junior high, teacher experience (years), teacher gender,
       teacher attended college, number of boarding students in the class, class size.
    5) Cluster (class-level)-robust standard errors in parentheses.
    6) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                       35
Table 3: CAL Program and Technology Effects on Math Test Scores and Grades­ Boys
Only
                                     (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)
                                     Math Test Score               Grade (Rank)             Grade, Class N >= 10


 CAL Program                      0.099**       0.099**        3.414***      3.430***      3.488***      3.506***
                                  (0.049)        (0.049)       (1.280)        (1.277)       (1.291)       (1.288)
 CAL Technology                    0.075          0.074         1.540         1.530          1.482         1.455
                                  (0.054)        (0.054)       (1.456)        (1.449)       (1.480)       (1.472)
 Difference (Program - Tech)       0.025          0.025         1.874         1.900          2.006         2.051
                                  (0.060)        (0.060)       (1.218)        (1.223)       (1.249)       (1.253)
 Additional Controls                 No            Yes           No            Yes            No            Yes
 N                                 2,142          2,142         2,095         2,095          2,053         2,053
 R-squared                          0.442         0.445          0.307         0.311          0.307           0.312
Notes:
    1) CAL program is the overall program effect (i.e. CAL treatment relative to control), and CAL technology is
        the isolated technology-based effect of CAL (i.e. CAL treatment relative to workbook session treatment).
    2) All columns control for baseline counterpart of dependent variable (baseline math score or baseline class
        rank in math).
    3) Even-numbered columns also control for the following baseline covariates: liking math (scale 1 to 100),
        student age (years), gender, father graduated junior high, mother graduated junior high, teacher experience
        (years), teacher gender, teacher attended college, number of boarding students in the class, class size.
    4) Cluster (class-level)-robust standard errors in parentheses.
    5) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                          36
Table 4: CAL Program and Technology Effects on Math Test Scores and Grades ­ Girls
Only
                                     (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)
                                      Math Test Score               Grade (Rank)              Grade, Class N >= 10


 CAL Program                       -0.044         -0.045         -0.526        -0.590         -0.345        -0.434
                                   (0.046)        (0.046)       (1.371)        (1.371)       (1.374)        (1.373)
 CAL Technology                     0.039         0.041          -1.451        -1.350         -1.365        -1.268
                                   (0.054)        (0.054)       (1.519)        (1.526)       (1.540)        (1.549)
 Difference (Program - Tech)       -0.084         -0.086         0.925          0.759         1.019          0.834
                                   (0.052)        (0.052)       (1.375)        (1.396)       (1.394)        (1.416)
 Additional Controls                 No            Yes            No             Yes            No            Yes
 N                                  1,785         1,785          1,733          1,733         1,696          1,696
 R-squared                          0.432          0.437          0.302        0.308           0.299           0.305
Notes:
    1) CAL program is the overall program effect (i.e. CAL treatment relative to control), and CAL technology is
        the isolated technology-based effect of CAL (i.e. CAL treatment relative to workbook session treatment).
    2) All columns control for baseline counterpart of dependent variable (baseline math score or baseline class
        rank in math).
    3) Even-numbered columns also control for the following baseline covariates: liking math (scale 1 to 100),
        student age (years), gender, father graduated junior high, mother graduated junior high, teacher experience
        (years), teacher gender, teacher attended college, number of boarding students in the class, class size.
    4) Cluster (class-level)-robust standard errors in parentheses.
    5) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                          37
Table 5: CAL and Workbook Treatment Effects on Math Outside of School (Homework
Hours) ­ Boys and Girls
                                               (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)
                                                       Boys                                 Girls


 CAL Treatment ­ Control (  )                 0.065             0.065            -0.387*            -0.393**
                                             (0.241)           (0.242)           (0.198)            (0.197)
                               
 Workbook Treat. ­ Control (      )           0.305             0.298             -0.068             -0.085
                                             (0.239)           (0.240)           (0.207)            (0.206)
 Additional Controls                           No                Yes               No                 Yes
 N                                            2,145             2,145             1,784              1,784
 R-squared                                    0.096              0.098               0.121              0.125
Notes:
    1) CAL treatment ­ Control and Workbook treatment ­ Control are reported for crowd out (in) estimates of
        the two treatments (see Equations 3.2 and 3.3).
    2) Math homework time (hours last week): control group mean = 3.36, SD = 2.70.
    3) All columns control for baseline math score.
    4) Even-numbered columns also control for the following baseline covariates: student age (years), gender,
        father graduated junior high, mother graduated junior high, teacher experience (years), teacher gender,
        teacher attended college, number of boarding students in the class, class size.
    5) Cluster (class-level)-robust standard errors in parentheses.
    6) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                       38
Table 6: CAL Program and Technology Effects on Liking Math Class (Scale 1-100)
                                    (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)        (5)               (6)
                                       All Students                      Boys                        Girls
 CAL Program                      2.580*        2.595*         3.648**          3.675**     1.405            1.476
                                  (1.336)       (1.327)        (1.644)          (1.639)    (1.557)           (1.540)
 CAL Technology                   2.675**       2.714**         2.467            2.551     2.813*            2.855*
                                  (1.357)       (1.359)        (1.624)          (1.628)    (1.672)           (1.679)
 Difference (Program - Tech)      -0.094         -0.119         1.181            1.124     -1.408            -1.379
                                  (1.491)       (1.485)        (1.780)          (1.776)    (1.844)           (1.824)
 Additional Controls                No            Yes            No              Yes         No               Yes
 N                                 3,931         3,931          2,145            2,145      1,785            1,785
 R-squared                          0.170         0.172          0.163          0.165         0.195         0.201
Notes:
    1) CAL program is the overall program effect (i.e. CAL treatment relative to control), and CAL technology is
        the isolated technology-based effect of CAL (i.e. CAL treatment relative to workbook session treatment).
    2) All columns control for baseline liking math class (scale 1 to 100), control group mean = 87.2.
    3) Even-numbered columns also control for the following baseline covariates: student age (years), gender,
        father graduated junior high, mother graduated junior high, teacher experience (years), teacher gender,
        teacher attended college, number of boarding students in the class, class size.
    4) Cluster (class-level)-robust standard errors in parentheses.
    5) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                          39
Appendix Figure 1
                                       Appendix Figure 2A: Quantile CAL Program Estimates for Test Score
-.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5
        Estimated Treatment Effect




                                       0     .1    .2      .3     .4       .5     .6   .7   .8    .9   1
                                                                       percentile

                                                        Estimated Treatment Effect          95% CI




                                                                                             41
                                       Appendix Figure 2B: Quantile CAL Technology Estimates for Test Score
-.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5
        Estimated Treatment Effect




                                        0     .1     .2      .3     .4       .5     .6   .7   .8       .9   1
                                                                         percentile

                                                          Estimated Treatment Effect          95% CI




                                                                                               42
                                    Appendix Figure 3A: Quantile CAL Program Estimates for Grade Rank
                 8 10
       Estimated Treatment Effect
-10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6




                                    0     .1     .2      .3     .4       .5     .6   .7   .8       .9   1
                                                                     percentile

                                                      Estimated Treatment Effect          95% CI




                                                                                           43
                               Appendix Figure 3B: Quantile CAL Technology Estimates for Grade Rank
                8 10
       Estimated Treatment Effect
-10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6




                                    0   .1   .2      .3     .4       .5     .6   .7   .8       .9   1
                                                                 percentile

                                                  Estimated Treatment Effect          95% CI




                                                                                       44
Appendix Table 1: Summary Statistics and Balance Check
                                                                    Control          CAL              Workbook              P-value             P-value            P-value
                   Baseline Characteristics
                                                                    1                2                 3                  (4)=(2)-(1)         (5)=(3)-(1)        (6)=(2)-(3)
Panel A. Student Characteristics
 (1)     Standardized math score                                     -0.026           -0.036             -0.032             [0.669]             [0.881]            [0.776]
                                                                    (0.987)          (1.062)            (1.017)
 (2)     Within class rank (using math score)                       53.906           53.799             55.008              [0.860]             [0.130]            [0.191]
                                                                   (29.498)         (30.539)           (29.453)
 (3)     Female (0/1)                                                 0.458            0.459              0.435             [0.762]             [0.264]            [0.163]
                                                                    (0.498)          (0.499)            (0.496)
 (4)     Age (years)                                                11.095           11.017             11.048              [0.874]             [0.738]            [0.612]
                                                                    (1.069)          (1.115)            (1.109)
 (5)     Father education 9 years or less (0/1)                       0.441            0.400              0.424             [0.081]             [0.554]            [0.237]
                                                                    (0.497)          (0.490)            (0.494)
 (6)     Mother education 9 years or less (0/1)                       0.390            0.356              0.365             [0.180]             [0.447]            [0.474]
                                                                    (0.488)          (0.479)            (0.482)
 (7)     Liking math                                                 -0.052            0.006             -0.117             [0.419]             [0.399]            [0.124]
                                                                    (1.050)          (1.015)            (1.087)
         N                                                            1390             1345               1289
Panel B. Teacher and Class Characteristics
 (1)     Female (0/1)                                                0.445            0.391              0.460              [0.334]             [0.909]            [0.417]
                                                                    (0.497)          (0.488)            (0.499)
 (2)     Experience (years)                                         16.239           13.425             15.424              [0.148]             [0.843]            [0.121]
                                                                   (11.886)         (11.050)           (11.384)
 (3)     College degree (0/1)                                        0.560            0.569              0.574              [0.667]             [0.371]            [0.670]
                                                                    (0.497)          (0.496)            (0.495)
 (4)     # boarding students                                        15.447           14.517             16.290              [0.162]             [0.949]            [0.270]
                                                                    (6.776)          (6.632)           (79.547)
 (5)     # of total students                                        35.426           32.717             35.322              [0.019]             [0.223]            [0.313]
                                                                   (13.965)         (14.217)           (15.339)
 (6)     N                                                            118              116                118

Notes: means and SDs (in parentheses) in columns 1-3. P-values in Columns (4-6) are calculated using the estimated coefficient and standard error on an indicator for the
treatment group in a regression of each baseline characteristic on the treatment indicator and controlling for randomization strata with robust standard errors accounting
for clustering within classes. Joint tests of all student/teacher baseline covariates simultaneously shows no significant difference between T1 and C (p-value: 0.860/0.124),
T2 and C (p-value: 0.790/0.862) or T1 and T2 (p-value = 0.184/0.840).



                                                                                  45
Appendix Table 2: CAL Program and Technology Effects on Whether Math Test
Scores/Grades are Above the Median

                                    (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)
                                                                                          Grade (Rank) Above
                                 Math Test Score Above        Grade (Rank) Above         Median (Y/N) for Class
                                     Median (Y/N)                Median (Y/N)                  N >= 10

 CAL Program                       0.016         0.015       0.036**       0.036**       0.038**       0.038**
                                  (0.020)       (0.020)      (0.018)       (0.018)       (0.018)       (0.018)
 CAL Technology                    0.034        0.035*        0.010         0.009         0.012         0.011
                                  (0.021)       (0.021)      (0.018)       (0.018)       (0.019)       (0.019)
 Difference (Program - Tech)       -0.018        -0.020       0.026         0.027         0.026         0.027
                                  (0.022)       (0.022)      (0.017)       (0.017)       (0.017)       (0.018)
 Additional Controls                 No           Yes          No            Yes           No            Yes
 N                                 3,928         3,928        3,829         3,829         3,722         3,722
 R-squared                         0.247         0.253        0.165         0.173         0.165         0.175
Notes:
    1) CAL program is the overall program effect (i.e. CAL treatment relative to control), and CAL technology is
        the isolated technology-based effect of CAL (i.e. CAL treatment relative to workbook session treatment).
    2) All columns control for baseline counterpart of dependent variable (baseline math score or baseline class
        rank in math above median (y/n)).
    3) Columns 2 and 4 also control for the following baseline covariates: liking math (1 to 100), student age
        (years), gender, father graduated junior high, mother graduated junior high, teacher experience (years),
        teacher gender, teacher attended college, number boarding students in the class, class size.
    4) Cluster (class-level)-robust standard errors in parentheses.
    5) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Appendix Table 3: CAL Program and Technology Effects on Math Test Scores and Grades ­ By Baseline Achievement
Terciles

                        (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)        (11)        (12)
                                lowest 1/3 achievers                           middle 1/3 achievers                              top 1/3 achievers
                          Math score         Math grade (rank)          Math score          Math grade (rank)           Math score           Math grade (rank)


 CAL Program           0.059       0.058     4.012**    3.842**     0.006       -0.002      -1.805      -1.681       0.019       0.021      3.168**     3.090**
                      (0.068)     (0.068)    (1.822)    (1.802)    (0.056)      (0.057)     (1.582)     (1.609)     (0.043)     (0.043)     (1.556)     (1.568)
 CAL Technology        0.049       0.058      1.873      1.691      0.067       0.064       -2.879      -2.945       0.037       0.040       1.060       1.040
                      (0.070)     (0.070)    (1.937)    (1.951)    (0.064)      (0.064)     (1.930)     (1.928)     (0.050)     (0.049)     (1.543)     (1.547)
 Program - Tech       -0.026      -0.029      1.531*    1.603*      -0.061      -0.066      1.074        1.265      -0.017      -0.019       2.108       2.050
                      (0.046)     (0.046)    (0.877)    (0.876)    (0.068)      (0.068)     (1.736)     (1.735)     (0.051)     (0.050)     (1.570)     (1.560)
 Add. Controls          NO         YES         NO        YES         NO          YES         NO          YES          NO         YES          NO         YES
 N                     1,316       1,316      1,294      1,294      1,310       1,310       1,280        1,280       1,302       1,302       1,255       1,255
 R-squared              0.192       0.199       0.164      0.182      0.118        0.125      0.121        0.129        0.154        0.170       0.089    0.109
Notes:
    1) CAL program is the overall program effect (i.e. CAL treatment relative to control), and CAL technology is the isolated technology-based effect of CAL
        (i.e. CAL treatment relative to workbook session treatment).
    2) All columns control for baseline counterpart of dependent variable (baseline math score or baseline class rank in math).
    3) Even-numbered columns also control for the following baseline covariates: student age (years), gender, father graduated junior high, mother graduated
        junior high, teacher experience (years), teacher gender, teacher attended college, number of boarding students in the class, class size.
    4) Cluster (class-level)-robust standard errors in parentheses.
    5) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Appendix Table 4: CAL Program and Technology Effects on Math Grades, Excluding
Classes with Certain Percentages of Boarding Students
                                    (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)
                                Boarding Students > 90%           Students > 80%              Students > 70%


 CAL Program                       1.306         1.318          1.562         1.616         1.356          1.387
                                  (0.912)        (0.912)       (0.993)       (0.996)       (1.029)        (1.029)
 CAL Technology                    -0.085        -0.081        -0.174         -0.146        -0.617        -0.560
                                  (1.060)        (1.061)       (1.110)       (1.108)       (1.224)        (1.225)
 Difference (Program - Tech)       1.392         1.399         1.737*        1.762*         1.973*        1.947*
                                  (0.928)        (0.927)       (0.968)       (0.971)       (1.073)        (1.077)
 Additional Controls                No            Yes            No            Yes            No           Yes
 N                                 3,928         3,928          3,829         3,829         3,750          3,750
 R-squared                          0.432         0.436          0.300        0.308          0.299            0.308
Notes:
    1) CAL program is the overall program effect (i.e. CAL treatment relative to control), and CAL technology is
        the isolated technology-based effect of CAL (i.e. CAL treatment relative to workbook session treatment).
    2) All columns control for baseline counterpart of dependent variable (baseline class rank in math test score).
    3) Even-numbered columns also control for the following baseline covariates: liking math (scale 1 to 100),
        student age (years), gender, father graduated junior high, mother graduated junior high, teacher experience
        (years), teacher gender, teacher attended college, number of boarding students in the class, class size.
    4) Cluster (class-level)-robust standard errors in parentheses.
    5) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Appendix Table 5: CAL Program and Technology Effects on Math Grades, Excluding
Classes with Certain Percentages of Boarding Students ­ Boys Only
                                   (1)           (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)
                                Boarding Students > 90%           Students > 80%               Students > 70%

 CAL Program                      2.836**       2.836**        3.042**       3.089**         2.332        2.426*
                                  (1.289)       (1.285)        (1.385)       (1.382)        (1.428)       (1.425)
 CAL Technology                    1.072         1.020          0.749         0.692          -0.123        -0.068
                                  (1.533)       (1.525)        (1.591)       (1.577)        (1.657)       (1.647)
 Difference (Program - Tech)       1.765         1.816          2.294*        2.397*        2.454*        2.494*
                                  (1.309)       (1.313)        (1.360)       (1.365)        (1.425)       (1.438)
 Additional Controls                No            Yes             No           Yes             No           Yes
 N                                 1,940         1,940          1,814         1,814          1,684         1,684
 R-squared                         0.302         0.306          0.299         0.303          0.307         0.310
Notes:
    1) CAL program is the overall program effect (i.e. CAL treatment relative to control), and CAL technology is
        the isolated technology-based effect of CAL (i.e. CAL treatment relative to workbook session treatment).
    2) All columns control for baseline counterpart of dependent variable (baseline class rank in math test score).
    3) Even-numbered columns also control for the following baseline covariates: liking math (scale 1 to 100),
        student age (years), gender, father graduated junior high, mother graduated junior high, teacher experience
        (years), teacher gender, teacher attended college, number of boarding students in the class, class size.
    4) Cluster (class-level)-robust standard errors in parentheses.
    5) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                        49
Appendix Table 6: CAL Program and Technology Effects on Math Grades, Excluding
Classes with Certain Percentages of Boarding Students ­ Girls Only
                                   (1)           (2)              (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
                                Boarding Students > 90%            Students > 80%              Students > 70%

 CAL Program                       -0.715         -0.734         -0.383        -0.443        -0.051        -0.168
                                  (1.405)        (1.396)        (1.550)       (1.544)       (1.597)       (1.589)
 CAL Technology                    -1.394         -1.176         -1.281        -1.061        -1.289        -1.068
                                  (1.615)        (1.619)        (1.681)       (1.680)       (1.775)       (1.787)
 Difference (Program - Tech)       1.392          1.399         1.737*        1.762*        1.973*        1.947*
                                  (0.928)        (0.927)        (0.968)       (0.971)       (1.073)       (1.077)
 Additional Controls                 No            Yes             No           Yes            No           Yes
 N                                 1,630          1,630          1,500         1,500         1,398         1,398
 R-squared                         0.295          0.303          0.289         0.297         0.287         0.294
Notes:
    1) CAL program is the overall program effect (i.e. CAL treatment relative to control), and CAL technology is
        the isolated technology-based effect of CAL (i.e. CAL treatment relative to workbook session treatment).
    2) All columns control for baseline counterpart of dependent variable (baseline class rank in math test score).
    3) Even-numbered columns also control for the following baseline covariates: liking math (scale 1 to 100),
        student age (years), gender, father graduated junior high, mother graduated junior high, teacher experience
        (years), teacher gender, teacher attended college, number of boarding students in the class, class size.
    4) Cluster (class-level)-robust standard errors in parentheses.
    5) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                           50
Appendix B: Cost Comparison
The main costs of the CAL program and workbook treatment sessions are for training
facilitators, paying facilitators to run the sessions, developing the software or workbook,
duplicating the software or workbook, and computer and Internet costs for the software. We
assume that both the CAL software and workbooks have a limited shelf life. We use the
ingredient approach to measure costs (Levin and Belfield 2015; Levin, et al. 2017).

CAL Program Costs
Facilitator training: The cost to train facilitators includes communication costs (3 training
sessions  10 RMB/training session = 30 RMB), training materials (20 RMB), and trainer
remuneration (30 RMB). The teacher training subtotal is 80 RMB/teacher, which is equivalent to
6.67 RMB/student (assuming that the number of participants is 12).

Facilitator stipends: Class subsidies are given to program teachers for implementing the CAL
sessions; this costs 850 RMB/teacher (for 17 weekly sessions at 50 RMB per session). This
comes out to 850 / 12 = 78.33 RMB/student.

Software development: The cost to design and develop the software is a one-time expenditure.
Assuming that the software will last for 5 years, its per-student unit cost is 200,000 RMB / 5
years / 88 classes / (12 students/class) = 37.88 RMB/student.
Reproduction costs: 0
Computer and Internet costs: 0 (conservatively assuming that these already exist for regular
classes and no extra wear and tear costs from CAL sessions)

Total cost: Based on the above, the total cost for the supplemental CAL intervention is:
6.67+78.33+37.88=122.80 RMB per student (roughly $18 USD).


Workbook Sessions Costs
Facilitator training: The cost to train facilitators includes communication costs (3 training
sessions  10 RMB/training session = 30 RMB), training materials (20 RMB), and trainer
remuneration (30 RMB). The teacher training subtotal is 80 RMB/teacher, which is equivalent to
6.67 RMB/student (assuming that the number of participants is 12).

Facilitator stipends: Class subsidies are given to program teachers for implementing the
workbook sessions, and cost 1 classes/week  17 weeks  50 RMB/class = 850 RMB/teacher.
This comes out to 850 / 12 = 78.33 RMB/student (roughly $18 USD).

Workbook development: The cost to design and develop the workbook is a one-time expenditure.
Assuming that the workbook content will last for 5 years, its per-student unit cost is 5,300 RMB
/ 5 years / 88 classes / (12 students/class) = 1 RMB/student.
Reproduction costs: The cost to photocopy and ship the workbook per student is 11 RMB.

Total cost: Based on the above, the total cost for the supplemental workbook intervention is:
6.67+78.33+1+11=97 RMB per student (roughly $14 USD).


                                               51
