                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE LABOR MARKET RETURNS TO ADVANCED DEGREES

                                         Joseph G. Altonji
                                            Ling Zhong

                                       Working Paper 26959
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26959


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




This paper is based on Altonji's presidential address at the May 2018 meeting of the Society of
Labor Economists, although the empirical work has been heavily revised. We are grateful to
participants at the SOLE conference, the 2017 CESifo Area Conference on the Economics of
Education, the 2018 ASSA meetings, and participants in seminar and conference presentations at
Cambridge University, Cheung Kong Graduate School of Business, Duke, the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, Georgia State, NSF, NYU, Oxford, Purdue, the University of California-
Berkeley, University of California-Riverside, UCL, the University of Connecticut, the University
of Warwick, the University of Wisconsin-Madison, and Yale. We thank Peter Arcidiacono, John
Eric Humphries, Arnaud Maurel, Magne Mogstad, Katherine Wagner, and Zhengren Zhu for
helpful comments. We are grateful to Lewis Ho and especially Elyse Adamic and Hoon Pyo Jeon
for outstanding research assistance. This research uses restricted-use data under a license with the
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, National Science Foundation. All
statistics in the paper that are based on that data went through disclosure review. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

 2020 by Joseph G. Altonji and Ling Zhong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including  notice, is given to the source.
The Labor Market Returns to Advanced Degrees
Joseph G. Altonji and Ling Zhong
NBER Working Paper No. 26959
April 2020
JEL No. I21,I26,J24,J31

                                         ABSTRACT

We estimate the labor market return to an MBA, a JD, and master's in engineering, nursing,
education, psychology and social work, and thirteen other graduate degrees. To control for
heterogeneity in preferences and ability, we use fixed effects for combinations of field-specific
undergraduate and graduate degrees obtained by the last time we observe an individual. Basically,
we compare earnings before the graduate degree to earnings after the degree. We find large
differences across graduate fields in earnings effects, and more moderate differences in internal
rates of return that account for program length and tuition. The returns often depend on the
undergraduate major. The contribution of occupational upgrading to the earnings gain varies
across degrees. Finally, simple regression-based estimates of returns to graduate fields are often
highly misleading.


Joseph G. Altonji
Department of Economics
Yale University
Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
joseph.altonji@yale.edu

Ling Zhong
Cheung Kong Graduate School of Business
Oriental Plaza 3/F
Tower E3, 1 East Chang An Ave
Beijing 100738
China
ling.zhong@yale.edu
1 Introduction
Graduate education has grown rapidly in the U.S. and other countries. The ratio of new master's degrees

awarded relative to the number of 24-year-olds in the U.S. has increased from 5.5% in 1985 to 14.7% in 2013.

Over the same period, the ratio of new master's degrees to new bachelor's degrees rose from about 27% to

about 37%. A similar pattern has occurred in other OECD countries. For example, in the UK, the fraction

of 24-year-olds with master's degrees rose from about 22% to 27% between 2005 and 2013.
                                                                                                      1

    Many papers report estimates of the earnings dierential between individuals with an advanced degree

and those who stop with a bachelor's degree, but there is very little research studying dierences in earnings

across    graduate degrees, even at the descriptive level. Figure 1 presents average earnings of full-time workers

for the 19 graduate degree types that we focus on in the paper, and Table B1 provides values for a much

more disaggregated set. The degree dierentials are large. For example, on average people with a master's

in education earn $66,174, while MBAs earn $113,177 and medical degree holders earn $164,317. A person

deciding about graduate programs needs to know whether these estimates represent causal eects.                       And

knowledge of the average causal eects is not enough, because returns may depend on undergraduate eld,

ability, and occupational preferences.

    This paper provides estimates of the returns to a broad set of graduate degrees.                 First, we estimate

average returns to specic graduate degrees, such as an MBA, controlling for the main eects of college

major. Second, we examine how these returns dier depending upon the undergraduate degree. Third, and

more tentatively, we present estimates of the experience prole of the returns.

    In order to credibly estimate returns to specic graduate degrees, we must account for the role of pref-

erences and pre-determined ability in the joint determination of eld of study, occupation, and earnings.

Graduate education and ability shift what an individual could potentially earn in each occupation. But in

a real sense, individuals choose their actual earnings by choosing job type based on both preferences and

potential earnings.     This can make earnings comparisons misleading as estimates of the causal eect of a

degree for those who choose it. For example, an individual might prefer a master's in ne arts to an MBA

because she enjoys art and would prefer to work as an artist rather than as a business analyst.                   Absent

graduate school in ne arts, her counterfactual occupation might be a lower paying but arts-related job, not

a business position. In this situation, the dierence in earnings between ne arts graduates and individuals

who do not go to graduate school would understate the labor market value of a ne arts degree.

    The same selection issues complicate estimation of the return to a particular graduate degree for individ-

uals with a given undergraduate degree. MBAs with a bachelor's in education are likely to dier from MBAs

who majored in economics not only in the type of human capital they acquired in college but also in their

preferences, predetermined ability, and occupations before graduate school.

    To address these issues, we use experience adjusted pre graduate school earnings of individuals who later

obtain a graduate degree to approximate what they would have earned had they not gone to graduate school.

One of the approaches we consider is to include person specic xed eects (FE) in a regression model that

includes dummy variables for graduate degrees in the current period. Abstracting from other controls, this

approach identies the return to graduate school using only people with earnings observations both before

and after graduate school.       Its main disadvantage is that for such people the elapsed time between when

the graduate degree was obtained and when earnings are observed is typically short in our data. For this

and other reasons, we rely primarily on a related approach, which we call FE-cg.                Instead of person xed

  1 The   numbers are from Altonji et al. (2016b). Lemieux (2014) and Lindley and Machin (2016), among others, discuss the
implications of the growth in graduate education for income distribution.




                                                              1
eects, FE-cg includes xed eects for whether an individual has obtained a particular college major                      c   and

graduate eld   g   combination by the last time that we observe them. The main advantage of FE-cg is that

it makes full use of individuals with earnings observations only before the advanced degree and the large

number observed only after the advanced degreenot just individuals who are observed both before and

after. Our identication strategy only applies to people who work between college and graduate school, but

they account for 85% of those who obtain graduate degrees.

   Our parameters of interest are the treatment on the treated (TT) eects of graduate eld                 g   for individuals

who majored in     c,   for various combinations of   c   and   g.   An example is the eect on earnings of obtaining an

MBA for engineering majors who get an MBA. The TT parameter is the dierence between two weighted

averages. The rst is the weighted average of potential earnings associated with each occupation conditional

on college and graduate eld, ability, and preferences.                The second is the corresponding weighted average

for the no graduate school counterfactual.            For the rst average the weights are the actual conditional

probabilities of choosing the occupations for those who obtain             g.   For the counterfactual average the weights

are the counterfactual probabilities.      Both sets of weights also depend on the conditional distributions of

ability and preferences of those who have chosen the particular BA and graduate eld.

   Expressions for the OLS, FE, and FE-cg estimators of the TT parameters reveal that OLS will almost

certainly be biased, with the sign of the bias depending on the graduate degree. The reason is that OLS uses

the wrong counterfactual earnings values. We also provide conditions under which FE-cg will be unbiased.

Roughly speaking, the rst condition is that no new information about ability or preferences arrives between

the time when pre graduate school earnings are observed and when the decision to attend graduate school

is made. The second is a set of assumptions that imply a common experience prole conditional on college

major. These include the eect of experience on potential earnings, the eect of experience on the occupation

choice probabilities given ability and preferences, and the eects of learning about ability and preferences on

earnings gains through occupational mobility. We also must restrict the role of occupation specic experience.

   The data are from multiple waves of the National Survey of College Graduates (NSCG, 1993 to 2015), and

the National Survey of Recent College Graduates (NSRCG, 1993 to 2010). Some individuals are surveyed

more than one time. The data sets contain basic controls, earnings, occupation, and education histories that

include acquired undergraduate and graduate degrees by eld of study. They are large enough to support

FE-cg estimation of the returns to graduate school for 31 combinations of undergraduate and graduate elds.

These data are a rich and underutilized resource for the study of undergraduate and graduate education.

   The empirical work starts with a descriptive analysis of the links among undergraduate eld, occupation,

and graduate eld.         We document three facts.        First, the link between undergraduate eld and graduate

eld varies substantially across graduate elds.             Second, both undergraduate eld and occupation before

graduate school have strong connections to graduate eld. Finally, the eect of graduate eld on postgraduate

occupation is about twice as large as undergraduate eld.

   We then look in more detail at the pre and post graduate school occupations for a few undergraduate

and graduate degree combinations, such as bachelors in engineering paired with a master's in education,

an MBA or a master's in engineering.          These results show that the distribution of pre graduate school

occupations is shifted toward the occupations that are more common for the particular advanced degree.

They suggest that the counterfactual occupations for engineering majors who get an MBA are dierent from

the occupations of engineering majors who do not attend graduate school. This means that regression models

that in essence compare earnings with graduate school to those without are likely to be misleading.                        The

occupation comparisons motivate, in part, our use of the FE-cg approach.




                                                                2
   The heart of the paper is the estimation of the graduate school returns.      The FE-cg approach shows

substantial dierences across graduate elds in labor market returns. There are too many elds to mention

all of the results here, but a few examples may be helpful. The estimated return (in logs) for law is 0.416

(0.059) and for medicine is 0.549 (0.072), or 51.6% and 73.2% respectively. The return to an MBA is only

0.110 (0.021) or 11.6%, which is far below the OLS value of 0.282 (0.008). The return is 0.103 (0.018) for a

masters in engineering, 0.179 (0.033) for computer and mathematical sciences, 0.227 (0.053) for health related

elds, 0.235 (0.041) for nursing, 0.202 (0.029) for psychology and social work, 0.162 (0.019) for education,

and essentially zero for both the arts and the humanities.    Estimates of the internal rate of return under

assumptions about public school tuition and program length vary less. For example, the values are 0.148 for

law, 0.160 for medicine, and 0.059 for an MBA.

   Specications that allow the graduate degree premiums to depend on years since degree completion

suggest that the premiums increase substantially with experience.      The FE-cg estimates of the average

premium between 1 and 28 years after degree completion is typically at least 5 log points higher than

estimates that assume a constant premium.        For an MBA, the estimate is 0.181.   However, as section 5.2

explains, the experience specic FE-cg estimates require the use of data on people who never attend graduate

school to identify the counterfactual experience prole in the absence of a degree. We suspect that they are

upward biased as a result, although it is also possible that constraining the graduate school returns to be a

constant leads to a downward bias in the average return. Estimates of internal rates of return are closer to

and sometimes below estimates assuming a constant earnings premium because of the eects of discounting

future earnings.

   The treatment on the treated eect for a given graduate eld depends on the college major. For example,

in the case of an MBA the FE-cg estimate of the return (in logs) is 0.098 (0.070) for economics majors, 0.157

(0.065) for business majors, 0.140 (0.102) for psychology and social work majors, but only 0.083 (0.024) for

engineering majors.

   The FE-cg and OLS estimates of the returns dier substantially for many degrees. OLS tends to overstate

the return to graduate elds that attract high paying college majors. Examples are a master's in engineering

and an MBA. OLS also tends to understate returns to graduate elds that attract lower paying majors, such

as a master's in education or in psychology and social work. Simple earnings comparisons of those with an

advanced degree to those without one are misleading.

   Finally, the FE-cg estimates indicate that the extent to which the returns operate through occupational

upgrading versus within occupation varies across degrees.     In the cases of law and medicine, most of the

return is across occupations, which make sense given licensing requirements and occupation specic skills.

But in many other cases, including engineering, most of the return is within occupation.

   Our paper contributes to the vast literature on the return to higher education, and to the growing

literature on the value of particular degrees.   The econometric challenges have a lot in common with the

problem of estimating the return to college major, and other problems in which individuals choose from

multiple unordered options (Heckman et al. (2008)), although we believe they are more severe in the graduate

education case. The literature on the returns to college majors has grown rapidly over the past 20 years, as

Altonji et al. (2012) and Altonji et al. (2016b) document. However, research on graduate degrees is much

more limited. Using NLS72, Altonji (1993) reports regression estimates of the return to the highest degree,

including some college, 10 aggregated college major categories, and 5 aggregated graduate school categories,

with controls for family background, test scores, high school grades, and other 12th grade aptitude measures.

His analysis is for a relatively young sample, and assumes that only the eld of highest degree matters. Black




                                                       3
et al. (2003) report OLS estimates of the return to a few graduate degree types for dierent majors using the

1993 NSCG. Altonji et al. (2016b) report OLS estimates for a broader set of graduate and undergraduate

degrees using the 1993, 2003, 2010, and 2013 NSCG.
                                                             2 Arcidiacono et al. (2008) study the return to an MBA

using panel data on people who registered to take the GMAT exam, a standardized test that is used in MBA

admissions. Sample members are observed up to 7 years after registering for the exam. They estimate that

the return to an MBA for men is 0.094 with basic controls, 0.063 after controlling for undergraduate GPA

and the GMAT test scores, and 0.048 after controlling for individual xed eects. Results for women are

similar. These estimates are lower than what we report, but the short span between MBA completion and

post MBA earnings observation may reduce the estimates.
                                                                   3 Bhattacharya (2005), Chen and Chevalier (2012)

and Ketel et al. (2016) are part of small literature that studies the return to medical degrees.

    To the best of our knowledge we are the rst to provide treatment on the treated estimates of the returns

to a broad set of graduate degrees and to a graduate degree for specic college majors while addressing

selection bias.

    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data. In section 3 we present basic facts about

dierences in earnings across graduate elds, and how they are related to earnings dierences by bachelor

degree eld and by occupation.           Section 4 examines links among undergraduate eld, graduate eld, and

occupation before and after graduate school.             Section 5 discusses the problem of selection bias and the

estimation strategies we use.        In section 6 we present the econometric specications.             Section 7 presents

estimates of the return to graduate degrees. We conclude in section 8.




2 Data
2.1 Data Sources
We employ data from the NSCG (1993 to 2015) and the NSRCG (1993 to 2010).                           They are part of the

Scientists and Engineers Statistical Data System (SESTAT) sponsored by the National Center for Science

and Engineering Statistics (NCSES) within the National Science Foundation (NSF). The NSCG 1993 and

2003 are, respectively, subsamples of the 1990 and 2000 decennial census long form respondents who had a

bachelor's degree.      In the 1990s and 2000s, NSF only follows people who have a BA eld, advanced eld,

or occupation that is Science and Engineering related (S&E) in their rst observation in the data system.

We denote this selection criterion by the phrase SESTAT-eligible.
                                                                               4 From 2010 on, the NSCG employs a

new rotating sampling strategy.         The NSCG 2010 includes respondents from previous waves but is drawn

primarily from respondents to the 2009 American Community Survey (ACS). The samples for the NSCG

2013 and the 2015 surveys combine a subset of the interviewees from the 2010 and 2013 NSCG and a subset

of interviewees with a BA degree from the 2010 and 2013 waves of the ACS. The NSCG 1993, 2003, 2010,

2013, and 2015 can be weighted to be representative of the U.S. population with bachelor's degree.
                                                                                                                     5 The

NSRCG 1993, 1995, 1997, 1999, 2001, 2003, 2006, 2008, and 2010 surveys add additional interviewees to the

  2 They   also report individual xed eects estimates based on early work for the current paper.     They are subject to the
concerns that we raise below.
  3 Montgomery     and Powell (2003) use the same data to show that the gender gap is narrower among MBA completers but
does not focus on the return to an MBA. See also Gicheva (2013).
  4 Science   and Engineering include the social sciences but excludes Health-related elds and occupations from 1993 to 2001.
From 2003 on, Health is included.    Throughout the paper, we use BA to refer to both bachelor's of arts and bachelor's of
science degrees and use MA in a similar fashion.
  5 The   NSCG 1993 and 2003 surveys are restricted to individuals who received a BA at least three years prior to the survey
and thus exclude recent college graduates.




                                                              4
data system. The NSRCG samples are restricted to individuals who have obtained a BA or advanced degree

in an S&E eld within three years prior to the survey reference date, and thus, all interviewees from the

NSRCG surveys are SESTAT-eligible.
                                                 6 All waves of the NSCG and the NSRCG are restricted to people who

are under 76 years of age and who live in the U.S. as of the survey reference date.

       We also use information from a version of the NSCG 1993 that is available from the Inter-university

Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR). The ICPSR version includes several variables from

the 1990 Census, including occupation based on the 1990 census classication, employment, and earnings and

work hours in 1989. We created occupation categories that are consistent across the census and SESTAT.
                                                                                                                                      7

       We append all waves of both the NSCG and NSRCG and build a panel data set focusing on people in

the US labor market with at least a bachelor's degree. We can track individuals who are surveyed more than

once. The availability of 1990 Census information for NSCG 1993 sample members is an additional source of

panel data observations for both earnings and occupation. In addition to using the 1990 Census information,

we obtain information about occupation in 1988 from an NSCG 1993 question. Finally, most of the surveys

ask two separate questions about earnings. The rst asks about annualized salary at the main employer. It

refers to the survey date. The second asks about the sum of earnings from all jobs in the prior calendar year.

This provides a source of additional panel observations for many individuals.
                                                                                                    8

       The combined dataset also contains detailed information on postsecondary education history, current and

past employment, and basic demographic variables. The latter include gender, race\Hispanic and parents'

education.
                 9   We use 19 aggregated BA categories and 19 aggregated graduate categories in most of our

analyses. Tables B1 and B2 provide the shares of the disaggregated elds in the aggregated categories of the

graduate degrees and BA respectively. The tables report the mean and standard deviation of earnings and

the regression coecients from estimating equation (3) using the disaggregated degree categories.

       A downside of the fact that NSCG and the NSRCG oversample people with STEM degrees is that sample

sizes for many pairs of specic non-STEM majors and graduate degrees are too small to support use of FE-cg

for the interactive specication. We only report FE-cg estimates of the pair specic return (parameter                                 cg
dened below) if we observe earnings prior to graduate school for at least 31 individuals.

       We construct weights to make the pooled sample representative of the US population of college graduates

over the years of our sample, and we use weights unless otherwise noted.
                                                                                               10

     6 In 2013 the NSRCG was merged into the NSCG. The NSCG                 surveys after the merge oversample recent college graduates.
     7 Table B3 reports the shares of the 363 disaggregated elds in         the 66 consistent categories (from column (3) to column (2)),
and the shares of those 66 consistent categories in the 21 aggregated occupations (from column (2) to column (1)). Table B6
uses the 21 categories and Tables 23 and Figure 2 use the 66 category classication.
     8 The    timing of the surveys is such that in a given year only one of two measures is available.         Consequently, the minor
dierences in the means of the two measures are absorbed by the year dummies. Measurement error is likely to be correlated
across the two measures. This will contribute to correlation in the earnings regression error term but will not lead to bias if
the measurement error is uncorrelated with the regressors. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level throughout the
paper. We divided the sample by earnings observation type and produced FE-cg estimates corresponding to the specication in
Table 5. The estimates using the current earnings measure are smaller for 10 of the 19 graduate elds (Table B4). None of the
dierences is signicant at the 5 percent level and t values are under |1.4| in 16 of 19 cases.
     9 We     cleaned the panel data to ensure consistent values for the demographic variables. We also cleaned the data to ensure
consistency of information about the degrees. Specically, we ensure that a given degree that an individual reports in multiple
surveys has coherent information for completion date, location and elds of study.
     10 The   details of how we construct weights are in Appendix B.3.2.         In brief, we aim to study the labor market returns to
advanced degrees that represent the population of people who have a college degree in any eld who are between 23 and 59 years
old who live in the US. The target populations of the 1993, 2003, 2010, 2013 NSCG are individuals with at least a BA degree.
We use the survey weights for each of these samples to estimate the distribution of college graduates across combinations of BA
eld and graduate eld (including no graduate degree) over the four years combined. (We did not use the 2015 sample to avoid
giving too much weight to the population distribution of college graduates from 2010 on.) The NSRCG and the other waves of
the NSCG prior to 2010 are restricted to the SESTAT eligible population. Thus individuals with STEM eligible occupations
and advanced degrees are overrepresented when we pool all of the data. We adjust the weights so that the weighted distribution
of   c, g   pairs in the pooled sample matches the distribution of   c, g   pairs that we estimated using the 1993, 2003, 2010, and 2013
NSCG. Separate weights are constructed for the earnings regressions and the occupational premium regressions that reect the




                                                                      5
    The occupational earnings premiums are constructed using the 2009-2014 waves of the ACS. We estimate

the premiums by OLS using the sample of full time workers with BA degrees who are between 24 and 59 years

old.
    11 The estimates are merged into the NSCG-NSRCG dataset by occupation. The ACS based premiums

are reported in Table B3. We use the occupational premiums associated with the classication in column (2)

as the dependent variable in our analysis of the eects of graduate degrees on occupational earnings.

    We restrict the analysis to individuals with BA degrees who are between 23 and 59 years old in the survey

reference year and who have at most one advanced degree. We exclude individuals who ever obtain a PhD,

who obtain a BA before age 20 or after age 55 or who obtain their advanced degree after age 49.
                                                                                                                       12 We also

restrict the earnings analysis to full-time workers.
                                                             13

    We typically exclude individuals who go directly to graduate school to help ensure comparability between

the people we observe before graduate school and those we observe after. We consider such individuals in

section 7.1.12. In the case of FE-cg, we also restrict the sample to individuals who have an advanced degree

when we last observe them, which we refer to as the graduate degree sample.                           We do this because the

parameter of interest is        TT,   and so it makes sense to estimate eects of control variables and age only for

individuals who ultimately get an advanced degree. However, we cannot impose this restriction when we allow

the eects of advanced degrees to depend on time since the degree. Our main OLS regression sample, which

we call the full sample, contains 858,130 observations, and includes 195,540 individuals who are observed

more than once. The sample used for FE-cg contains 297,530 observations and includes 8,170 pre advanced

degree observations on 4,810 individuals.
                                                   14

    Denitions and descriptive statistics for the key control variables that appear in our regression models

are in Table A1.



2.2 The Timing of the Earnings Observations and Degree Completion
In this section, we provide information about the timing of earnings observations relative to BA completion

and advanced degree completion. Unfortunately, we do not know the start date of graduate school. Conse-

quently, we estimate the start date by subtracting an assumed typical number of years required to obtain

the degree for a full time student. Earnings are treated as prior to graduate school if they are prior to the

estimated start date.
                           15 This restriction and our exclusion of part time workers should eliminate most of

the problem of using earnings measured when people are attending graduate school. Column 1 of Table A2

reports the mean, and 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 90th quantiles of the number of years from BA completion

mix of surveys that contribute observations. The pooled sample weights for earnings account for the fact that some interviews
contribute earnings observations for two years.     We trim the adjusted weights using 1/10 and 10 times of the median of the
weights of all observations in the combined data.
  11 The   regression controls include a cubic in age interacted with gender, race\Hispanic interacted with gender, and dummies
for whether or not the person has a master's degree, a professional degree, and PhD. Unfortunately, the ACS does not report
eld of advanced degree.
  12 We    code BA based on the primary eld of the rst BA obtained. Thus, we do not account for a second major, or a minor.
One could extend the FE-cg approach to treat BA combinations as an additional type of BA, but we have not done so. We
drop individuals who obtain multiple BA degrees in dierent years. Because of concerns about choice based sampling, we also
exclude the follow up observations of individuals who do not have degrees in S&E elds but are SESTAT-eligible only because
of their occupation choices in their rst observation (0.523% of the person year observations in the pooled sample).
  13 We   code an individual as full-time if she reported working full-time or if she worked at least 41 weeks per year and at least
35 hours per week. We used 41 weeks to accommodate the employment arrangements of many teachers. With the exception of
the 1989 annual earnings measure, we assume that full-time status in the prior year is the same as the survey year when the
earnings measure refers to the year before the survey. We do so because we lack data on full time status in the prior year.
  14 We    round all observation counts to the nearest 10.    The mean, 1st percentile, median, and 99th percentile number of
observations per person in the full sample for earnings are 3.72, 1, 3, and 9. The corresponding values in the graduate degree
sample are 3.88, 1, 3, and 9.
  15 We   assume 4 years for Medicine, 3 for Law, 2 for an MBA, and 1 for all other master's degrees.




                                                                  6
for earnings observations that precede graduate school enrollment. All statistics in the table are unweighted.

The 10th, 50th, and 90th quantiles are 1 (the minimum), 4, and 12. More than 82% of pre graduate school

earnings observations occur between 1 (the minimum) and 5 years before completion of the advanced degree

(column 2). Column 3 reports that the 10th, 50th, and 90th quantiles of time from advanced degree com-

pletion to post advanced degree earnings observations are 2, 9, and 24. The corresponding values are much

lower for individuals with earnings observations both before and after the advanced degree (column 5). The

short period between the advanced degree and earnings is likely to lead the FE estimates to understate the

returns to graduate school if the returns rise with time since graduation. In part for this reason, we place

little emphasis on the FE estimates. Finally, column 4 presents time from BA to advanced degree completion

for those who obtained an advanced degree.              This column does not condition on the availability of a pre

advanced observation. The 10th, median and 90th quantiles are 2, 5, and 12.

    Table A3 presents the unweighted age distribution of the earnings observations. The rst column refers to

the full sample. The 10th, 50th and 90th quantiles are 26, 38, and 53. The 10th, median and 90th quantiles

of the age distribution of the 8,170 pre advanced degree observations of people with a graduate degree by

the last interview are 24, 28, and 38 (column 3).              The mean is 29.4.      These individuals are younger and

have a more condensed distribution than those who only have a BA when last observed (column 2). The

fourth column reports the age distribution of the 289,360 post advanced degree earnings observations from

the graduate degree sample. The 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles are 28, 39, and 53. The observations are

fairly evenly distributed across calendar years.
                                                        16




3 Facts about Earnings Dierences across Graduate Fields
Table 1 displays basic facts about earnings dierences across graduate degrees. The statistics are for people

who work full time, earn at least $5,000 per year, graduated from college at least one year earlier, and are age

23 to 59. All statistics are weighted. Columns 1 and 2 display the mean of earnings and the log of earnings,

respectively. Dierences across elds are large. Column 3 provides information about the role of occupation

in eld dierences in earnings. It reports the mean and standard deviation of occupation coecients given

the occupation distribution for each graduate eld. The values are expressed as deviations from the mean for

the graduate degree sample. Figure 2 graphs the relationship between the occupation mean for each graduate

eld and mean of the log of earnings for each eld. The points are tightly clustered around the regression

line displayed in the graph, which has a slope of 1.36 (0.09).

    Earnings dierences across graduate elds are in part a reection of earnings dierences across the un-

dergraduate majors that lead to them. Column 4 provides information about earnings levels in the college

majors that lead to the specied graduate degree. It reports the mean and standard deviation of the BA

premiums for each advanced degree based on the OLS estimates of equation (3) using the disaggregated BA

and advanced degree categories.
                                        17   Figure 3 graphs average earnings by advanced degree against the BA

premiums. There is a positive relationship, with a slope coecient of 1.77 (0.34). Earnings of those with

advanced degrees in STEM elds such as engineering, biology, and the physical sciences tend to be below the

regression line. These advance degrees pay less than one would expect given earnings associated with the BA

degrees that lead to them. Medicine is a notable exception to this pattern. It pays extremely well but draws

  16 See   Table B5. For the graduate degree sample, the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles of year are 1993, 2003, and 2014. The
percentiles of the distribution of years for earnings observations that are post graduate degree are the same. For pre graduate
school earnings observations the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentile values are 1990, 2002 and 2009, with a mean of 1999.8.
  17 The   BA premiums are reported in Table B2.




                                                                7
heavily from biology and other life science majors, which are not especially high paying.

   Figure B1 plots advanced degree specic gender dierences in the average occupational premium against

the degree specic gender dierence in average earnings. The gender gaps in earnings are centered around 0.22,

while the gender gaps in the occupational premium are centered around 0.05. The slope of the relationship

is 0.54 (0.53). In the cases of biology and the arts, the earnings gaps are about 0.15, while the occupational

earnings gap is very small. In the case of medicine, the overall gap is large (0.34) even though the occupation

gap is only 0.02. Discrimination, gender dierences in work hours, gender dierences in medical specialty, and

heterogeneity within the medicine category (which includes MD, optometry, dentistry, osteopathic, podiatry,

and veterinary) may all contribute to the gap.
                                                      18

   Figure B2 plots the gender earnings gap for each advanced degree against the corresponding gender

dierence in the mean of the BA premium.               By construction, the gender gap in BA premiums is entirely

due to gender dierences in the mix of BA degrees for a given graduate degree. Only a small portion of the

gender gap among advanced degree holders is due to dierences in undergraduate degree. The slope of the

relationship is 1.19 (0.97), but the gender gaps in average BA premiums within graduate elds are relatively

small.




4 Links among BA Fields, Graduate Fields and Occupations
Here we document three facts about links among education elds and occupation and then look at case studies

of occupation before and after graduate school for engineering and education majors. The evidence indicates

that both specicity of knowledge and heterogeneity of preferences inuence education and occupation paths.

The patterns suggest that comparisons of earnings of those with and without a graduate degree will be

misleading, even controlling for undergraduate eld.

   The rst fact is that the link between undergraduate eld and graduate eld varies dramatically across

graduate elds. Table 4 of Altonji et al. (2016b) reports the ratio of the share of a specied graduate degree

accounted for by a specied undergraduate major to the share of that major of all undergraduate degrees.

If majors are equally represented in all graduate degrees, then this ratio would be 1.0, aside from sampling

error. In reality, the table shows that particular undergraduate majors are heavily overrepresented in certain

graduate programs. For example, the relative share of undergraduate engineering majors among those with

a master's in engineering is 11.0. The relative shares of economics BAs are less concentrated. The highest

value is 4.95 for a master's in social science, and the value is 3.1 for a master's in business, 2.83 for law and

2.2 for health services administration. It is also instructive to compare shares across graduate degree types.

The relative shares for law and MBA programs, which have few prerequisites, are much more even across

majors than the shares for master's in nursing, or engineering, which have many prerequisites.

   The second fact is that both undergraduate eld and occupation before graduate school have strong

connections to graduate eld. We estimate probit regressions for the probability of attending graduate school

in eld     g   as a function of 19 indicators for undergraduate eld and 21 indicators for occupation before

graduate school (not reported). The sample consists of pre graduate school observations on individuals who

eventually obtain an advanced degree. Separate F tests indicate that both the undergraduate eld indicators

and the occupation dummies are highly signicant predictors of graduate eld.

   Third, the eect of graduate eld on post graduate occupation is about twice as large as the eect of

BA eld. To establish this, we regress estimates of the probability of working in occupation               j   conditional on

 18 See   Sasser (2005), Bertrand et al. (2010), Goldin and Katz (2011) and Goldin and Katz (2016) for analyses of the gender
gaps in various professional occupations, including pharmacist and doctor, and for MBA holders.




                                                              8
having      both   a BA in   c   and an advanced degree in       g on a constant, the probability of working in occupation j
given   c   and the probability of working in          j given g . The coecient on the probability of j |c is 0.437 (0.033)
while the coecient on the probability               of j |g is (0.874 (0.017)).
                                                                               19



4.1 Case Studies of the Relationship among Major, Advanced Degree, and Oc-
    cupation
The regressions provide an overall sense of the relationship among                       c, g ,   and   j,   but it is also useful to take a

closer look at a few cases. Table 2 examines the occupation choices before graduate school and after graduate

school for individuals with a BA in engineering. Cell sizes are small for the pre graduate degree samples in

some instances. In Table 2 as well as Table 3, we only report results for occupation categories containing at

least 10 cases, and in some instances we aggregate occupations. For comparison, the top panel of Table 2 lists

the ve most common occupations for engineering graduates who have not obtained an advanced degree by

age 35.
           20 For this group, the rst four are all engineering occupations and account for 48.8% of all graduates.

The fth is software developer, which is also engineering related. The next three panels of the table examine

the pre graduate school occupations of engineering majors who go on to get an MBA, a master's in education,

or a master's in engineering. Engineers also dominate among pre MBA occupations, but top level managers

account for 6.2%. Post MBA, managerial occupations are the rst, fourth and fth most common.

    Few engineers get a master's in education, so we only broadly characterize the occupations.                                           Prior to

graduate school, about one third of this group work in engineering related occupations and about 25% work

as primary or secondary school teachers. Thus, the early occupations of engineers who go on to a master's

in education are quite dierent from engineers as a whole. After an education master's, about 50% work as

secondary school teachers and another 11% work as postsecondary school teachers. The other three most

common occupations are managerial.

    Engineers who eventually pursue a master's in engineering follow a dierent path.                                       Prior to graduate

school, the 5 most popular occupations are all engineering, and account for 72.1% of the cases. After the

master's in engineering, the 5 most popular occupations are in engineering and computer science. Managerial

occupations are not represented.

    Table 3 provides similar information for education majors who pursue an MBA or a master's in education.

Teaching dominates the most common occupations for education majors who have not obtained an advanced

degree by age 35, although the 4rth and 5th most common occupations are secretary (4.0%) and top-level

managers (2.7%). The number of pre MBA education majors is too small to break out occupations in detail,

but none works as a teacher. Post MBA, the top 4 occupations are all business related. Secondary school

teacher is number 5.

    On the other hand, education majors who pursue a master's in education are overwhelmingly concentrated

in teaching occupations both before and after getting a master's degree. Interestingly, top level manager is

the third most common post master's occupation, with 8.01% of the total. A few of these individuals may

hold high level management positions within the education system, but we lack the industry codes needed

to check.
             21

  19 We    restrict the sample of   j, c, g combination to   the 1,137 cases with at least 50 observations on       c,   at least 50 on   g,   and at
least 15 on occupation for the      c, g pair. The results   are not very sensitive to lowering or raising these restrictions.
  20 We    impose the sample restrictions used in the earnings analysis below. The tables also report average earnings, although
we do not discuss this information in the text, because cell sizes are relatively small in some cases.
  21 The    SESTAT top level manager category includes presidents and provosts. (See note 2 of Table B3). Also, both the SESTAT
occupation codes and the 1990 Census codes include managers in education and related elds as a detailed category. We treat
it as separate from top level manager in the 66 more aggregated categories that we use. See Table B3.




                                                                        9
      These examples show that the pre graduate school career paths of individuals depend on the specic

advanced degree and may be quite dierent from the early career paths of those who do not go to graduate

school. Calculations for physical and related sciences show a similar pattern (not shown). They are consistent

with the regression analysis of the link between occupation after graduate school and undergraduate major

and graduate eld discussed above. For undergraduate engineering majors, we have used information about

whether and why an individual's job is not related to BA eld to shed light on the importance of preferences

and labor market opportunities in determining occupation before graduate school and graduate eld of study

(Table B6). Not surprisingly, occupation prior to graduate school is related to the reason for working in an

unrelated job, and so is average pay. Engineering majors who were working in an unrelated job are less likely

to get an engineering master's and more likely to pursue a business degree.

      Overall, the evidence in section 4 indicates that simple comparisons of earnings of those with an advanced

degree with those without an advanced degree are likely to be misleading. They also suggest that a strategy

of comparing earnings before and after graduate school for those who eventually obtain a specic graduate

degree is likely to be superior to simple OLS.




5 Addressing Selection Bias When Estimating the Return to Grad-
  uate Degrees
In this section we discuss our estimation strategy.               We begin by specifying how earnings are determined

and dening the TT parameters that we attempt to estimate. We then present the OLS, FE, and the FE-

cg estimators and discuss the conditions under which the FE and FE-cg estimators will identify the TT

parameters.



5.1 The Treatment on the Treated Eect of a Graduate Degree on Earnings
First, some notation. Let         i   denote the individual and for now let       t   denote both the calendar year and years

since college graduation. Later we use            ageit   to denote age of    i   in year   t.   The variable       g , g = 0, 1,    , G ,
is the index of graduate degree type. Examples are a master's in engineering, a master's in education, and

an MBA. The value           g=0       corresponds to no graduate degree. The variable             Git is   the graduate degree that

i   holds in t,   and the indicator    Ggit indicates that i has a graduate degree               in g in   period   t.   It is shorthand

for   Git = g .   The index    c, c = 1,    , C , denotes undergraduate major. We only            consider people who already

have a college degree.          We use the terms major, eld, and degree type synonymously.                                 The index      j,
j = 1,    , J , denotes occupation.
   Let wijcgt = wjcgt (Ait ) denote the value of the potential log of earnings that a person of ability Ait with

degrees c and g could expect to receive in occupation j in period t.
                                                                        22 When we use j and g as subscripts

along with t, they refer to occupation and graduate degree status at t. Again, g = 0 corresponds to no

graduate degree. Thus wjc0t (Ait ) is the log of earnings in j for someone who majored in c and had not gone

to graduate school by period t. We suppress transitory shocks that inuence earnings, such as luck in job

search, and assume that these factors are unrelated to choice of cg . We are thus ignoring potential upward

    22 Altonji et al. (2016b) briey discuss the evidence on interactions between occupation and college major in earnings equations,
which is limited. Lemieux (2014) is one of the few papers that use multiple regression to estimate a system of potential earnings
equations for   c, j   pairs. Robst (2007), Yuen et al. (2010), Lemieux (2014), Kinsler and Pavan (2015), Lindley and McIntosh
(2015) and Altonji et al. (2016a) nd that higher earnings for college graduates (1) who report that the skill requirements of
their occupation is a good match for their college major or (2) who work in an occupation that is typical for their major. We
do not know of papers that present such evidence for graduate eld or college degree/graduate degree combinations.




                                                                 10
bias from Ashenfelter's dip (Ashenfelter (1978)) prior to graduate school.
                                                                                                                      23 The vector      Ait consists of all
variables that determine or are correlated with the earnings of a worker in                                              j   given  c and g . The function
wjcgt (Ait )      is not restricted, so the eect of                   Ai   may depend on the combination of                      j , c and g . However, the
function does not include occupational history, so it implicitly assumes that the eect of prior occupation on

earnings does not vary with j and g conditional on c. We return to this issue below.
             Qit inuences preferences for g and choice of j given cg , but does not directly inuence earnings.
      The vector

Some elements of Ait also inuence preferences for g and j . We dene Ait and Qit so that the inuence of

c and g on occupation specic earnings and nonpecuniary preferences are captured by wjcgt (Ait ) and the
occupation choice probabilities introduced below. This denition makes it easier to distinguish between the

causal eects of           c   and   g    on   wjcgt (Ait )    from the correlation that arises because the choices of                      c   and   g   depend

on   Ait    and   Qit .   In the discussion of identication we treat                        Ait      and   Qit    as unobserved by the econometrician,

although in practice we include demographic controls. We abstract from the quality and selectivity of the

college and graduate programs, which we do not observe.
                                                                                        24 We suppress the              i subscript when i is not needed
for clarity.

      We focus on         T Tcgt ,   the average treatment eect of                  g      for   c   majors who eventually go on to obtain               g.   Let

wc0t |Ggt be the mean of what these individuals would have earned had they not gone to graduate school.
Let  wcgt |Ggt be the mean of actual earnings in t for c majors with a g degree. Let pcgt (j |At , Qt ) be the
probability of choosing j in t given At , Qt , c and g . Let dFt (At , Qt |c, Ggt ) denote the conditional density of

A and Q, which reects selection based on choice of c and g , as discussed in Appendix B.1. Then

                                    wcgt |Ggt =                      pcgt (j |At , Qt ) wcgjt (At ) dFt (At , Qt |c, Ggt )                                    (1)
                                                        j      A,Q


                                    wc0t |Ggt =                      pc0t (j |At , Qt ) wc0jt (At ) dFt (At , Qt |c, Ggt ) ,
                                                        j      A,Q


      The treatment on the treated eect is



                                                               T Tcgt = wcgt |Ggt - wc0t |Ggt .

Comparing the expressions for                        wcgt |Ggt    and      wc0t |Ggt    in (1) reveals that             g    aects earnings through two

channels.        First,   g    alters the potential earnings in each occupation                             j.     Second, it alters the distribution of

occupations that people choose conditional on                            c, A and Q.
      We directly observe the sample analog of                          wcgt |Ggt . It is        the average of post graduate school earnings of

people who choose               c, g .   The key econometric challenge is measuring                              wc0t |Ggt ,   which is the counterfactual

earnings in       t    of those who chose            c, g .   The FE and FE-cg approaches, detailed in section 5.2, use earnings of

c   majors before graduate school who eventually obtain                                g   to approximate counterfactual earnings. Basically,

we are replacing              wc0t |Ggt       with   wc0t- |Ggt       after adjusting for age and time eects, where                       t-     is prior to

graduate school.

    23 A   negative transitory earnings shock will lower the opportunity cost of graduate school. As a result, the transitory earnings
component in       t   will be negatively associated with graduate school attendance in                      t.   Prior earnings of those who do attend will
understate what future earnings of graduate school attendees would have been in the absence of graduate school. Arcidiacono
et al. (2008) discuss the issue in the context of their individual xed eects analysis of the return to an MBA. They do not nd
evidence of an earnings dip prior to entering an MBA. Nor do earnings rise for those who previously said that they expect to
enroll in an MBA program but do not do so. However, it is possible that the issue is important for some of the other graduate
degrees that we consider. We lack sucient panel data to assess it.
    24 With   quality measures and enough data, one could extend the analysis to consider program quality by redening c and                                   g   to
be eld and program quality combinations. One could also condition on other information such as undergraduate records and
test scores if it were available.




                                                                                  11
     Consideration of a randomized controlled trial provides insights into the challenge of identifying the causal

eect of graduate education when multiple elds are available, even for those who work before graduate school.

Suppose at the end of the pre-graduate school period (t1 below), a set of economics majors are oered the

opportunity to get an MBA for free.                        The intent-to-treat eect of the tuition subsidy oer on earnings is

identied, and one could identify such eects for each value of pre-graduate school occupation (jt1 below).

But these eects mix gains from an MBA relative to no advanced degree with gains relative to alternative

graduate degrees.                 The counterfactual for the TT parameter would be a complicated mix of alternative

education choices. Without multiple sources of eld specic exogenous variation in incentives, it would be

dicult to make progress using an IV strategy.
                                                                     25 Consequently, while we will point out serious limitations

of the FE-cg and FE approaches, they have the big advantage of providing a way to control for alternative

graduate school options.



5.2 What Do Alternative Estimators of T Tcg Identify?
In this section, we discuss the earnings specications used in the empirical work and interpret the estimators

of   T Tcgt   in light of the model of earnings discussed above. We consider OLS regression, OLS regression with

person xed eects (FE), and OLS regression with xed eects for the                                   c, g   combination reported the last

time we observe an individual (FE-cg). We consider the three period case.                                 The timing is as follows.   We

consider      c   majors who have obtained their degree prior to                     t1   and who choose to work in period     t1   rather

than go directly to graduate school. This choice is in anticipation of the fact that our identication strategy

involves comparisons of earnings before and after graduate school. Our parameters of interest refer to this

population.          We consider the 15 percent of individuals who go directly from college to graduate school in

section 7.1.12. In             t2 ,   individual   i   either works in the optimal occupation or goes to graduate school in the

optimal eld. In              t3 , i   chooses an occupation and works.



5.2.1         OLS Regression

We rst consider the OLS regression of                         wicgjt on a set of dummies for combinations of c and g , without
controls for        j   or   A.   The OLS coecient           on Ggt3 using just the period t3 observations for c majors identies


                                                            OLS
                                                         T Tcgt3 = w cgt3 |Ggt3 - w c0t3 |G0t3 .


    OLS
T Tcgt3 is a biased estimator of T Tcgt3 because both education and occupation choice depend on A and
                                                                                                        OLS
Q. This implies that dFt3 (At3 , Qt3 |c, Ggt3 ) diers from dFt3 (At3 , Qt3 |c, G0t3 ). Consequently, T Tcgt3 diers
from T Tcgt3 for two main reasons. First, dierences in the distribution of A between the c, Ggt3 and the

c, G0t3 populations will lead average earnings to dier for a given occupation. Second, A and Q inuence
occupation choice, and occupation matters for earnings.
                                                                                26 Intuitively, an English major who chooses to go to

law school has dierent occupational preferences and abilities than an English major who does not go to law

school. The law school graduate would have followed a dierent career path in the absence of a law degree.

  25 Similar      issues arise in the estimation of the return to a college major, as discussed in Altonji et al. (2016b) and Kirkeboen
et al. (2016). The latter exploits the fact that in some countries, university admission is centralized and in on the basis of test
scores with program specic cutos. See also Hastings et al. (2013).
  26 Here     we consider OLS when only            t3   observations are used to simplify the discussion of bias, but the argument extends
directly to the case when observations from all three periods are used. We use all periods in the empirical work.




                                                                           12
5.2.2      Person Fixed Eects (FE)

The second specication controls for person xed eects. The earnings gain from                                    g   for a given   c   is identied

from people who are observed working both before and after obtaining g .
                                                                        27 Consider the subset of individuals

who majored in      c,   work in period          t1 ,   obtain   g   in   t2   and work in t3 . They identify




                       FE
                    T Tcgt3       = E [wicgjt3 - wic0jt1 |c, Ggit3 ]                                                                          (2)


                                  =                     pcgt3 (j |At3 , Qt3 ) wcgjt3 (At3 ) dFt3 (At3 , Qt3 |c, Ggt3 )
                                         j       A,Q


                                      -                   pc0t1 (j |At1 , Qt1 ) wc0jt1 (At1 ) dFt1 (At1 , Qt1 |c, Ggt3 ) .
                                             j      A,Q


Comparing the above equation with (1), one can see that dierences could arise from three sources. The rst

is the dierence between           dFt3   and       dFt1 .   The second is the eect of experience on occupation choice. The

third is the eect of experience on occupation specic earnings.

   First consider        dFt3
                            dFt1 . To focus on the selection issue, assume for now that years since college
                                and
                                                           FE
graduation do not aect the w and p functions. Then T Tcgt3 = T Tcgt3 if the distribution of A and Q does

not change between t1 and t3 . Note that the distributions of A and Q do not shift with the attainment of g

because A and Q are dened to be net of the eects of cg . However, other factors may lead to changes in A

and Q (or updating of beliefs about A and Q) in the years after college.

   To see the implications, consider a change in Q that would induce individuals both to move toward

higher paying occupations and to get a degree g , say an MBA. Then w cgt1 |Ggt3 is likely to understate the

counterfactual earnings of someone who obtains an MBA. For example, an education major who starts out

as a teacher but nds she has a taste for business would be likely to move toward better paying business

related occupations even if she were not to pursue an MBA. Her newly found taste for business would also

make her more likely to seek an advanced degree that provides skills that are valued in business, such as an

MBA. The dierences between her earnings as a teacher and her earnings after her MBA would overstate

the causal eect of the MBA.

   The problem is lessened if earnings are available                            after   her preferences have changed but     before      she goes

to graduate school. In this case, her earnings (and occupation choices) prior to graduate school will reect

her new beliefs.

   Assumption A1            (Constant ability and preferences):

                                         dFt1 (At1 , Qt1 |c, Ggt3 ) = dFt2 (At2 , Qt2 |c, Ggt3 ) .

In this case,   wcgt1 |Ggt3     is based on the distribution of ability and preferences that governed the decision to

obtain    g.

5.2.3      Age Proles

Because we do not observe the counterfactual                          wcgt1 |Ggt3 ,     we also need additional assumptions that allow

us to adjust for age.           In our basic specication, we assume that the graduate degree does not alter the

experience prole for        c   majors. This requires three additional assumptions, which we refer to as A2a-A2c.

 27 The   main eects of college majors are not identied. They are absorbed by the person eects.




                                                                                13
A2a concerns the eects of new information about            A and Q. New information arriving between t2 and
t3 could still lead dFt1 (At1 , Qt1 |c, Ggt3 ) and dFt3 (At3 , Qt3 |c, Ggt3 ) to dier even if dFt1 (At1 , Qt1 |c, Ggt3 ) =
dFt2 (At2 , Qt2 |c, Ggt3 ). The new information will induce a change in earnings, as individuals optimize across
occupations. We assume that on average the earnings change from new information about A and Q would

have been the same in the counterfactual case in which the person did not attend g .

      Assumption A2b is that earnings growth within occupation is the same for all occupations conditional on

college major and ability. Assumption A2c concerns the earnings growth from predictable shifts in occupation

with experience. We assume that the contribution of occupational progression to earnings growth for those

who choose         g   would have been the same if they had not gone to graduate school. In appendix B.2, we provide

mathematical statements of the three assumptions.

      The upshot of the three assumptions about experience eects is that                                   c majors who chose Ggt3 would have
experienced the same age prole of earnings had they been forced to                                      choose G0t3 even though their earnings

level would dier. In the empirical work we do report some estimates that allow the experience prole to

depend on graduate degree based on the specication in 6.1.



5.2.4         OLS Regression with Final Degree Combination Fixed Eects (FE-cg)

Our main econometric approach is closely related to the person xed eects approach but allows us to use

data on people who only are observed through                           t2   or are only observed in           t3 .    Either way, we know whether

they obtained          g   by the time they exited the sample. We make an additional assumption, A3, which is that

the distributions        dFt3 (At3 , Qt3 |c, Ggt3 ) and dFt1 (At1 , Qt1 |c, G0t3 )                 of   A   and   Q   do not depend on whether we

observe an         individual in t1 only, t3 only, or both t1 and t3 .

      Consider the estimator
                                                 FEcg
                                              T Tcgt3 = w cgt3 |G0t1 , Ggt3 - w c0t1 |G0t1 , Ggt3 ,

where we have made explicit the fact that all individual in the analysis are observed in                                        t1   prior to obtaining

g   and are known to have obtained                  g    in t2 and thus have the degree in t3 . Under assumptions A1, A3, and the
                                                                                               F Ecg
parallel age trend assumptions mentioned in section 5.2.3,                                  T Tcgt3  = T Tcgt3 .      We call this estimator FE-cg

and sometimes refer to it as the degree combination xed eects estimator. We implement it using regression

with the indicator variables               Cc(i)   for   c, Gg(i)t   for having    g   in   t and Cc(i) Gg(i)     for whether the individual     i ever
                                                                                                                                                  F Ecg
obtained       c   and   g.   People who are never observed to obtain a graduate degree do not contribute to                                  T Tcgt
other than by helping to identify eects of control variables, including age proles. In our main specication,

we exclude them from the sample.



5.2.5         Occupation-Major Specic Treatment Eects

The earnings model assumes that early occupation does not have                                      g   specic or      jt3   specic eects on future

earnings.
         28 We are also implicitly ruling out any eect of j on the nonpecuniary costs of graduate school.
                                                           t1
These assumptions imply that the choice of rst period occupation is separable from future education and

occupation decisions. Separability means that plans to go to graduate school do not directly inuence the

choice of      jt1 ,   given   At1   and   Qt1 .   This is important for our use of pre graduate school earnings to estimate

counterfactual earnings of those who go to graduate school.

      To see the consequences if separability does not hold, consider economics BAs who are considering a

PhD in Economics.                Such individuals sometimes work as a research assistant for a year or two, in part
    28 For   evidence of occupation specic experience, see Poletaev and Robinson (2008), Gathmann and Schnberg (2010), and
Yamaguchi (2012).




                                                                              14
because of occupational preferences but in part because the experience and connections the work provides

are complementary with PhD studies and an academic career. Research assistant positions typically pay less

than the business and nance jobs that economics majors often choose. Individuals who obtained a PhD in

economics would probably have chosen a dierent mix of occupations in t1 if one had eliminated PhD studies

as an option. We suspect violations of separability are likely to be the strongest for PhD studies, which we

do not consider in this paper. But it may be important for an MD degree and is unlikely to hold perfectly.

Violations may lead to an overstatement of returns to some elds.

    One could modify FE to estimate a separate TT eect for each                            c, g, jt1   combination.      One could also

modify FE-cg to estimate the          c, g, jt1 specic treatment eect by controlling for xed eects for each c, g, jt1
combination, provided that          jt1 is observed for all individuals. A halfway house is to control for the main
eect of    jt1 .29   In practice, sample size considerations and lack of information about occupation prior to

graduate school for those who are only surveyed after graduate school limits our ability to condition on early

occupations. But even if one did obtain estimates of              T Tcgjt1 t   for various values of      jt1 , one might be concerned
about using pre graduate school earnings in             jt1   as a measure of earnings in the absence of graduate school

later in a career. We leave this to future research.




6 Econometric Specication
We work with a specication in which the eects of college and graduate school are additive and a specication

in which the return to graduate school depends upon the undergraduate major. The additive specication is


                                           C                                   G
                                                c       c
                            wit = a1 +          0   +   ageit
                                                                  Cc(i) +          g Gg(i)t + Xit  + uit .                                    (3)
                                          c=2                               g =1

                            c     c
Here  t denotes the year, 0   + age it
                                       is the return to c at ageit relative to the reference major (education),
                                                                              c
and Cc(i) is a dummy variable for whether i majored in c. We specify age            to be a major specic cubic
                                                                                 it
                          c
polynomial in ageit and 0 to be a constant. Similarly, g is the premium for graduate degree g relative to no

graduate degree and Gg (i)t is the associated indicator for whether i holds a g degree in t. The control vector

Xit consists of the full set of interactions between gender and race\Hispanic indicators, a gender specic
cubic in ageit , which we measure relative to age 35, and year dummies.
                                                                           30

    The error term uit may be written as uit = ei + it . We further decompose the permanent component ei

into its mean bcg for c majors who eventually get a graduate degree in g and an orthogonal component vi .

That is,


                                                        C     G
                                                ei =              bcg Cc(i) Gg(i) + vi                                                        (4)
                                                       c=1 g =0

where   Gg(i)   is an indicator for whether     i   eventually obtains a graduate degree in                g,   and   G0(i)   is 1 if   i   never
                                                                                         c
obtains a graduate degree. The FE specication treats ei as a xed eect in estimation. The 0 coecients
                                                          C  G
are not separately identied. The FE-cg specication adds                                bcg Cc(i) Gg(i)   to (3) and applies OLS to
                                                                            c=1 g =0
 29 Note   the FE estimators implicitly control for earnings dierences across individuals in time invariant factors that are
associated with early occupation.
 30 The   year dummies in combination with age will control for cohort eects that are linear in birth year and partially control
for nonlinear birth year eects. We observe undergraduate GPA for about 28 percent of the people in our sample. In preliminary
work, controlling for GPA did not alter our results very much.




                                                                   15
                            C                                         G                               C   G
                                  c       c
               wit = a1 +         0   +   ageit
                                                  Cc(i) +                 g Gg(i)t + Xit  +                    bcg Cc(i) Gg(i) + vi + it            (5)
                            c=2                                   g =1                              c=1 g =0

with vi and it treated as random. The Cc(i) indicators are collinear with the set of                                        Cc(i) Gg(i)   indicators, so

0 is not separately identied from the bcg heterogeneity parameters.31
c

     The interactive specication is


                                      C                                        C   G
                                          c   c
                     wit = a1 +           0 + ageit
                                                    Cc(i) +                              cg Cc(i) Gg(i)t + Xit  + ei + it .                         (6)
                                   c=2                                        c=1 g =1


Here    cg    is the premium for graduate degree              g   for individuals with a BA in                 c.    The FE estimator again treats

ei   as a person xed eect. The FE-cg estimator applies OLS to




                       C                                  C       G                                        C     G
                            c   c
        wit = a1 +          0 + ageit
                                      Cc(i) +                         cg Cc(i) Gg(i)t + Xit  +                        bcg Cc(i) Gg(i) + vi + it .   (7)
                      c=2                              c=1 g =1                                           c=1 g =0


     In the OLS case, the estimates of            c
                                              cg are based on both cross-sectional and panel data variation.
                                                      and

They will be biased by correlations between ei and BA major and graduate degree.

    In the FE case, we can estimate cg only if at least one sample member with c (i) = c is observed both

before and after obtaining g . In the FE-cg case, we can estimate cg only if at least one person with c (i) = c

is observed after graduate school and at least one person who eventually obtains g (Gg (i) = 1) is observed

before graduate school. The before and after observations can be for dierent people.

     A numerical example claries how observations contribute to the FE and FE-cg estimates. We abstract

from age and time eects and other covariates.                             Table 4 presents earnings data for three individuals who

obtained a BA in economics and are known to have obtained an MBA. Barry earned $55,000 before getting

an MBA and $90,000 after, a gain of $35,000. Ebony earned $80,000 after her MBA, but her pre MBA earnings

are not observed. Mary earned $65,000 before her MBA but her post MBA earnings are not observed. The

FE estimate of      Econ, MBA     is the change in Barry's earnings  $35,000. The FE-cg estimate is the dierence

between the averages of post MBA earnings and pre MBA earnings  $25,000=$85,000-$60,000. It makes

use of all 4 of the earnings observations, not just Barry's.



6.1 Allowing Experience Proles to Depend on Graduate Field
We also estimate models in which the potential experience prole of earnings depends on                                             g.   In the additive

case, the FE-cg specication is




                                                      C                                         G
                                                                c   c
                                      wit = a1 +                0 + ageit
                                                                          Cc(i) +                     gxit Gg(i)t
                                                      c=2                                      g =1
                                                            C     G
                                          + Xit  +                        bcg Cc(i) Gg(i) + vi + it ,                                               (8)
                                                          c=1 g =0

  31 Dierences    across cohorts in selection patterns into graduate school might aect the FE-cg estimates, given that the
Cc(i) Gg(i)   xed eects in the model are not interacted with cohort.                       We do not have any evidence on the importance of
this.




                                                                              16
where       xit   is years since    i   obtained the advanced degree. The variable          xit is 0 for those without an advanced
degree in t.         The return to          g   at   x years after graduate school completion is given by gx = g0 + g1 x + g2 x2 .
                                                                 C    G
In the OLS case, we exclude the term                                       bcg Cc(i) Gg(i) .      We add experience interactions to the models
                                                                c=1 g =0
with   cg    interactions using the parsimonious specication
                                                                                         32


                                                                 cgx = gc0 + g1 x + g2 x2 .                                                                (9)



      If the return to        g   varies with time since graduate school, then the estimates of                              g     based on equations (3)

and (5) identify an average of the experience specic eects                                    gx    weighted by the sample distribution of           xit   for

those who chose          g.   In Table 5 we report               g    based on (3) and (5). We also report the average return measure


                                                                              28
                                                                        1
                                                        g1_28 =               g 0 + g 1 x + g 2 x2
                                                                       28 x=1

based on equation (8) with or without the                         Cc(i) Gg(i)      controls.
                                                                                                  33 As we discuss below,       g1_28   typically exceeds

g   by about 0.04, and sometimes by more, especially in the FE-cg case.

      The choice of whether or not to include people who never attend graduate school inuences the implicit

control group and the nature of the variation that identies the age prole parameters.                                                      In the case of

OLS, one is assuming that college graduates without advanced degrees are an appropriate control group.

Consequently, we use the full sample, which includes them, when we use OLS whether or not we include

the   xit    interactions. When using FE-cg without the                            xit   interactions (i.e., equation (5)) we use the graduate

degree sample. We exclude college only individuals because the parameter of interest is treatment on the

treated. However, when we allow for                        xit   interactions using equation (8), we use the full sample and assume

that the age-earnings prole (but not the intercepts) for                                      c   majors who never go to graduate school is the

counterfactual prole for                c   majors who do. Those who do not go to graduate school are needed to provide

information about counterfactual age-earnings proles for the ages after most people attend graduate school.

This could lead to upward bias if those who do not go to graduate school have atter age proles or dierent

time trends than the counterfactual proles of those who do. Using the full sample instead of the graduate

degree sample usually leads to larger FE-cg estimates of                                      g    that are usually closer to the OLS estimates.

However, constraining graduate returns to be constant if they in fact rise with                                              xit   might lead to upward

bias in the age proles, because                    ageit and xit are correlated. This                    would lead to downward bias in          g   as an

estimate of the average return                   to g when equation (5)) is used.




7 Estimates of the Return to Graduate Degree
In this section we report estimates of returns to graduate education. In section 7.1 we start with the additive

specication for men and women combined. Section 7.2 presents the internal rate of return estimates that

account for tuition and program length.                              Section 7.3 presents results by gender.                    In section 7.4 we allow

returns to depend on BA eld.

 32 We      have too few observations to allow            g 1   and   g2    to vary with both        c and g .
 33 We      stop at 28 because it is less than or equal to the 90th quantile of                     xit for each   of the 19 graduate degrees.




                                                                                   17
7.1 Results Using the Additive Specication
Columns 1 and 2 of Table 5 report FE-cg estimates of                         g    for the additive specication with age proles

that depend only on          c.   The log of earnings is the dependent variable. They are based on equation (5). We

use 19 aggregated BA categories and 19 aggregated graduate categories in most of our analyses.                                          Column

1 uses the graduate degree sample.                It is our preferred sample for FE-cg.                  Column 2 uses the full sample,

which also includes the college only subsample. Columns 3-6 also use the full sample. Column 3 presents the

corresponding OLS estimates based on equation (3).

   Columns 4 and 5 present FE-cg and OLS estimates of                            g1_28   based on equation (8) which includes                g-
specic interactions with post graduate school potential experience                       xit .       We call this the   g -specic experience
prole specication. Recall that               g1_28    is the average of the return over the rst 28 years after the graduate

degree. To facilitate comparison to the results in columns 1, 2 and 3, column 6 presents the average of                                  ^gxit
over the distribution of          xit   in the graduate degree sample. We typically nd that                  g1_28   exceeds    g , especially
for the FE-cg estimates. In part, this reects the fact that                       g   is a sample weighted average of returns at

various values of    xit .    The sample distribution of          xit   is skewed somewhat to the left. Thus                  g   places more

weight on lower values, although it also places some weight on post graduate experience values above 28,

while   g1_28   does not.
                              34 Columns 7-11 correspond to columns 1-5 but are for the occupational component

of earnings.

   Before turning to Table 5, we note that Tables B1 and B2 report OLS estimates of                                       c   and   g   for 168

advanced elds and 144 BA elds, respectively.                     The tables also report the composition of each of the 19

aggregated BA and graduate categories. To our knowledge, it is the rst time such a disaggregated set of

estimates has been presented. It is a small step toward the objective of providing estimates that can be used to

guide the decisions of individuals, institutions, and the government about investments in graduate education.

The estimates show large dierences across degrees, with substantial heterogeneity within the 19 categories

that we feature.
                   35 However, they should be viewed as descriptive rather than causal. This is especially true

for the graduate degrees, for which we believe selection bias in the OLS estimates is particularly serious.

Regressing the FE-cg estimates for the 19 graduate categories on the corresponding OLS estimates yields a

slope of 0.607 (0.100) and a constant of 0.068 (0.026). Thus the FE-cg estimate tends to be small relative to

the OLS estimate when OLS is large, and vice versa.
                                                     36 The gap between the FE-cg and OLS estimates has

a strong negative relationship with the average for the graduate degree of the BA premiums.
                                                                                           37 The results

are consistent with a theme, which is that OLS tends to overstate (understate) returns to advanced degrees

that attract students from high (low) paying majors.



7.1.1     Medicine

In the case of medicine, the FE-cg estimate of               g   is 0.549 (0.072) and the OLS estimate is 0.687 (0.016). The

FE-cg estimate rises to 0.597 when the full sample is used (column 2). This points to the fact that part of

 34 Tables B7 and B8 report more detailed information about the experience prole of graduate school eects.
 35 For example, for engineering the estimates of ^ range from -0.002 (0.034) for agricultural engineering to 0.249                 (0.015) for
                                                         g
computer and system engineering.
 36 Adjusting   the slope for the eect of sampling error in the OLS estimates makes almost no dierence because the OLS
estimates are very precise. We performed the adjustment under the assumption that the sampling errors in the OLS and FE-cg
estimators are independent, which is approximately true. The bias corrected estimator is the product of the OLS coecient and
the adjustment factor
                                                                  var ^gOLS
                                                 ^=                                         2
                                                                                                 ,
                                                                         1
                                                      var ^gOLS -          19
                                                                        19 g =1
                                                                                  se
                                                                                  ^ gOLS
  where   ^ gOLS
          se       is the standard error of     ^gOLS and var   ^gOLS is the unweighted variance of the           OLS estimates across elds.
 37 The   coecient relating the gap to the       g -specic average of the BA premiums is -0.603 (0.223).


                                                                        18
the dierence between OLS and FE-cg is the use of college only cases to estimate the counterfactual.

   Columns 4 and 5 we report          ^g1_28   using the specication with   g -specic   experience proles. The FE-cg

estimate is 0.658 and the OLS estimate is 0.738. The FE-cg estimate of the return is only 0.072 (0.089) at

one year, but rises to 0.659 (0.085) at 10 years and 0.867 (0.086) at 20 before declining to 0.606 (0.094) at

30 years (Tables B7 and B8). The college only observations in column 4 accounts for part of the dierence

between columns 1 and 4. When we use the specication with the experience interactions to estimate                gx     and

then compute     ^g   as the sample weighted average of     gx   (column 6), we obtain a larger value than when we

exclude the experience interactions (column 2).
                                               38 Consequently, the specication of the quadratic functional

form for   gx   as well as the choice of sample contribute to dierences among the FE-cg estimates.

   Columns 7-11 present a corresponding set of results for the occupational component of earnings.                     The

FE-cg estimate is 0.492 (0.053) and the OLS estimate is 0.478 (0.005). The eects decline by about 0.04 over

the rst 20 years (not reported). This makes sense when one thinks about the careers of medical doctors.

They typically enter residency programs right after graduation, working as doctors but at relatively low pay.

Later, some fraction may migrate to other occupations, such as manager.                 Managers (not controlling for

degree type) are paid less on average than doctors.

   Table B9 reports individual xed eects estimates of            g .   For the log of earnings, the FE point estimate

is actually negative:       -0.054 (0.107).    The FE estimate substantially understates the returns to medicine,

because most of the post graduate school observations that identify this eect are for low values of            xit ,   when

many doctors are in residency programs. For occupational earnings, the FE estimate is 0.577 (0.092) which

is actually above the corresponding OLS and FE-cg estimates. Medicine is an extreme case, but it illustrates

the diculty of estimating returns using individual xed eects when panel length is relatively short and the

payo to the graduate degree takes a few years to be fully realized. Consequently, we place little emphasis on

the FE estimates in this paper. The approach would be valuable in a longer panel, which could be created by

merging the data that we use with administrative earnings records. We hope to pursue this in future work.



7.1.2     Law

The FE-cg estimate of         g   for a law degree is 0.416 (0.059).    It is slightly below the OLS estimate.         The

estimate of   g1_28    is 0.469 (0.056) in the case of FE-cg. Both approaches indicate that the return rises with

time since graduation, as is documented in Table B7. The FE-cg estimates rise from 0.280 (0.060) one year

after law school to 0.542 (0.058) at 20 years.         OLS and FE-cg agree that much of the return comes from

occupational upgrading.

   As was the case for medical degrees, the FE estimate of              g   appears to greatly understate the return

to law.    The value is only 0.117 (0.058), although the FE results indicate that occupational upgrading is

important and are in line with the other approaches. Given the partnership system and the importance of

on the job training in law, one might expect the short time between law school and the earnings observations

in the eective sample for FE to lead it to understate the earnings eect of a law degree while capturing the

occupation related component.

   Overall, the evidence indicates that the TT eect of a law degree is large  about 0.15 per year for a 3

year degree. Of course these estimates do not account for tuition costs, which are substantial especially at

private universities.
                       39

 38 Here we use the sample distribution of x to construct  from the estimates of  .
                                            it            g                        gx
 39 We do not know whether the graduate institution was private not for prot, private for   prot, or public.




                                                            19
7.1.3      MBA and Other Business Related Master's Degrees

Row 4 of Table 5 reports estimates of the return to an MBA. The FE-cg estimate of                g   is 0.110 (0.021).

This estimate suggests only a modest return to an MBA, in sharp contrast to the OLS estimate of 0.282

(0.008).    The FE-cg and OLS values of      g1_28   are larger: 0.181 and 0.308 respectively, reecting the fact

that the return rises with time since graduate school and that     g   places more weight on the earlier years. A

comparison of columns 1 and 2 indicates that the need to include the college only subsample when estimating

g1_28     accounts for about half of the dierence between the FE-cg estimates of     ^g   and   g1_28 .
     The FE-cg estimates show that an MBA improves occupational earnings by an average of 0.016 over the

rst 28 years. The comparable OLS estimate is 0.096. We believe that selection on ability and occupational

preferences leads to substantial bias in the OLS estimates. The high post MBA earnings implied by the OLS

estimates are a reection of relatively high pre MBA market opportunities and business/management related

preferences of many who obtain an MBA.

     The business related master's degree category consists of nancial management (48.1%), business mar-

keting and business management (24.8%), accounting (18.7%), agricultural economics (3.7%), marketing

research (3.4%), other agricultural business and production (0.9%), and actuarial science (0.4%). (See Table

B1). As a group, they are more technical than an MBA degree, and we suspect that they have more spe-

cic prerequisites. The FE-cg estimate of      g   is 0.206 (0.044). This is a healthy return assuming that these

programs take one or even two years if pursued full time. Occupation accounts for about 0.028 (0.013) of

the return. The OLS estimate of      g   is again much larger than FE-cg: 0.342 (0.012). Of this 0.107 (0.004)

is through occupation alone. Like the MBA case, the gap between FE-cg and OLS is narrower for                    g1_28 .
Most of the relative increase in the FE-cg estimate is due to the switch to the full sample.



7.1.4      MA in Health Services Administration, and Public Administration

We next consider two other management and administrative services related degrees. The FE-cg estimate

of   g   for a master's in health administration is 0.273 (0.091). The OLS estimate is similar: 0.302 (0.026).

Occupational returns account for 25% and 42% (respectively) of these eects. The FE-cg and OLS estimates

of   g   for public administration are about two thirds as large  0.193 (0.052) and 0.212 (0.020), respectively.

About half of the return is through occupation.



7.1.5      MA in Nursing

The FE-cg and OLS estimates of       g   are 0.235 (0.041) and 0.313 (0.014) respectively, a large dierence. The

FE-cg estimate of     g1_28   is 0.163 (0.038), which is 55 percent of the corresponding OLS estimate.            FE-cg

and OLS show similar occupation premiums of 0.02 and 0.03. The substantial dierence between FE-cg and

OLS for earnings and the small dierence for occupation suggest substantial earnings related selection among

nurses who obtain a master's degree.



7.1.6      MA in Health Related Fields

The health related category consists primarily of physical therapy (26.9%), audiology and speech pathology

(19.8%), public health (18.9%), other health/medical sciences (18.5%), pharmacy (9.1%), and health/medical

assistant (4.2%). Both FE-cg and OLS show a return of about 0.22, with little variation with          xit .   The FE-cg

estimate suggests that 0.098 (0.022) of the return is through occupational upgrading. This makes sense given




                                                         20
the importance of occupation specic training and licensing requirements in most of the subelds in the

category.



7.1.7      Engineering and Computer Science\Math

The FE-cg and OLS estimates of          g   for a master's in engineering are 0.103 (0.018) and 0.147 (0.005). For

computer science and math, the FE-cg and OLS estimates are 0.179 (0.033) versus 0.204 (0.009). OLS shows

a larger eect operating through occupation. To some degree, OLS misses the fact that people who obtain a

degree in these two elds were in relatively high paying occupations prior to graduate school.

     Table B7 reports the estimates ofgx . In both elds the estimates rise over the rst few years after the
degree.    The FE-cg and OLS estimates of g 1_28 are larger and more similar than the estimates of g . Placing

more of the weight on the FE-cg estimates, we conclude that a master's degree in these two elds yields a

healthy return that comes a number of years after graduate school.



7.1.8      MA in Other Science\Engineering Related Fields

The other science and engineering category is dominated by architecture and environmental design (73%).

The remainder consists of engineering technologies, electrical and electronics technologies, or industrial pro-

duction technologies.      The FE-cg estimate is only 0.089 (0.057).        The OLS estimate is 0.115 (0.013).   We

suspect that returns are higher in the engineering related elds, for which average earnings and the OLS

estimates are substantially larger than for architecture (Table B1).



7.1.9      Biology\Agriculture\Environmental Sciences and Physical Sciences

For master's degrees in biology, agricultural, environmental and life sciences, the FE-cg estimate is 0.231

(0.045).     The estimate for the physical sciences is 0.158 (0.054), which is also substantial.      The estimates

of   g1_28   are about 0.10 and 0.13 higher. Most of these returns are within occupation. In sharp contrast,

the corresponding OLS estimates are only 0.015 (0.011) and 0.053 (0.015) respectively.            Almost all of the

dierence between the estimators is within occupation.             We are surprised by the large dierence between

FE-cg and OLS in this case, especially because it is not associated with a large dierence in the occupational

return estimates.



7.1.10       Education

The results for a master's in education are particularly interesting. Teacher contracts often mandate higher

salaries for teachers with master's degrees. For example, the 2018 salary schedule for New York City species

base salaries of $56,711 for a teacher with 1 year of experience and $105,394 for a teacher with 22 years

of experience.     The corresponding values for a teacher with an approved master's degree are $63,751 and

$112,434.
         40 The implied premium in logs are 0.117 for new teachers and 0.065 for teachers with 22 years

of experience.     Note that the average gain may be larger if the masters facilitates movement into higher

paying administrative or specialized teaching positions. The FE-cg estimate of         g   is 0.163 (0.019), of which

0.028 (0.007) is due to occupational advancement.            The earnings eect seems high, but the fact that a

small component is through occupation seems reasonable given that a master's in educational administration

accounts for 15.7% of the education category, and it pays better (Table B1). When we add the college only

 40 See   https://www.schools.nyc.gov/careers/working-at-the-doe/benets-and-pay.




                                                            21
observations and allow the return to depend on          xit ,   the eect rises from 0.109 (0.019) when        xit = 1   to 0.261

(0.019) when     xit = 20.   The increase seems implausibly large.

   In contrast, the OLS estimate is 0.102 (0.006), and it is only 0.045 (0.007) ve years after the degree.

OLS shows a substantial       negative   eect on occupational pay of -0.064 (0.003). We think this reects the fact

that getting a master's in education is an indication that an individual has chosen to continue as a teacher or

to switch into teaching from a higher paying occupation              ^cg .   That is, those who get a master's in education,

even conditional on undergraduate major, have talents and preferences that lead them toward a relatively low

paying (but socially valuable) profession. This negative occupational selection takes away from the positive

and contractually based treatment on the treated eect of a master's in education.



7.1.11      Psychology\Social Work, the Humanities, Not science or engineering related and
            Social Sciences

The FE-cg and OLS estimates of           g   for a master's in psychology and social work follow the same qualitative

pattern as education but are quantitatively more extreme. The FE-cg estimate is 0.202 (0.029), while the

OLS value is only 0.056 (0.009). About 0.087 of the gap is because FE-cg implies a 0.025 (0.017) occupational

return while OLS implies a       loss   of -0.062 (0.004).

   The relative values of the OLS and FE-cg estimates of              g      for a master's in humanities also follow a similar

pattern, although the FE-cg approach indicates a return of only 0.018 (0.062). The small return is associated

with an estimate of -0.076 (0.025) for occupational earnings. One interpretation of this nding is that the

humanities degree enables an individual to nd work in occupations that value the degree, and these are

relatively low paying. Getting a master's in humanities has a modest positive eect within occupation. In

contrast, the OLS estimate is -0.145 (0.014) and is driven by a huge -0.202 (0.008) eect on occupational

earnings.

   The results for master's degrees in the Not science or engineering related category are qualitatively

similar. This category consists of communications (13.2%), library science (39.3%), criminal justice/protective

services (13.9%), and journalism (8.2%). The FE-cg estimate is 0.117 (0.056) while the OLS estimate is 0.064

(0.014). About 0.02 of the dierence arises from the more negative OLS estimate of the occupation return.

   Social science (excluding psychology) is the exception within this group, in that the FE-cg and OLS

estimates of     g   are very similar: about 0.1 for the earnings premium and about 0.03 for the occupational

premium.
            41



7.1.12      Returns for Individuals Who Go Directly to Graduate School

In our data 15% of those with graduate degrees when we last observe them went directly to graduate school

after college. The fraction varies from 1.9% in Health administration to 62.1% for Medicine (Table B10).

It would be useful to know whether our TT estimates also apply to degrees obtained directly after college.

Relevant to the answer is whether those who go directly to graduate school are very dierent from those

who do not.      Table B10 reports that direct goers are 9.65 percentage points more likely to have a college

educated father than those who delay, on a base of 40.54%. We also used the earnings regression coecients

on the race\Hispanic indicators to form a race\Hispanic earnings index for men and for women. The mean

of the index is 0.004 higher for men who go direct and 0.001 higher for women who go direct.                         For most

graduate elds, those who go direct have slightly higher grades (Table B10). The mean advantage is 0.067

 41 The   FE-cg estimate for a master's in arts is too noisy to support a meaningful comparison to OLS.




                                                                22
             42 Overall, these results suggest those who go directly to graduate school are academically and
on a 4.0 scale.

economically advantaged relative to those who do not, but the dierences seem small.
                                                                                      43

    Second, we also estimated equation (5) on a sample that includes those who went directly to graduate

school, with an indicator for go direct added. The coecient on go direct is 0.077 (0.008). The value

falls to 0.043 (0.008) when we use the model with experience interactions (equation 8, suggesting that part

of the gap is because direct goers have more post graduate school experience. Table B11 reports estimates

of equation (5) with a full set of interactions between the              Ggt   indicators and go direct added. We do not

have space to discuss the estimates but they are typically positive and are substantial for some degrees. For

example, the value is only 0.004 for an MBA but 0.107 (0.019) for law and 0.081 (0.013) for engineering.

The values fall when we include experience interactions. Caution is warranted, because the coecients on

the go direct interactions combine the dierence in the return to a particular graduate degree for those

who go direct and those who delay with dierences between the two groups in the                        bcg    heterogeneity terms.

A dierent identication strategy, perhaps based on a rich control set for family background, undergraduate

achievement, and preferences, will be required to identify TT eects for those who go direct to graduate

school.



7.2 Internal Rates of Return Estimates Based on the FE-cg Regressions
Table 6 reports the present discounted values (PDV) of lifetime income net of tuition for each advanced degree,

the counterfactual PDV for people who chose various advanced degrees had they not gone for graduate school

and the percentage gain from the advanced degree. It also reports the calculated internal rate of return                       g
for each advanced eld.

    The estimates are based on the following assumptions. Column 1 shows the assumed duration of each

degree. We use average tuition in 2012 at public institutions, in 2013 dollars (National Center for Education

Statistics (2019)). We assume graduate programs are full-time, and students have zero earnings when they

are enrolled. We assume people start graduate school in the indicated eld at age 27, and retire at age 59.

We set the earnings error term to 0, the parental education variables to their weighted sample means and

the calendar year to 2012. We set the race\Hispanic indicators to non-Hispanic white, but take a population

weighted average over the distribution of gender and undergraduate major for each advanced degree. The

PDV calculation assumes that the interest rate is 0.05.
                                                                      44 The PDV and counterfactual PDVs vary a great

  42 We control for BA eld, advanced eld, and year of college degree. The standard deviation of GPA is 0.41.
  43 Oyer (2006), Kahn (2010) and other studies nd that leaving school during a recession has substantial eects           on early
earnings that persist. Labor market conditions also aect the decision to attend graduate school, an issue that is relevant to
the discussion of Ashenfelter's dip. However, the empirical evidence is mixed (Altonji et al. (2016b)). College graduation year
dummies explain only 0.004 of the variation in the go direct indicator, controlling for a cubic in graduation year (not shown).
This indicates that going direct is only weakly related to labor market conditions at college graduation. Consequently, the eects
of labor market conditions on the timing of graduate school and on pre graduate school earnings seem unlikely to matter much
for our estimates.
  44 The   formula for the actual PDV calculation is


                                                 actual                net incomecgi (age)
                                            P DVcgi     (r) = 59
                                                              age=27                         ,
                                                                         (1 + r)age-27
where
                                           -tuitiong                                     if age - 27  duration of g
                net incomecgi (age) =                   ^                                                             .
                                           exp a
                                               ^           ^c  ^
                                                               c
                                                1 + Xit  + 0 + age +^g + b^
                                                                          cg             otherwise
The interest rate is denoted by   r.   The formula for counterfactual PDV is


                                                              exp a
                                                                  ^    ^c  ^
                                                                           c
                                                                   1 + 0 + age + 0 + Xit ^ + b^
                                                                                              cg
                                counterfactual
                           P DVcgi             (r) = 59
                                                     age=27                                              .
                                                                             (1 + r)age-27



                                                                 23
deal across graduate degrees.

   For medicine, the percentage gain in PDV (with tuition accounted for) is 41.6%. It is a 4 year degree,

and   ^g    is 0.160.   For law, the values are 28.7% and 0.148, while the percentage gain for an MBA is 1.1%

and   ^g   is 0.059. The internal rate of return is above 10% for all other degrees, except arts, humanities, and

other science and engineering related elds, for which it is negative. A master's in the life sciences has the

highest internal rate of return. Using average private tuition lowers                    ^g   to about 0.13 for medicine, and about

0.13 for law (not reported). It leads to a reduction of about 0.01 or 0.02 for the other elds. Table B12 uses

the model (7) with experience interactions and reports values of                       ^g   that are often lower even though   1-28
is often higher, presumably because later career earnings are discounted. The values are 0.128 for medicine,

0.131 for law, 0.083 for an MBA, and 0.150 for engineering.



7.3 Returns by Gender
Tables B13 and B14 report summary statistics about earnings for men and women, by graduate eld. Table

7 reports FE-cg and OLS estimates of               g   and   g1_28    based upon separate models for men and women. In all

other respects, the specications are identical to the pooled specications that form the basis for Table 5. Not

surprisingly, there is a strong relationship between the FE-cg estimates for men and for women. A regression

of the estimate for women on the corresponding estimate for men yields a sampling error corrected slope

coecient of 0.513 (0.187).
                                   45 The female - male dierence in the simple averages of coecients is 0.042, but

when one weights the coecients using the shares of the advanced degrees in the pooled sample of men and

women, the dierence is only 0.003. It is interesting to note that women obtain a larger return to an MBA

than men do: 0.156 (0.039) versus 0.091 (0.024), although the dierence is not statistically signicant. One

should keep in mind that because the earnings of women are below those of men prior to the advanced degree,

the gain in dollars from an advanced degree implied by the log of earnings model is smaller in some cases

for women even when           g   is higher. A full exploration of gender dierences in the causal eect of graduate

education on labor market outcomes will require a separate paper.



7.4 Graduate Returns by Undergraduate Field
We now turn to estimates of graduate returns by undergraduate eld. In Table B15 we report results for 31

degree combinations with pre advanced observations on at least 31 individuals, but due to space constraints

only consider a subset in the text and Table 8. Columns 1 and 2 of Table 8 report FE-cg and OLS estimates

of the treatment eect for earnings. For completeness, columns 3 and 4 report the FE-cg estimates of                             cg
and   cg1- 28    using the full sample, which includes the college only observations. In column 4 the eect of                   xit
on earnings after graduate school depends on                  g   but not   c,   as given in equation (9). We do not discuss these

estimates, but they are typically larger than the FE-cg estimate of                     ^cg   when the college only observations are

excluded (column 1). They are probably upward biased, while the sample weighted                            cg   parameter estimates

in column 1 probably underestimate the average return per year over the full period after graduate degree

attainment. Columns 5 and 6 report FE-cg and OLS estimates of                           cg    for the occupation premium.

  The internal rate of return     g   of advanced eld   g   is the solution to

                                                          actual             counterfactual
                                           weighti  P DVcgi     (g ) - P DVcgi             (g ) = 0
                                       c
  where    weighti   is the sample weight.
 45 See    footnote 36. The correction factor is 1.395.




                                                                      24
7.4.1   MBA and Business Related Master's Degrees

The rst 8 rows of Table 8 report the returns to an MBA for various undergraduate elds.           For business

majors the FE-cg estimate is 0.157 (0.065), while the OLS estimate is 0.239 (0.016). For economics majors

the FE-cg estimate is 0.098 (0.070) and the OLS estimate is 0.280 (0.036). One might have expected the

return to be larger for economics majors under the assumption they would benet more from basics in

accounting, management, marketing, and nance that business majors may typically take as undergraduates.

The dierence in the estimates is not signicant even at the 10% level. OLS appears to substantially overstate

the return to an MBA for both majors. In both cases OLS shows a substantial occupation related return of

about 0.065, but FE-cg does not.

   Next we consider STEM majors. The FE-cg estimate of the return to an MBA for biological, agricul-

tural, and environmental sciences majors is -0.107 (0.087). The value for engineering is only 0.083 (0.024).

In contrast, the OLS estimates range from 0.221 (0.013) for engineering to a whopping 0.335 (0.038) for

bio/agricultural/environmental sciences.    OLS appears to vastly overstate the value of an MBA for these

elds, just as it understates the value of a science related master's degree.    We nd the same pattern for

physical science majors.

   The table reports substantial FE-cg estimates of 0.153 (0.076) and 0.140 (0.102) for other social sciences

and psychology. The corresponding OLS estimates are much larger0.403 (0.049) and 0.399 (0.042). It is

interesting to note that we nd substantial FE-cg eects on the occupational returns in the cases of other

social sciences and psychology, but only a small eect for the business related majors. Overall, the results

show substantial heterogeneity across college majors in the value of an MBA, although sampling error is

likely part of the story. The pattern suggests that for some undergraduate elds an MBA can provide the

skills needed to facilitate a transition into a higher level business career.

   The second panel reports estimates for business related master's degrees for three majors. The return

for engineering and economics majors is below the return for business majors, although standard errors are

substantial. The OLS estimates are far above the FE-cg estimates in two of the three cases.



7.4.2   Education

Table 8 panel 3 presents estimates of the return to a master's in education for 7 majors. In some cases, the

estimates are imprecise, because of small cell sizes. The most important estimate is for education majors,

for whom an education masters is common. FE-cg indicates a return of 0.153 (0.028), of which 0.017 (0.009)

is an occupational premium.     The corresponding OLS estimate is even larger: 0.204 (0.008).     In all other

cases, the FE-cg estimate is substantially above the OLS estimate. The gap is particularly large for physical

and related sciences and computer and mathematical sciences as well as for engineering (not reported). OLS

shows a negative occupational premium in all cases.       It is often large, especially for higher paying STEM

elds.

   Overall, the evidence points to a substantial positive return to a master's degree in education, as one

would expect given teacher contracts. OLS seems to be an unreliable guide. The results for the occupational

earnings suggest that the reason is that in many cases those in a given major who pursue a master's in

education chose lower paying occupations prior to graduate school than those who do not. This is not the

case for education majors, which may be why FE-CG and OLS are similar for them.




                                                        25
7.4.3     Other Master's Degrees

The return to a master's in engineering for engineering majors is 0.119 (0.021), of which 0.015 (0.012) is

occupational upgrading. In this case, the OLS estimates are similar. We obtain a healthy return of 0.147

(0.055) to a graduate degree in computer science/math for those who majored in those disciplines.                                       The

return for engineering majors is smaller. The OLS estimates of the returns are about 0.14 in both cases.

   For psychology or social work the FE-cg estimates of                   cg      are about 0.235 for social science majors and for

psychology or social work majors. For both majors, the OLS estimate is about 0.095. Most of the dierence

in the FE-cg and OLS estimates is due to dierences in the occupational returns, which are negative in the

OLS case.



7.4.4     Patterns in the FE-cg estimates by undergraduate eld

Here we highlight how FE-cg estimates of the major specic returns to advanced degrees are related to the

OLS estimates of the BA and advanced degree earnings premia and occupation premiums. We estimate a

series of weighted regressions of the FE-cg estimate of               ^cg    on the OLS estimate for the 113           cg   combinations

for which at least 10 individuals are observed prior to graduate school on the OLS estimates of                                   c   and   g
for the additive specication (not reported).
                                            46 The OLS estimates are probably biased as estimates of causal

eects, but they do capture dierences across elds in the conditional mean of earnings.

   When only       ^c
                        is included, the coecient is -0.204 (0.071), When both                  ^c   and   ^g
                                                                                                                are included, they enter

with coecients of -0.333 (0.095) and 0.480 (0.114) respectively.                         The negative coecient on            ^c   indicates

that the return to graduate degrees tends to be lower for individuals with higher paying majors. Adding the

product of the deviations of       ^c   and   ^g   from their averages across the 19 undergraduate and graduate elds

to the regression indicates that the association of            ^cg   with   ^c    is more negative for graduate degrees with high
                                                                                                                             occ
pay, although the p-value on the interaction term is only 0.107. When the FE-cg estimates of                                 cg       for the

occupation premium are used in place of              ^cg ,   the estimates again indicate that the eect of              g   is smaller for

those with high paying undergraduate degrees, especially for graduate degrees that pay well.




8 Concluding Remarks
Information about the labor market value of alternative graduate degrees is both critical to education decisions

and in short supply. The biggest challenge, in addition to data, is that ability and preferences inuence both

job choice and graduate eld. This makes simple earnings comparisons a poor guide to the causal eects of

the degrees.

   We address the selection problem by controlling for xed eects for whether an individual has obtained

a particular college major and graduate degree combination by the last time that we observe her. Basically,

the FE-cg approach compares earnings before graduate school with earnings after graduate school.

   In the empirical sections we start with a set of facts about the linkages between BA eld, graduate eld,

and occupation. Our main contribution is to provide treatment on the treated estimates of the returns for

19 graduate elds as well as 31 estimates of returns to graduate elds that are for specic undergraduate

majors. The appendix provides descriptive information about earnings premiums for 168 graduate elds. We

provide highlights of the results in the introduction and a detailed discussion in section 7, so here we simply

characterize the results rather than review point estimates.

 46 The   weights are the inverse of square of the standard error of      ^cg .




                                                                     26
    First, the FE-cg estimates dier substantially across elds. Second, we obtain somewhat larger estimates

when we allow the return to graduate school to depend on time since degree completion.                          For most elds

annual returns appear to rise with post graduate school experience. However, we suspect that the experience

specic estimates may be biased because they require the use of data on people who never attend graduate

school to identify the counterfactual experience prole. Third, estimates of internal rates of return, which

account for tuition and program length, vary less across elds.                   They are also less sensitive to including

experience interactions.

    Fourth, the return to a given graduate eld, such as an MBA, depends on the college major. Fifth, the

FE-cg estimates indicate that the extent to which the returns operate through occupational upgrading varies

across degrees. In the cases of law and medicine, most of the returns are across occupations. But in many

other cases, such as a master's in engineering, most of the returns are within occupation.

    Finally, the FE-cg and OLS estimates of the eects on earnings and on the occupational upgrading dier

substantially for many degrees. OLS tends to overstate the returns to graduate elds that attract high paying

college majors, such as a master's in engineering and an MBA. OLS also tends to understate the returns to

graduate elds that attract lower paying majors, such as a master's in psychology and social work. The simple

earnings comparisons of those with an advanced degree to those with only a BA can be very misleading.

    We close with a few caveats. The FE-cg approach requires that experience adjusted earnings observed

prior to the advanced degree must provide an unbiased estimate of what a person would have earned had she

not gone to graduate school, after accounting for dierences in experience. As we explained above, this will

only be true under some strong assumptions. Because the fundamental problem is that we do not observe

counterfactual earnings after graduate school, further progress would seem to require either a more structural

approach or a source of quasi-experimental variation in which a set individuals who are intending to pursue

an MBA, say, are induced at random not to go to graduate school                     in any eld      without altering earnings

prospects in the absence of a graduate degree. This is a tall order.
                                                                    47

    We stress that our estimates are averages across a wide range of institutions. The return to a law degree

may depend on the school. Our approach could incorporate program quality if the data on institutions that

are collected in the NSCG and NSRCG were made available to researchers. We also stressed that our results

are for people who work before going to graduate school. The returns in some elds could be dierent for

those who go immediately to graduate school. Finally, one should keep in mind that our treatment on the

treated estimates may of course be dierent from average treatment eects.                         For example, the estimated

eect for an MBA, say, may be only a rough guide to what the return would be for someone with talents

and preferences that are quite dierent from typical business school graduates. And the treatment on the

treated estimates for medicine and other selective programs are for those who are able to obtain admission

to medical programs.

    Despite these limitations we believe that our paper is an important step toward the goal of providing

information about graduate school returns that individuals can rely on. But we have a long way to go.




 47 Another   possibility is to use geographical proximity to particular graduate programs as a source of variation. Alternatively,
there may be settings in which grades or test scores have a discontinuous relationship with admission to a graduate program at
a particular institution, although we suspect that it will be dicult to dene the counterfactual using such a design given the
large number of alternative programs and institutions.




                                                                27
References
Altonji, Joseph G, The demand for and return to education when education outcomes are uncertain,
  Journal of Labor Economics, 1993, 11 (1, Part 1), 4883.
  , Erica Blom, and Costas Meghir, Heterogeneity in human capital investments: High school curricu-
  lum, college major, and careers,    Annu. Rev. Econ., 2012, 4 (1), 185223.
  , Lisa B Kahn, and Jamin D Speer, Cashier or consultant? Entry labor market conditions, eld of
  study, and career success,    Journal of Labor Economics, 2016, 34 (S1), S361S401.
  , Peter Arcidiacono, and Arnaud Maurel, The analysis of eld choice in college and graduate school:
  Determinants and wage eects, in Handbook of the Economics of Education, Vol. 5, Elsevier, 2016,

  pp. 305396.


Arcidiacono, Peter, Ability sorting and the returns to college major,      Journal of Econometrics, 2004, 121
  (1-2), 343375.


  , Jane Cooley, and Andrew Hussey, The economic returns to an MBA,                  International Economic
  Review, 2008, 49 (3), 873899.
Ashenfelter, Orley, Estimating the eect of training programs on earnings,          The Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 1978, pp. 4757.
Bertrand, Marianne, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F Katz, Dynamics of the gender gap for young
  professionals in the nancial and corporate sectors,      American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  2010,   2 (3), 22855.
Bhattacharya, Jayanta, Specialty selection and lifetime returns to specialization within medicine,   Journal
  of Human Resources, 2005, 40 (1), 115143.
Black, Dan, Seth Sanders, and Lowell Taylor, The economic reward for studying economics,           Economic
  Inquiry, 2003, 41 (3), 365377.
Chen, M Keith and Judith A Chevalier, Are women overinvesting in education? Evidence from the
  medical profession,     Journal of Human Capital, 2012, 6 (2), 124149.
Gathmann, Christina and Uta Schnberg, How general is human capital? A task-based approach,
  Journal of Labor Economics, 2010, 28 (1), 149.
Gicheva, Dora, Working long hours and early career outcomes in the high-end labor market,          Journal of
  Labor Economics, 2013, 31 (4), 785824.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F Katz, The cost of workplace exibility for high-powered professionals,
  The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 2011, 638 (1), 4567.
   and      , A most egalitarian profession: pharmacy and the evolution of a family-friendly occupation,

  Journal of Labor Economics, 2016, 34 (3), 705746.
Hastings, Justine S, Christopher A Neilson, and Seth D Zimmerman, Are some degrees worth
  more than others? Evidence from college admission cutos in Chile, Technical Report, National Bureau

  of Economic Research 2013.



                                                      28
Heckman, James J, Sergio Urzua, and Edward Vytlacil, Instrumental variables in models with
  multiple outcomes: The general unordered case,    Annales d'Economie et de Statistique, 2008, pp. 151174.
Kahn, Lisa B, The long-term labor market consequences of graduating from college in a bad economy,
  Labour economics, 2010, 17 (2), 303316.
Ketel, Nadine, Edwin Leuven, Hessel Oosterbeek, and Bas van der Klaauw, The returns to
  medical school:   Evidence from admission lotteries,    American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  2016,   8 (2), 225254.
Kinsler, Josh and Ronni Pavan, The specicity of general human capital: Evidence from college major
  choice,   Journal of Labor Economics, 2015, 33 (4), 933972.
Kirkeboen, Lars J, Edwin Leuven, and Magne Mogstad, Field of study, earnings, and self-selection,
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (3), 10571111.
Lemieux, Thomas, Occupations, elds of study and returns to education,            Canadian Journal of Eco-
  nomics/Revue canadienne d'conomique, 2014, 47 (4), 10471077.
Lindley, Joanne and Stephen Machin, The rising postgraduate wage premium,             Economica,   2016,   83
  (330), 281306.


  and Steven McIntosh, Growth in within graduate wage inequality: The role of subjects, cognitive skill
  dispersion and occupational concentration,   Labour Economics, 2015, 37, 101111.
Montgomery, Mark and Irene Powell, Does an advanced degree reduce the gender wage gap? Evidence
  from MBAs,     Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society, 2003, 42 (3), 396418.
National Center for Education Statistics, National Postsecondary Student Aid Study, 2019.

Oyer, Paul, Initial labor market conditions and long-term outcomes for economists,    Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 2006, 20 (3), 143160.
Poletaev, Maxim and Chris Robinson, Human capital specicity: evidence from the Dictionary of
  Occupational Titles and Displaced Worker Surveys, 19842000,        Journal of Labor Economics,   2008,   26
  (3), 387420.


Robst, John, Education and job match: The relatedness of college major and work,        Economics of Edu-
  cation Review, 2007, 26 (4), 397407.
Sasser, Alicia C, Gender dierences in physician pay tradeos between career and family,           Journal of
  Human Resources, 2005, 40 (2), 477504.
Yamaguchi, Shintaro, Tasks and heterogeneous human capital,          Journal of Labor Economics,   2012,   30
  (1), 153.


Yuen, Jennifer et al.,     Job-education match and mismatch: Wage dierentials, Citeseer, 2010.




                                                     29
Figures




                                     Figure 1: Average earnings by advanced eld
Note: The gure presents the weighted average of earnings by advanced elds, in descending order of earnings (in 2013 dollars).
Medicine is highest paid and humanities elds are lowest paid.




                Figure 2: Average ln(earnings) of advanced elds by average occupation premium
Note:   The gure presents the relationship between the averages of the log of earnings (in 2013 dollars) and the occupation
premium for each advanced eld, using sample weights. The dots are the averages. The shaded circles around the dots indicate
the share of each advanced eld among all graduate degree holders. The straight line is the tted simple regression line between
the two averages, with the shares of the advanced elds as weights. The standard error of the slope is 0.10. The gure shows
that much of the variation in earnings across advanced degrees is associated with occupational sorting.




                                                              30
               Figure 3: Average ln(earnings) of advanced elds by average BA major premium
Note: The gure presents the relationship between the averages of the log of earnings (in 2013 dollars) and the averages of BA
major premium of each advanced eld, using sample weights. The dots indicate the averages. The shaded circles indicate the
share of each advanced eld among all graduate degree holders. The straight line is the tted simple regression line between
the two averages, with the shares of the advanced elds as weights. The standard error of the slope is 0.34. The gure shows
a positive relationship between the log of earnings and the BA major premium.     Therefore, those who choose a high-paying
advanced eld tend to have majored in a high-paying BA eld.




                                                             31
Tables
             Table 1: Average earnings, occupation premium and BA premium by advanced degree


                                                                                                  College
                                                                               Occupational                     Number
Advanced degree                                    Earnings     ln(Earnings)                       major                     %
                                                                                 Premium                         of obs
                                                                                                 premium

                                                       (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)      (6)
                                                    164,317         11.797          0.443           0.225
Medicine                                                                                                         8,470     3.717
                                                   [104,585]        [0.695]        [0.181]         [0.101]
                                                    128,813         11.563          0.258           0.230
Law                                                                                                              9,950     6.949
                                                    [90,921]        [0.652]        [0.140]         [0.113]
                                                    122,957         11.543          0.130           0.324
Master's in Business related elds                                                                               11,240     6.563
                                                    [85,639]        [0.591]        [0.192]         [0.124]
                                                    113,177         11.495          0.114           0.318
MBA                                                                                                             30,140    13.714
                                                    [67,599]        [0.542]        [0.215]         [0.132]
                                                    101,916         11.428          0.164           0.441
Master's in Engineering                                                                                         63,560     7.000
                                                    [51,287]        [0.471]        [0.140]         [0.087]
Master's in Computer and                             98,898         11.386          0.102           0.356
                                                                                                                26,510     5.259
mathematical sciences                               [50,789]        [0.500]        [0.176]         [0.130]
                                                     97,979         11.356          0.091           0.232
Master's in Health Services Admin.                                                                               2,430     1.088
                                                    [57,931]        [0.520]        [0.227]         [0.107]
                                                     97,553         11.406          0.071           0.329
Master's in Nursing                                                                                              4,440     1.767
                                                    [43,653]        [0.408]        [0.163]         [0.049]
Master's in Other Science and                        90,477         11.284          0.026           0.281
                                                                                                                 4,430     1.640
Engineering related elds                            [53,875]        [0.513]        [0.219]         [0.118]
                                                     88,437         11.268          0.064           0.212
Master's in Public Administration                                                                                3,460     1.781
                                                    [44,286]        [0.517]        [0.254]         [0.103]
                                                     83,227         11.172          0.013           0.264
Master's in Physical and related sciences                                                                       14,700     1.667
                                                    [46,735]        [0.595]        [0.191]         [0.092]
Master's in Other Social and                         81,130         11.131         -0.031           0.208
                                                                                                                17,190     3.628
related sciences                                    [56,708]        [0.585]        [0.255]         [0.125]
                                                     79,264         11.161          0.009           0.179
Master's in Health related elds                                                                                 11,320     3.995
                                                    [45,515]        [0.488]        [0.219]         [0.125]
Master's in Biological / agricultural /              69,445         11.018         -0.089           0.173
                                                                                                                18,160     3.038
environmental / life sciences                       [39,952]        [0.518]        [0.208]         [0.094]
Master's in Other Non-Science and                    69,023         11.030         -0.139           0.150
                                                                                                                 4,000     2.869
Engineering elds                                    [38,552]        [0.472]        [0.239]         [0.098]
                                                     66,174         11.020         -0.193           0.090
Master's in Education elds                                                                                      29,390    21.751
                                                    [29,774]        [0.403]        [0.205]         [0.104]
                                                     65,212         10.920         -0.164           0.072
Master's in Arts                                                                                                 2,330     1.804
                                                    [48,187]        [0.571]        [0.207]         [0.095]
                                                     64,541         10.964         -0.172           0.118
Master's in Psychology and Social Work                                                                          20,970     6.860
                                                    [34,381]        [0.471]        [0.236]         [0.082]
                                                     61,536         10.887         -0.278           0.135
Master's in Humanity elds                                                                                        6,660     4.909
                                                    [39,599]        [0.525]        [0.272]         [0.110]
Data source: NSCG 1993-2015, NSRCG 1993-2010

Note:   Weighted summary statistics reported for observations with a BA degree or higher, between the ages of 23 and 59,
inclusive. Standard deviations are reported in brackets. The sample is restricted to full time workers who obtained their BA
degree after age 19. The sample excludes people with PhD degrees now or in the future and people who attend graduate school
directly after college.   The sample also excludes observations of people enrolled in advanced degrees.    Earnings statistics are
based on annualized basic salary of the principal job in 2013 dollars and exclude observations based on annual earnings in the
previous year. Earnings are censored to be more than $5,000 per year, and less than $1,500,000 per year. Column 5 presents the
unweighted cell counts, rounded to the nearest 10, of the regression sample excluding the constructed occupation observations for
1988. Column 6 presents the weighted percentages of each advanced eld of the regression sample using the regression weights.




                                                               32
        Table 2: Occupation choices of individuals with BA in Engineering by advanced degree choice


       Educational                                                                                                    Average
                                                      Rank   Occupation before age 35                          %
       background                                                                                                     earnings

                        advanced                       1     Mechanical engineers                             15.16   67,837
                                             degree    2     Electrical engineer                              12.38   70,696
          No




                                                       3     Civil engineers                                  12.24   65,031
                                                       4     Not-elsewhere-classied engineers                 8.97    67,518
                                                       5     Computer software developers                     6.24    73,822



                                                                        Pre Adv Occupation before age 45
                                                       1     Mechanical engineers                             15.25   69,839
                                                       2     Electrical engineer                              14.55   73,585
                             by last observation




                                                       3     Not-elsewhere-classied engineers                 10.45   76,191
           Have an MBA




                                                       4     Industrial engineers                             9.21    69,919
                                                       5     Top-level managers, executives, administrators   6.19    96,982
                                                                       Post Adv Occupation before age 59
                                                       1     Top-level managers, executives, administrators   17.27   151,210
                                                       2     Mechanical engineers                             9.29    96,330
                                                       3     Electrical engineer                              9.04    95,666
                                                       4     Other management related occupations             7.06    120,469
                                                       5     Managers and administrators, n.e.c.              6.82    132,180



                                                                        Pre Adv Occupation before age 45

                                                                                    1/4 are teachers
           Have a Master's
                             in Education




                                                                       Post Adv Occupation before age 59
                                                       1     Secondary school teachers                        46.49   65,805
                                                       2     Postsecondary Teachers                           10.70   72,512
                                                       3     Top-level managers, executives, administrators   5.17    83,531
                                                       4     Other management related occupations             4.80    85,472
                                                       5     Managers in education and related elds           3.32    74,616



                                                                        Pre Adv Occupation before age 45
                                                       1     Electrical engineer                              22.85   67,798
                                                       2     Mechanical engineers                             16.54   66,747
           Have a Master's




                                                       3     Not-elsewhere-classied engineers                 11.96   64,654
                             in Engineering




                                                       4     Aeronautical/aerospace/astronautical engineers   11.71   65,358
                                                       5     Civil engineers                                  9.01    64,756
                                                                       Post Adv Occupation before age 59
                                                       1     Electrical engineer                              16.21   94,987
                                                       2     Mechanical engineers                             13.57   88,893
                                                       3     Civil engineers                                  12.51   87,868
                                                       4     Not-elsewhere-classied engineers                 10.58   94,738
                                                       5     Computer software developers                     7.86    96,650
Note: Tables 2-3 report occupation distributions and average earnings by BA eld and advanced degree eld and status. All
statistics are weighted. The sample excludes observations based on the annual earnings in the previous year. For combinations
with a small cell count, i.e. the most common occupation has less than 10 observations, the specic tabulation is replaced by a
general statement. The top panel reports the ve most common occupations for the BA eld within the subsample of people
who do not have an advanced degree when they are last observed. The lower panels report the ve most common occupations for
each BA and advanced eld combination, separately for pre and post advanced degree observations, on the subsample of people
who have an advanced degree when they are last observed. Column 1 describes each panel. Column 2 reports the rankings of the
occupations, column 3 reports the name of each occupation, column 4 reports the share of each occupation within each distinct
educational background, and column 5 reports the average earnings of the individuals with each occupation and educational
background combination. Table 2 focuses on people with a BA in Engineering.




                                                                                    33
                          Table 3: Occupation choices of individuals with BA in Education by advanced degree choice


Educational
                                        Rank   Occupation before age 35                                %      Average earnings
background

                                         1     Secondary school teachers                              26.32       42,720
               advanced




                                         2     Primary school teachers                                25.89       40,812
                               degree
   No




                                         3     Kindergarten and earlier school teachers               5.21        36,359
                                         4     Secretaries                                            3.99        37,331
                                         5     Top-level managers, executives, administrators         2.73        57,770



                                                                 Pre Adv Occupation before age 45

                                                                             Not teachers
                 Have an MBA




                                                                 Post Adv Occupation before age 59
                                         1     Top-level managers, executives, administrators         12.87       129,247
                                         2     Other management related occupations                   8.04        68,075
                                         3     Computer systems analysts and computer scientists      7.77        85,146
                                         4     Accountants, auditors, and other nancial specialists   7.24        69,521
                                         5     Personnel, training, and labor relations specialists    6.7        90,492



                                                                 Pre Adv Occupation before age 45
                                         1     Secondary school teachers                              40.98       42,961
                                         2     Primary school teachers                                36.08       43,581
     Have a Master's




                                         3     Postsecondary Teachers                                 5.67        58,166
                       in Education




                                         4     Kindergarten and earlier school teachers               3.35        30,082
                                         5     Vocational and educational counselors                  2.32        42,652
                                                                 Post Adv Occupation before age 59
                                         1     Secondary school teachers                              31.06       61,917
                                         2     Primary school teachers                                26.08       59,601
                                         3     Top-level managers, executives, administrators         8.01        83,162
                                         4     Vocational and educational counselors                  7.22        61,624
                                         5     Postsecondary Teachers                                 4.89        61,625
Note: This table repeats the case study presented in Table 2, but focusing on people with a BA in Education.




                                                                           34
                                        Table 4: Example of FE-cg estimator


                                                                                                Post MBA
                              BA-Econ,                Post BA,            Post-MBA
        Observation                                                                               minus
                          MBA at last obs.?      Pre-MBA Earnings          Earnings
                                                                                          Pre-MBA Earnings
            Barry                 Yes                  $55,000              $90,000              $35,000
           Ebony                  Yes                    NA                 $80,000                NA
            Mary                  Yes                  $65,000                NA                   NA
        Column Mean                                    $60,000              $85,000              $25,000
Note:   FE-cg estimate of return to MBA for economics major is:   $25,000 (=$85,000-$60,000).   FE estimate is $35,000
(=$90,000-$55,000)




                                                        35
                                                              Table 5: Returns to graduate education, additive specication
     Dependent variable:                                                          ln(earnings)                                                            Occupational Premium
                                                                                         w/ post Adv exp. interaction                                                 w/ post Adv exp. interaction

                                                 FE-cg
                                                             FE-cg      OLS          FE-cg           OLS          FE-cg          FE-cg
                                                                                                                                                 FE-cg       OLS         FE-cg           OLS
                                                                                                                            #                                                                     
                                                              full                 128 yrs        128 yrs       all years                         full                 128 yrs        128 yrs
                                                   (1)         (2)       (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)               (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)           (11)
                                                  0.549      0.597     0.687         0.658          0.738          0.619             0.492       0.482      0.478         0.478         0.475
     Medicine
                                                 (0.072)     (0.083)   (0.016)       (0.084)       (0.016)        (0.084)        (0.053)        (0.057)     (0.005)      (0.057)        (0.005)
                                                  0.416      0.438     0.457         0.469          0.474          0.462             0.319       0.307      0.291         0.307         0.289
     Law
                                                 (0.059)     (0.056)   (0.015)       (0.056)       (0.015)        (0.056)        (0.033)        (0.033)     (0.004)      (0.033)        (0.004)
                                                  0.206      0.238     0.342         0.265          0.358          0.248             0.028       0.031      0.107         0.036         0.112
     Master's in Business related elds
                                                 (0.044)     (0.044)   (0.012)       (0.044)       (0.013)        (0.044)        (0.013)        (0.013)     (0.004)      (0.013)        (0.004)
                                                   0.11      0.142     0.282         0.181          0.308          0.162             0.010       0.012      0.092         0.016         0.096
     MBA
                                                 (0.021)     (0.021)   (0.008)       (0.021)       (0.009)        (0.020)        (0.007)        (0.007)     (0.003)      (0.008)        (0.004)
                                                  0.103      0.146     0.147         0.198          0.184          0.165             0.017       0.024      0.063         0.027         0.067
     Master's in Engineering
                                                 (0.018)     (0.019)   (0.005)       (0.019)       (0.007)        (0.019)        (0.010)        (0.011)     (0.002)      (0.011)        (0.002)
     Master's in Computer and                     0.179      0.192     0.204         0.228          0.232          0.202             0.011       0.010      0.064         0.009         0.064
     mathematical sciences                       (0.033)     (0.033)   (0.009)       (0.034)       (0.011)        (0.033)        (0.010)        (0.010)     (0.003)      (0.010)        (0.004)
     Master's in Health Services                  0.273      0.259     0.302         0.300          0.342          0.268             0.069       0.059      0.127         0.074         0.144
     Administration                              (0.091)     (0.088)   (0.026)       (0.091)       (0.031)        (0.088)        (0.028)        (0.030)     (0.010)      (0.032)        (0.012)
                                                  0.235      0.181     0.313         0.163          0.294          0.181             0.023       0.010      0.032         0.006         0.024
     Master's in Nursing
                                                 (0.041)     (0.036)   (0.014)       (0.038)       (0.018)        (0.036)        (0.010)        (0.009)     (0.006)      (0.010)        (0.008)
     Master's in Other Science and                -0.018     -0.002    0.097         0.024          0.106          0.002             0.025       0.015      0.016         0.017         0.018
     Engineering related elds                    (0.058)     (0.056)   (0.019)       (0.056)       (0.019)        (0.056)        (0.040)        (0.040)     (0.009)      (0.040)        (0.009)
                                                  0.193      0.214     0.212         0.263          0.246          0.229             0.104       0.104      0.111         0.122         0.126
     Master's in Public Administration
                                                 (0.052)     (0.052)   (0.020)       (0.053)       (0.020)        (0.052)        (0.034)        (0.034)     (0.009)      (0.034)        (0.009)
     Master's in Physical and                     0.158      0.224     0.053         0.285          0.094          0.245             -0.018      -0.022     0.010        -0.025         0.008
     related sciences                            (0.054)     (0.052)   (0.015)       (0.053)       (0.016)        (0.052)        (0.018)        (0.018)     (0.006)      (0.019)        (0.007)
36




     Master's in Other Social and                 0.089      0.118     0.115         0.164          0.144          0.134             0.027       0.019      0.029         0.027         0.036
     related sciences                            (0.057)     (0.056)   (0.013)       (0.057)       (0.017)        (0.056)        (0.023)        (0.022)     (0.006)      (0.023)        (0.007)
                                                  0.227      0.232     0.219         0.246          0.214          0.240             0.098       0.084      0.078         0.077         0.069
     Master's in Health related elds
                                                 (0.053)     (0.052)   (0.012)       (0.054)       (0.015)        (0.053)        (0.022)        (0.021)     (0.005)      (0.022)        (0.007)
     Master's in Bio/agricultural/                0.231      0.276     0.015         0.331          0.049          0.298             0.029       0.032      -0.021        0.040         -0.015
     environmental/life sciences                 (0.045)     (0.046)   (0.011)       (0.046)       (0.012)        (0.045)        (0.014)        (0.014)     (0.005)      (0.015)        (0.006)
     Master's in Other Non-Science                0.117      0.148     0.064         0.187          0.085          0.173             -0.034      -0.031     -0.053       -0.030         -0.054
     and Engineering elds                        (0.056)     (0.055)   (0.014)       (0.056)       (0.015)        (0.056)        (0.025)        (0.025)     (0.008)      (0.026)        (0.008)
                                                  0.162      0.188     0.102         0.218          0.118          0.210             0.028       0.025      -0.064        0.032         -0.059
     Master's in Education elds
                                                 (0.019)     (0.018)   (0.006)       (0.018)       (0.006)        (0.018)        (0.007)        (0.007)     (0.003)      (0.007)        (0.003)
                                                  -0.025     -0.022    -0.001        0.021          0.018          0.003             0.027       0.024      -0.051        0.026         -0.051
     Master's in Arts
                                                 (0.099)     (0.103)   (0.023)       (0.103)       (0.023)        (0.103)        (0.039)        (0.040)     (0.009)      (0.040)        (0.009)
     Master's in Psychology and                   0.202      0.200     0.056         0.254          0.091          0.218             0.025       0.011      -0.062        0.023         -0.054
     Social Work                                 (0.029)     (0.029)   (0.009)       (0.030)       (0.010)        (0.029)        (0.017)        (0.017)     (0.004)      (0.017)        (0.005)
                                                  0.018      0.037     -0.145        0.063          -0.138         0.060             -0.076      -0.079     -0.202       -0.076         -0.201
     Master's in Humanity elds
                                                 (0.062)     (0.060)   (0.014)       (0.060)       (0.014)        (0.060)
                                                                                                                    (0.025) (0.024) (0.008)          (0.025)                            (0.008)
     ( graduate degree sample, which only includes people who have an advanced degree when they are last observed;  g 1-28 ; # sample mean over x of gx )
     Note: The table reports estimates of returns to advanced degrees for a set of additive regression specications. Sample weights are used. Standard errors are clustered by person.
     The dependent variable is log earnings in col. 1-6 and the occupation premium in col. 7-11. The regressions include dummies for each BA eld (OLS only) and each advanced
     degree, as well as parental education, the year, interactions between a cubic in age and gender, a cubic in age and BA eld, and between race\Hispanic and gender.                    The age
     polynomials and the year dummies control for linear birth cohort trend and partially control for nonlinear birth cohort eects. Col. 1 and 7 report FE-cg estimates of               g   on the
     graduate degree sample using equation (10). Cell counts for this sample for earnings range from 2,410 for an MA Arts to 64,810 for an MA in Engineering. Columns 2-6 and
     8-11 use the full sample. Col. 2 and 8 report FE-cg estimates of      g     using (10). Col. 3 and 9 report OLS estimates of       g     using (7). Col. 4-5 and 10-11 report FE-cg and OLS
     estimates of   g1-28 ,   the simple average of the experience specic return    gx   to each advanced degree from 1 to 28 years after degree attainment. They are based on (13), with
     degree combination xed eects excluded in the OLS case. Col. 6 is the same as col. 4 but reports the mean of                gx   over sample distribution of x; see the notes to Table B7 for
     details. The graduate (full) sample has 297,530 (858,130) observations for earnings and 195,540 (581,280) for occupation.
                                 Table 6: Internal rate of return to advanced degrees



                                         Duration                                                Percentage
                                           of the    Annual      Net PDV             PDV        gain from the    Internal rate
 Advanced eld
                                         advanced Tuition           Actual     counterfactual     advanced         of return
                                           degree                                                   degree

                                            (1)        (2)            (3)            (4)              (5)              (6)

 Medicine                                    4       13,317      1,810,100        1,277,127         41.565            0.160


 Law                                         3       16,697      1,497,405        1,162,502         28.700            0.148


 Master's in Business related elds           2        6,736      1,600,132        1,430,585         11.815            0.130


 MBA                                         2        9,311      1,498,869        1,482,262         1.069             0.059


 Master's in Engineering                     1        8,131      1,603,010        1,515,778         5.746             0.128

 Master's in Computer and
                                             1        8,131      1,486,989        1,306,222         13.809            0.213
 mathematical sciences
 Master's in Health Services
                                             2        6,736      1,317,210        1,110,126         18.573            0.161
 Administration

 Master's in Nursing                         2        8,131      1,772,490        1,579,679         12.230            0.123

 Master's in Other Science and
                                             1        8,131      1,176,934        1,258,478         -6.513         Negative
 Engineering related elds

 Master's in Public Administration           2        6,736      1,326,570        1,204,609         10.053            0.117

 Master's in Physical and
                                             1        8,131      1,149,323        1,026,048         11.992            0.196
 related sciences
 Master's in Other Social and
                                             1        6,736      1,089,713        1,046,047         4.135             0.107
 related sciences

 Master's in Health related elds             2        8,131      1,169,304        1,033,358         13.034            0.130

 Master's in Bio/agricultural/
                                             1        8,131      1,019,034         848,672          20.050            0.266
 environmental/life sciences
 Master's in Other Non-Science and
                                             1        6,736      1,009,283         943,427          6.953             0.138
 Engineering elds

 Master's in Education elds                  1        6,736         968,676        867,243          11.668            0.184


 Master's in Arts                            2        6,736         875,820        995,711         -12.132         Negative

 Master's in Psychology and
                                             2        6,736         891,215        807,823          10.240            0.114
 Social Work

 Master's in Humanity elds                   1        6,736         846,302        873,830          -3.176         Negative

Note: The statistics are calculated from regression coecients underlying the FE-cg estimates reported in Table 5, column 1. For
each advanced degree, we calculate the predicted value of actual income in levels (with graduate education) and counterfactual
income (without graduate education) from age 27 to 59. When evaluating the log earnings model we set the earnings error term to
0, the parental education variables to their weighted sample means and the calendar year to 2012. We also set the race\Hispanic
indicators to non-Hispanic white. For each graduate degree we calculate the population weighted average of predicted earnings
at each age over the distribution of gender and of undergraduate major for that graduate degree. We subtract the tuition of the
graduate degree from people's actual income to obtain net income. We assume graduate programs are full-time, and students
have zero earnings when they are enrolled. The assumed duration of the degree is in Column 1. The average tuition at public
institutions in 2012 from the National Center of Education Statistics is in column 2. Then we calculate the present discounted
value of the lifetime net income, assuming the interest rate is 0.05. Column 3 is the PDV of actual income net of tuition. Column
4 is the PDV of counterfactual income. All monetary values in the table are in 2013 dollars. Column 5 is the percentage increase
in net income 100((Col. 3-Col. 4)/Col. 4). In column 6, we report estimates of the internal rate of return of each advanced
eld. The internal rate of return is the discount factor that equates actual and counterfactual lifetime net income.




                                                               37
                                                 Table 7: FE-cg Estimates of the returns to graduate education, by gender
          Gender:                                                          Female                                                                  Male
          Dependent variable:                         ln(Earnings)                  Occupational Premium                      ln(Earnings)                Occupational Premium

                                                                FE-cg 128                          FE-cg 128                            FE-cg 128                         FE-cg 128
                                           FE-cg        OLS                   FE-cg       OLS                     FE-cg        OLS                   FE-cg       OLS
                                                                     yrs                              yrs                                    yrs                             yrs
                                            0.452       0.640      0.548       0.552     0.518       0.513         0.514       0.703      0.730       0.456     0.460       0.465
          Medicine
                                           (0.132)    (0.030)     (0.161)     (0.097)    (0.008)    (0.115)       (0.096)     (0.020)    (0.083)     (0.049)    (0.006)    (0.050)
                                            0.439       0.518      0.527       0.345     0.346       0.335         0.405       0.422      0.470       0.316     0.265       0.310
          Law
                                           (0.070)    (0.023)     (0.067)     (0.042)    (0.006)    (0.043)       (0.095)     (0.018)    (0.092)     (0.051)    (0.004)    (0.050)
          Master's in Business related      0.240       0.375      0.313       0.022     0.135       0.045         0.177       0.327      0.242       0.033     0.098       0.038
          elds                             (0.079)    (0.024)     (0.082)     (0.025)    (0.009)    (0.026)       (0.052)     (0.014)    (0.052)     (0.015)    (0.005)    (0.015)
                                            0.156       0.354      0.243       0.022     0.124       0.030         0.091       0.250      0.170       0.005     0.079       0.012
          MBA
                                           (0.039)    (0.016)     (0.041)     (0.015)    (0.006)    (0.016)       (0.024)     (0.009)    (0.024)     (0.008)    (0.004)    (0.008)
                                            0.044       0.182      0.190       -0.002    0.081       0.002         0.117       0.138      0.207       0.020     0.059       0.029
          Master's in Engineering
                                           (0.041)    (0.014)     (0.046)     (0.020)    (0.005)    (0.022)       (0.021)     (0.006)    (0.022)     (0.012)    (0.002)    (0.013)
          Master's in Computer and          0.241       0.231      0.288       0.017     0.083       0.017         0.149       0.191      0.199       0.007     0.056       0.005
          mathematical sciences            (0.066)    (0.018)     (0.067)     (0.019)    (0.007)    (0.020)       (0.036)     (0.010)    (0.037)     (0.012)    (0.004)    (0.012)
          Master's in Health Services       0.279       0.294      0.316       0.048     0.108       0.047         0.092       0.323      0.170       0.109     0.156       0.111
          Administration                   (0.100)    (0.029)     (0.102)     (0.030)    (0.012)    (0.034)       (0.128)     (0.045)    (0.133)     (0.060)    (0.018)    (0.061)
                                            0.190       0.275      0.120       0.022     0.028       0.001         0.567       0.576      0.574       0.028     0.069       0.074
          Master's in Nursing
                                           (0.043)    (0.015)     (0.038)     (0.011)    (0.006)    (0.011)       (0.113)     (0.039)    (0.136)     (0.032)    (0.013)    (0.034)
          Master's in Other Science         0.074       0.134      0.166       0.116     0.039       0.126         -0.072      0.079      -0.027      -0.013    0.008       -0.020
          and Engineering related elds (0.106)        (0.042)     (0.110)     (0.075)    (0.016)    (0.070)       (0.058)     (0.022)    (0.055)     (0.042)    (0.010)    (0.043)
          Master's in Public                0.172       0.273      0.245       0.082     0.108       0.088         0.219       0.170      0.289       0.125     0.113       0.147
          Administration                   (0.061)    (0.032)     (0.066)     (0.048)    (0.016)    (0.048)       (0.077)     (0.025)    (0.078)     (0.045)    (0.011)    (0.044)
38




          Master's in Physical and          0.032       0.087      0.191       0.007     0.015       -0.006        0.203       0.038      0.330       -0.027    0.007       -0.034
          related sciences                 (0.073)    (0.027)     (0.084)     (0.027)    (0.011)    (0.029)       (0.066)     (0.018)    (0.062)     (0.022)    (0.007)    (0.023)
          Master's in Other Social and      0.147       0.168      0.235       0.039     0.044       0.040         0.033       0.072      0.124       0.023     0.017       0.028
          related sciences                 (0.080)    (0.017)     (0.081)     (0.027)    (0.008)    (0.026)       (0.077)     (0.020)    (0.079)     (0.040)    (0.008)    (0.039)
          Master's in Health related        0.327       0.220      0.302       0.102     0.076       0.065         0.012       0.232      0.101       0.100     0.090       0.103
          elds                             (0.063)    (0.013)     (0.065)     (0.023)    (0.006)    (0.023)       (0.073)     (0.023)    (0.077)     (0.050)    (0.011)    (0.051)
          Master's in Bio/agricultural/     0.232       0.077      0.301       0.021     0.002       0.029         0.219       -0.035     0.378       0.033     -0.039      0.044
          environmental/life sciences      (0.069)    (0.015)     (0.070)     (0.022)    (0.007)    (0.022)       (0.062)     (0.016)    (0.060)     (0.020)    (0.007)    (0.020)
          Master's in Other Non-Sci         0.154       0.100      0.224       -0.072    -0.069      -0.070        0.094       0.024      0.159       0.020     -0.031      0.025
          and Engineering elds             (0.072)    (0.018)     (0.075)     (0.037)    (0.009)    (0.038)       (0.092)     (0.024)    (0.089)     (0.032)    (0.013)    (0.033)
                                            0.196       0.154      0.253       0.016     -0.055      0.021         0.087       0.016      0.151       0.049     -0.075      0.057
          Master's in Education elds
                                           (0.023)    (0.007)     (0.022)     (0.009)    (0.003)    (0.009)       (0.034)     (0.010)    (0.034)     (0.011)    (0.005)    (0.011)
                                            0.024       0.027      0.089       0.035     -0.027      0.026         -0.091      -0.024     -0.064      0.000     -0.070      0.025
          Master's in Arts
                                           (0.119)    (0.032)     (0.122)     (0.055)    (0.013)    (0.055)       (0.159)     (0.033)    (0.165)     (0.052)    (0.013)    (0.057)
          Master's in Psychology and        0.205       0.101      0.264       0.016     -0.055      0.007         0.201       -0.021     0.262       0.056     -0.067      0.060
          Social Work                      (0.033)    (0.010)     (0.033)     (0.018)    (0.005)    (0.018)       (0.065)     (0.017)    (0.062)     (0.038)    (0.009)    (0.038)
                                            0.163       0.019      0.232       -0.054    -0.091      -0.051        -0.049      -0.247     0.005       -0.087    -0.263      -0.084
          Master's in Humanity elds
                                           (0.061)    (0.019)     (0.059)     (0.030)    (0.010)    (0.030)       (0.097)     (0.018)    (0.095)     (0.032)    (0.010)    (0.032)
          ( graduate degree sample, which only includes people who have an advanced degree when they are last observed)
     Note: The table reports FE-cg and OLS estimates of returns to advanced degrees by gender for a set of additive regression specications. The control variables include dummies
     for each BA eld (in OLS only) and each advanced degree, as well as a set of demographic variables including parental education, year of the survey, and interactions of cubic in
     age with race\Hispanic and with BA eld. Columns 1, 4 (women) and 7, and 10 (men) report estimates of           g ,   the eects of advanced degrees on earnings and on the occupation
     premium from an FE-cg regression on the graduate degree sample. The specication is equation (10). Cell counts for this FE-cg regression specication are identical to the cell
     counts reported in Table B13 and Table B14. Columns 2, 5, 8, and 11 report OLS estimates of        g     based on equation (7). Columns 3, 6, 9, and 12 report FE-cg estimates for
     earnings and the occupation premium of   g1-28 ,   which is the simple average of return to each advanced degree between 1 and 28 years after degree obtainment. The specication
     is equation (13) and the full sample. A detailed explanation for the construction of these averages is provided in the notes for Table B7.
                                        Table 8: Returns to graduate education by undergraduate elds



                                                                                                                     Occupation                     # of pre
 Advanced eld                     Undergraduate eld                                   ln(earnings)                                       Earnings
                                                                                                                      premium                       Adv obs


                                                                                     FE-cg                                                          person-yr
                                                                          FE-cg
                                                                                  
                                                                                                OLS      g1-28     FE-cg
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                OLS       Mean
                                                                                      full                                                          [person]
                                                                                                                                          [SD]
                                                                            (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)         (6)       (7)        (8)
                                                                           -0.107    -0.049    0.335     0.005     0.114        0.162    104,487      140
                                  Bio/agricultural/environmental sci.
                                                                          (0.087)    (0.089)   (0.038)   (0.089)   (0.036)     (0.015)   [71,152]     [70]
                                                                           0.157     0.185     0.239     0.215     0.008        0.062    106,338      110
                                  Business
                                                                          (0.065)    (0.062)   (0.016)   (0.063)   (0.016)     (0.006)   [63,644]     [90]
                                                                           0.093     0.086     0.244     0.127     0.007        0.051    111,408      220
                                  Computer and mathematical sci.
                                                                          (0.053)    (0.053)   (0.026)   (0.053)   (0.018)     (0.010)   [63,853]    [120]
                                                                           0.098     0.171     0.280     0.200     -0.006       0.069    124,810      100
                                  Economics
  (1) MBA                                                                 (0.070)
                                                                           0.083
                                                                                     (0.057)
                                                                                     0.127
                                                                                               (0.036)
                                                                                               0.221
                                                                                                         (0.058)
                                                                                                         0.165
                                                                                                                   (0.028)
                                                                                                                   0.002
                                                                                                                               (0.013)
                                                                                                                                0.037
                                                                                                                                         [79,541]
                                                                                                                                         125,730
                                                                                                                                                      [60]
                                                                                                                                                      870
                                  Engineering
                                                                          (0.024)    (0.023)   (0.013)   (0.024)   (0.010)     (0.005)   [68,201]    [460]
                                                                           0.153     0.200     0.403     0.238     0.052        0.188    103,004      80
                                  Other Social and related sci.
                                                                          (0.076)    (0.075)   (0.049)   (0.075)   (0.041)     (0.018)   [70,458]     [40]
                                                                           0.131     0.159     0.292     0.211     0.063        0.104    116,660      60
                                  Physical and related sci.
                                                                          (0.123)    (0.119)   (0.049)   (0.119)   (0.042)     (0.020)   [64,735]     [40]
                                                                           0.140     0.133     0.399     0.184     0.043        0.194    98,845       80
                                  Psychology or Social Work
                                                                          (0.102)    (0.100)   (0.042)   (0.100)   (0.037)     (0.019)   [59,509]     [50]
                                                                           0.271     0.305     0.277     0.328     0.030        0.081    113,906      70
                                  Business
      Master's in                                                         (0.090)    (0.092)   (0.020)   (0.092)   (0.019)     (0.006)   [81,716]     [60]

  (2) Business                    Economics
                                                                           0.039
                                                                          (0.105)
                                                                                     0.117
                                                                                     (0.092)
                                                                                               0.361
                                                                                               (0.045)
                                                                                                         0.133
                                                                                                         (0.092)
                                                                                                                   -0.011
                                                                                                                   (0.025)
                                                                                                                                0.100    141,223
                                                                                                                               (0.015) [103,505]
                                                                                                                                                      70
                                                                                                                                                      [40]
      related elds                                                         0.084     0.138     0.269     0.163     0.014        0.030    137,198      150
                                  Engineering
                                                                          (0.051)    (0.050)   (0.030)   (0.050)   (0.023)     (0.009)   [80,653]     [70]
                                                                           0.093     0.163     0.035     0.208     0.026       -0.079    66,709       160
                                  Bio/agricultural/environmental sci.
                                                                          (0.061)    (0.060)   (0.025)   (0.060)   (0.019)     (0.013)   [37,250]     [80]
                                                                           0.175     0.153     -0.147    0.175     0.072       -0.191    69,224       180
                                  Computer and mathematical sci.
                                                                          (0.066)    (0.066)   (0.026)   (0.066)   (0.029)     (0.017)   [30,063]    [100]
                                                                           0.153     0.185     0.204     0.209     0.017       -0.009    64,584       230
                                  Education
                                                                          (0.028)    (0.025)   (0.008)   (0.025)   (0.009)     (0.004)   [27,230]    [180]

  (3) Master's
      Education
               in
                                  Other Social and related sci.
                                                                           0.174
                                                                          (0.047)
                                                                                     0.230
                                                                                     (0.048)
                                                                                               0.110
                                                                                               (0.024)
                                                                                                         0.254
                                                                                                         (0.048)
                                                                                                                   0.022
                                                                                                                   (0.023)
                                                                                                                               -0.064
                                                                                                                               (0.012)
                                                                                                                                         65,574
                                                                                                                                         [31,374]
                                                                                                                                                      170
                                                                                                                                                      [90]
                                                                           0.172     0.233     -0.128    0.281     0.064       -0.214    66,977       90
                                  Physical and related sci.
                                                                          (0.078)    (0.075)   (0.045)   (0.076)   (0.048)     (0.019)   [27,996]     [50]
                                                                           0.035     0.024     -0.056    0.058     0.039       -0.119    73,058       80
                                  Political science
                                                                          (0.095)    (0.095)   (0.049)   (0.095)   (0.043)     (0.022)   [38,120]     [40]
                                                                           0.243     0.226     0.089     0.266     0.037       -0.074    61,028       190
                                  Psychology or Social Work
                                                                          (0.043)    (0.043)   (0.018)   (0.043)   (0.021)     (0.010)   [28,240]    [120]
                                                                           0.119     0.170     0.110     0.220     0.015        0.038    101,372     1,070

  (4) Master's in                 Engineering
                                                                          (0.021)    (0.021)   (0.006)   (0.022)   (0.012)     (0.002)   [50,854]    [630]
      Engineering                 Physical and related sci.
                                                                           0.080     0.137     0.248     0.197     0.044        0.143    99,008       60
                                                                          (0.085)    (0.082)   (0.022)   (0.082)   (0.040)     (0.006)   [46,062]     [40]

      Master's in                 Computer and mathematical sci.
                                                                           0.147     0.137     0.142     0.173     0.002        0.023    95,083       330

  (5) Computer and                                                        (0.055)
                                                                           0.056
                                                                                     (0.053)
                                                                                     0.093
                                                                                               (0.012)
                                                                                               0.133
                                                                                                         (0.054)
                                                                                                         0.136
                                                                                                                   (0.015)
                                                                                                                   0.000
                                                                                                                               (0.005)
                                                                                                                                0.034
                                                                                                                                         [46,515]
                                                                                                                                         102,825
                                                                                                                                                     [180]
                                                                                                                                                      150
      math sci.                   Engineering
                                                                          (0.050)    (0.047)   (0.015)   (0.047)   (0.013)     (0.004)   [50,290]     [80]

      Master's in                 Other Social and related sci.
                                                                           0.232     0.262     0.101     0.292     0.037       -0.074    63,118       90

 (10) Psychology and                                                      (0.065)
                                                                           0.238
                                                                                     (0.067)
                                                                                     0.208
                                                                                               (0.019)
                                                                                               0.090
                                                                                                         (0.066)
                                                                                                         0.272
                                                                                                                   (0.030)
                                                                                                                   0.024
                                                                                                                               (0.011)
                                                                                                                               -0.045
                                                                                                                                         [28,577]
                                                                                                                                         62,264
                                                                                                                                                      [50]
                                                                                                                                                      290
      Social Work                 Psychology or Social Work
                                                                          (0.035)    (0.033)   (0.012)   (0.034)   (0.020)     (0.007)   [36,053]    [180]
 ( graduate degree sample, which only includes people who have an advanced degree when they are last observed;                FE-cg with experience prole,
 averaged over 128 years)
Note: Estimates of returns to advanced degree by undergraduate elds are reported. Columns 1-4 present estimates from earnings regressions, and
columns 5-6 present estimates from occupation premium regressions. Columns 1 and 5 present the returns to each advanced degree by each BA eld
from the FE-cg regression. Column 2 presents the returns from the FE-cg regression on the full sample. Columns 3 and 6 present the OLS estimates.
Column 4 presents   g1-28 ,   the average of return to each advanced degree by BA eld from 1 to 28 years of post advanced degree experience. A detailed
explanation of the construction of these averages is provided in the notes for Table B7. Column 7 presents the mean and [standard deviation] of the
annualized basic salary of the principal job in 2013 dollars for people with each combination of undergraduate and graduate eld. Column 8 presents
the individual-level cell count and [observation-level cell count] of pre advanced degree earnings observations for the FE-cg earnings regression (col. 1),
which is the regression with smallest sample among all regressions reported in this table. The individual-level cell count counts multiple observations
of one individual as one. Unweighted cell counts are rounded to the nearest 10. A complete set of estimates of degree combinations with at least 30
individuals is provided in Table B15.
                                                                            39
    Appendix A
                              Table A1: Summary statistics of the control variables


                                                        Gender
                                                                        Percentage               Frequency
                                                                            (1)                      (2)
      Female                                                               41.90                  315,550
      Male                                                                 58.10                  542,580
      Total                                                                 100                   858,130


                                                   Gender and Race
      Asian, Female                                                         2.74                   36,520
      Asian, Male                                                           3.75                   64,000
      Black Hispanic, Female                                                0.11                    1,400
      Black Hispanic, Male                                                  0.09                    1,320
      Black Non-hispanics, Female                                           3.69                   39,360
      Black Non-hispanics, Male                                             2.73                   32,190
      Native American, Female                                               0.31                    4,150
      Native American, Male                                                 0.33                    5,410
      Other race, Female                                                    0.66                    8,400
      Other race, Male                                                      0.69                   10,010
      White Hispanic, Female                                                2.08                   27,040
      White Hispanic, Male                                                  2.30                   35,380
      White Non-hispanic, Female                                           32.32                  198,690
      White Non-hispanic, Male                                             48.21                  394,260


                                           Father's education attainment
      Less than high school                                                15.15                  123,300
      High school diploma                                                  28.01                  223,740
      Some college, vocational, trade school, 2-year college               18.66                  156,550
      College Degree                                                       20.46                  189,120
      Master's degree (including MBA)                                       6.11                   61,090
      Professional degree (e.g. JD, LLB, MD, DDS, etc.)                     9.75                   84,010
      Doctorate (e.g. PhD, DSc, EdD, etc.)                                  1.86                   20,310


                                           Mother's education attainment
      Less than high school                                                12.30                  112,040
      High school diploma                                                  38.00                  300,110
      Some college, vocational, trade school, 2-year college               22.13                  184,320
      College Degree                                                       17.81                  165,090
      Master's degree (including MBA)                                       4.99                   51,750
      Professional degree (e.g. JD, LLB, MD, DDS, etc.)                     4.19                   38,190
      Doctorate (e.g. PhD, DSc, EdD, etc.)                                  0.50                    5,920
      Missing                                                               0.08                     720
Note: Weighted summary statistics of the demographics for the OLS regression sample. Unweighted cell counts are rounded to
the nearest 10.




                                                           40
                                    Table A2: Distribution of time gaps between educational experience and earnings observation


                                                                                                                        Time from Adv
                                                                                                                                            Time from BA to
                                                                                                                         completion to
                                                             Time from                                                                      Adv completion
                                       Time from BA                            Time from Adv                             post Adv obs.
                                                          pre-Adv obs. To                          Time from BA to                           (for individuals
                                       completion to                            completion to                           (for individuals
                                                                 Adv.                              Adv completion                             with pre and
                                        pre-Adv obs.                            post Adv obs.                             with pre and
                                                             Completion                                                                         post Adv
                                                                                                                            post Adv
                                                                                                                                              observations)
                                                                                                                         observations)
                                             (1)                  (2)                 (3)                  (4)                 (5)                  (6)

                     10th quantile            1                    1                   2                    2                   1                    4

                     25th quantile            2                    2                   4                    3                   1                    5

                          Mean               5.45                3.11                10.92                5.98                 2.18                8.36

                         Median               4                    3                   9                    5                   2                    7

                     75th quantile            8                    4                   17                   8                   3                   11

                     90th quantile            12                   5                   24                  12                   4                   15

                          count             8,170                8,120              289,360             297,480               7,400               15,520
41




     Note: Unweighted summary statistics of the time gaps reported for the regression sample. Columns 3-4 are estimated from the graduate degree sample. Columns 1, 2, 5, and
     6 are estimated from a more-restricted subsample in which the individuals are observed working full time before they obtain the advanced degree. Our sample selection rules
     impose a minimum of 1 for the time gap variables in columns 1-5. Column 2 excludes about 50 pre advanced earnings observations on individuals for whom we dropped post
     advanced observations because they were reinterviewed only because of occupation. See footnote 13. Unweighted cell counts are rounded to the nearest 10.
                              Table A3: Age distribution of the earnings observations


                                                     Individuals       Individuals with
                                                                                           Individuals with
                                 Full sample        without Adv.       Adv. Degree in
                                                                                           advanced degree
                                                        Degree            the future
                                      (1)                 (2)                 (3)                  (4)


              10th quantile           26                  25                   24                  28

              25th quantile           30                  29                   25                  32

                  Mean              38.70                38.25               29.40               39.83

                 Median               38                  37                   28                  39

              75th quantile           47                  46                   33                  47

              90th quantile           53                  53                   38                  53




                  Count            858,130             560,600               8,170              289,360


Note: Unweighted summary statistics of individual age are reported for the additive OLS regression sample. Observations based
on the survey report of earnings and annual earnings in the previous year are both included. Column 4 is estimated from the
graduate degree sample. Column 3 is estimated from the more restricted subsample of individuals who are observed working
full time before they obtain an advanced degree. Unweighted cell counts are rounded to the nearest 10.




                                                             42
   Appendix B

B.1 The Distribution of Ability and Preferences Conditional on College Major
    and Graduate Education Choice
In this appendix we use a three period model of education and occupation choice to study how selection

inuences the relationship between      dFt1 (At1 , Qt1 |c, Ggt3 ) and dFt3 (At , Qt |c, Ggt3 ).       Drawing on Altonji (1993),

Arcidiacono (2004) and other papers, Altonji et al. (2012) and Altonji et al. (2016b) summarize the theoretical

literature on the choice of eld of study and labor market careers. The theory stresses the following features.


  1. Preferences, innate ability, and knowledge at the start of college shape the expected utility of a particular

      education program. The decisions of whether to attend graduate school and in what eld depend upon

      the same factors, as well as occupational experience.


  2. Individuals learn gradually about preferences and ability, and about the labor market opportunities

      associated with particular courses of study in particular occupations.


  3. Choices are made sequentially with imperfect information about preferences, ability, and labor market

      opportunities.


  4. Education programs and occupations have dierent skills and knowledge prerequisites. The skill and

      knowledge of an individual inuence how much the person learns in a particular program, and perfor-

      mance on the job.


  5. Field of study shapes knowledge accumulation. A program of study shifts potential earnings in various

      occupations. Actual earnings depend on occupation choice, and occupation choice depends on potential

      earnings and preferences.


  6. The eect of past experience in an occupation on potential earnings in other occupations varies.


A key implication is that the choices of whether to attend graduate school and what type of degree to pursue

are inuenced by prior choices, ability, and preferences.

   We now present a simple three period model of occupation choice, graduate school, and earnings that is

consistent with the rst ve features but assumes prior occupation has a neutral eect on the earnings. At

the end of the appendix, we discuss how occupation specic experience alters the pattern of selection. In

keeping with the analysis in section 5.2, the timing is as follows. We consider                   c   majors who have obtained

their degree prior to   t1   and who choose to work in period       t1   rather than go directly to graduate school. The

potential earnings in each occupation in       t1   is given by   wc0jt1 (At1 ).
                                                                             t2 , individual i either works in the
                                                                                       In

optimal occupation or goes to graduate school in the optimal eld. In t3 , i chooses an occupation and works.
            occ
    Let nucgjt (At , Qt , jt ) be the non-pecuniary value of working in j in period t. It depends on At , Qt , and

the j th element jt of the vector t of i-specic i.i.d. occupation specic preference components. The function

nuocc
   cgjt also depends on c and g because the knowledge and experiences gained in c and g may inuence how
satisfying j is for given values of At and Qt .

   We have implicitly assumed that prior occupation choice does not aect the pecuniary and nonpecuniary

ow value of graduate education. The earnings specication assumes that prior occupation does not aect

future labor market opportunities in a way that depends on                 g   or   jt .   As a result, choice of occupation is

separable from future education and occupation decisions.                 Correlation between          jt1   and choice of   g   and



                                                             43
future occupations arises from persistence in                    At , Qt      and the causal eects of                   c   and   g.    We discuss relaxing

these assumptions in section 5.2.5.

     People are indierent to the timing of consumption and income and are risk neutral.
                                                                                                                                        48

     We now work backwards from the third period. The ow value from working in occupation                                                       j   in   t3   is



                                    exp (wcgj   t3   (At3 )) + nuocc
                                                                 cgj     t3   (At3 , Qt3 , j      t3 ) , j   = 1,    , J .

The individual chooses the occupation jt3 with the highest ow value, which we denote by                                                 Vcgt3 (At3 , Qt3 , t3 ).
The occupation choice probabilities                  pcgt3 (jt3 |At3 , Qt3 )      are implicitly dened by the above                       t3 choice problem
and the distribution of the transitory occupation specic preference vector                                       t3 .
     In   t2 , i   either works in the best occupation             jt2   or attends graduate school in the best eld. The net ow

value of attending graduate school in eld                   g                  nugrad (At2 , Qt2 , vt2 ) minus the
                                                                is the non-pecuniary component
                                                                                 cg
monetary cost COSTg (At2 , zt2 ). The non-pecuniary value depends on c, A, Q, and the preference shifter

vt2 . The shifter vt2 inuences utility from graduate school but is unrelated to A and Q, and has no direct
inuence on occupation choice. The monetary cost depends on At2 and on the net tuition shifter zt2 . The

vector zt2 captures tuition and grants at nearby schools and the potential for nancial support from relatives.

     Adding the ow value of obtaining a g degree to the continuation value for t2 gives the value of going to

graduate school in eld g :


                         Vcg t2 (At2 , Qt2 , zt2 ) =nugrad
                                                      cg   (At2 , Qt2 , vt2 ) - COSTg (At2 , zt2 ) , g = 1,    , G
                                                       + Et2 [Vcg t3 (At3 , Qt3 , t3 )] .
The expectation is over the distribution of                     At3 , Qt3         and     t3   conditional on       At2 , Qt2 .        We do not explicitly

incorporate the fact that graduate school attendance in                               g   is also conditional on availability and admission.

However, one can think of the                 nugrad
                                                cg   (At2 , Qt2 , vt2 )           and the      COSTg (At2 , zt2 )           functions as incorporating

these factors.

     Working in          t2   corresponds to choosing        g = 0.   The ow value of working in                        j   is



                                    exp (wc0j   t2   (At2 )) + nuocc
                                                                 j (At2 , Qt2 , t2 , c, 0) , j = 1,    , J .


The value of working in             t2   is


                               Vc0t2 (At2 , Qt2 , t2 ) =max exp (wc0jt2 (At2 )) + nuocc
                                                                                    c0jt2 (At2 , Qt2 , t2 )
                                                            j

                                                           + Et2 Vc0t3 (At3 , Qt3 , t3 ) .

Note that          j   does not appear in the continuation value                   Et2 Vc0t3 (A, Q, t3 )        because we have ruled out eects

of   j   on skill accumulation and the evolution of preferences.

     Person        i   attends graduate school in program                g   if   g   is the best available graduate school option and it

dominates working. The optimality conditions are



                           Vcgt2 (At2 , Qt2 , vt2 , zt2 ) > Vcg t2 (At2 , Qt2 , vt2 , zt2 ) , g = 1,    , G and g = g                                      (10)

 48 That     is, we are assuming quasilinear utility and perfect credit markets.                    We also assume a zero rate of time preference.
Given quasilinear utility and perfect credit markets, time preference would only inuence choice by altering the weights on the
non-pecuniary components of utility in dierent periods.




                                                                              44
and

                                        Vcgt2 (At2 , Qt2 , vt2 , zt2 ) > Vc0t2 (At2 , Qt2 , t2 ) .                                      (11)


Note that     Ggt3 = Ggt2     because graduate education is obtained in                  t2 .
    The above inequalities for the choice of          g   implicitly dene the conditional pdf              dFt1 (At2 , Qt2 |c, Ggt3 ) based
on the joint pdf of     (At2 , Qt2 , vt2 , zt2 , t2 ) given c. The conditions (10, 11) and the pdf of
    (At1 , Qt1 , At2 , Qt2 , zt2 , t2 , At3 , Qt3 |c ) implicitly dene the conditional pdfs dFt1 (At1 , Qt1 |c, Ggt3 ) and
dFt3 (At3 , Qt3 |c, Ggt3 ). These distributions are central to our discussion of identication in 5.2.
    Finally, we turn to the rst period. People choose the best occupation jt1 given that the value of working

in j , j = 1,    , J is



            Vc0t1 (jt1 |At1 , Qt1 , t1 ) = exp (wc0j       t1   (At1 )) + nuocc
                                                                            c0j (At1 )

                                         + Et1 max maxVcg t2 (At2 , Qt2 , vt2 , zt2 ) , Vc0t2 (At2 , Qt2 , t2 )                  .
                                                                 g


The expectation is over the distribution of               At2 , Qt2 , vt2 , zt2 , t2   conditional on     At1 , Qt1 , c.   The above choice

problem implicitly determines the occupation choice probabilities                        pc0t1 (jt1 |At1 , Qt1 ).


B.2 Mathematical Statement of Assumptions About the Age Prole of Earnings
A2a concerns the eects of new information about                      A   and   Q.
    Assumption A2a (Neutral              contribution of updating about At , Qt to earnings trends ):


              pcgt3 (j |At3 , Qt3 ) wcgjt3 (At3 ) [dFt3 (At3 , Qt3 |c, Ggt3 ) - pcgt3 (j |At1 , Qt1 ) wcgjt3 (At1 ) dFt1 (At1 , Qt1 |c, Ggt3 )]
    j   A,Q


=             pc0t3 (j |At3 , Qt3 ) wc0jt3 (At3 ) [dFt3 (At3 , Qt3 |c, Ggt3 ) - pc0t3 (j |At1 , Qt1 ) wc0jt3 (At1 ) dFt1 (At1 , Qt1 |c, Ggt3 )] .
    j   A,Q


The occupation probability function and earnings functions on the left hand side are evaluated at                                    Gt3 = g
while those on the right hand side are evaluated at                  Gt3 = 0.       This is the only dierence.

    The next assumption is that earnings growth within occupation is the same for all occupations conditional

on college major and ability.

    Assumption A2b       (Earnings trends do not depend on occupation): wcgjt (At ) and wc0jt (At ) follow
parallel trends that depend on At1 but not the occupation. That is,

                         E [wcgjt (At ) |c, Ggt3 ] = wcgjt1 (At1 ) + ac (At1 , At - At1 ) , g = 0, 1, ..., G ,

    where   ac (, )   is some college major specic function.

    The nal assumption, A4, concerns the earnings growth due to predictable shifts in occupation with

experience.

    Assumption A2c (Occupational      earnings progression ): Evaluated at dFt1 (A, Q|c, Gg
                                                                                          t3 ), the contribution
of occupational progression to earnings growth for those who choose g would have been the same if they had
not gone to graduate school. To be specic,




                                                                      45
                [pcgt3 (j |At3 , Qt3 ) dFt1 (At3 , Qt3 |c, Ggt3 ) - pcgt1 (j |At1 , Qt1 )] wcgjt1 (At1 ) dFt1 (At1 , Qt1 |c, Ggt3 )
      j   A,Q


  =             [pc0t3 (j |At3 , Qt3 ) dFt1 (At3 , Qt3 |c, Ggt3 ) - pc0t1 (j |At1 , Qt1 )] wc0jt1 (At1 ) dFt1 (At1 , Qt1 |c, Ggt3 )
      j   A,Q


  =         c (A, Q, t3 - t1 ) dFt1 (A, Q|c, Ggt3 )
      A,Q


for g = 0, 1, ..., G and some college major specic function c (, , ).

B.3 Data Appendix
B.3.1     Construction of the panel data

As described in section 2, we pool all waves of NSCG (1993 to 2015) and NSRCG (1993 to 2010) to build

the panel data set for empirical analyses.             Each raw data set we use is based on a separate survey , so

they unavoidably have various inconsistencies in variable names and values across waves, and across multiple

observations of the same person. We start assembling the panel data from a set of 10 NSCG data les and

8 NSRCG data les, and append and clean the panel data in the following steps.

   Step 1. We modify the variable names in each separate data le to unify key variable names.

   Step 2. We assign values to categorical variables using crosswalks modied from the codebook of each

separate data source to ensure consistent classications. These variables include parental education, marital

status, race, type of each postsecondary degree, major and minor eld of each degree with three dierent

levels of disaggregation (best code includes 144 categories, minor group includes 33, and major group

includes 7), occupation with three dierent levels of disaggregation (best code includes 144 categories,

minor group includes 31, major group includes 7). Table B2 is the crosswalk for BA elds, and table B1

is the crosswalk for advanced elds. In both tables, column (1) is the aggregated classication we dene and

use in most of the empirical analysis. Table B3 is the crosswalk for occupation, in which column (1) and

(2) present an aggregated (19 categories) and a disaggregated (66 categories) classication that we construct

to incorporate the NSCG/NSRCG and 1990 Census occupation codes. We also merge in the BA premiums

and occupational premiums estimated from the ACS through crosswalks between BA eld and occupation

classications in the ACS and the NSCG/NSRCG data.

   Step 3. We hard code a number of cases to ensure the value of time invariant variables are consistent

across multiple cases of the same person in the panel data.                   These variables include birth year, parental

education, primary and secondary elds and the graduation year of the rst BA.

   Step 4. We re-organize the degree information. The raw data organize the advanced elds in the time

order of completion.        It also records two elds of the same degree (i.e.                with the same degree type and

graduation year) as multiple degrees. We re-order the degrees so that they are in time order, and multiple

records of the same degree are collapsed.

   Step 5. We drop people whose educational background implies odd time order. For example, a few people

completed their advanced degree before they have a BA degree.

   Step 6.     We make use of the question about the person's total income in the previous year to expand

the panel data. From each existing observation, we generate an observation of the same person from a year

before the survey. For the prior year observation, we remove any degree that is completed in the year of the




                                                                 46
survey, and modify other age and calendar year. We also drop observations that are prior to the graduation

year of the rst BA.

       Step 7. We dene the regression sample by imposing the following restrictions. First, people have to work

full time. This is indicated by either the dummy variable for working full time in the raw data, or jointly

by working at least 35 hours a week and at least 40 weeks a year. We do not have information about hours

worked or a direct question about full time status for the calendar year prior to the survey. Consequently,

we assume that full time status in the year prior to the NSCG and NSRCG survey is the same as full time

status at the time of the survey. The full time status indicator for the 1989 earnings observation and the

1990 occupation variables is based on 1990 Census questions about usual hours worked per week and number

of weeks worked in 1989.

       Second, people have to be aged between 23 and 59. Third, we drop people with a PhD by the last time we

observe them and drop observations of people who are currently enrolled in an educational program.
                                                                                                                         49 We

also drop people who hold a BA degree before 18 years old and drop people who obtained their rst advanced

degree before age 23 or after age 49. We also drop people who did not work between BA completion and

being enrolled in graduate school. Section 7.1.12 provides a detailed discussion of the last restriction. Lastly,

we drop the follow up observations of people who became SESTAT-eligible solely because of occupation.
                                                                                                                            50

       Step 8. We deate all the nominal earnings to 2013 US dollars.

       Step 9, We dene the weights as described in section B.3.2.

       Step 10. We rescale the occupation premiums based on the ACS (see below) to have a coecient of 1.

We let
           rescale
           occ     = ^ occ , in which ^ is the estimated coecient from w =  + occ .                The value is of   ^ is 0.934.
                                                                                                                     

B.3.2        Construction of Sample Weights

Overview of construction of weights                  We aim to study the labor market returns to advanced degrees

that represent the population of people who have a college degree in any eld who are between 23 and 59

years old who live in the U.S.. The target populations of the 1993, 2003, 2010, 2013 NSCG are individuals

with at least a BA degree. We use the survey weights for each of these samples produced by the National

Center for Science and Engineering Statistics (NCSES) to estimate the distribution college graduates across

combinations of BA eld and graduate eld (including no graduate degree) over the four years combined. The

NSRCG and the other waves of the NSCG prior to 2010 are restricted to the SESTAT eligible population.

Thus individuals with STEM eligible occupations and advanced degrees are overrepresented when we pool

all of the data. Furthermore, and the NCSES weights for these waves weight to the SESTAT population.

       We adjust the NCSES weights for all waves of the NSRCG and NSCG so that the weighted distribution of

c, g   pairs in the pooled sample matches the distribution of          c, g   pairs that we estimated using the 1993, 2003,

2010, and 2013 NSCG. Separate weights are constructed for the earnings regressions and the occupational

premium regressions that reect the mix of surveys that contribute observations. The pooled sample weights

for earnings account for the fact that some interviews contribute earnings observations for two years. We

trim the adjusted weights using 1/10 and 10 times of the median of the weights of all observations in the

combined data.
  49 Enrollment   is inferred by completion time of the degree. We assume all master degrees, MBA, and other professional degrees
take 2 years, Law takes 3 years, and Medicine takes 4 years. Surveys are conducted in April prior to 2000, and October after.
  50 If   a person does not hold a BA or an advanced degree in a S&E eld, but is included in the database and has follow up
interviews, we say this person becomes SESTAT-eligible because of an S&E occupation choice.




                                                                47
Details         Let   weightis   denote that survey weights provided by NCSES, where                      i   denotes the person and    s
denotes a specic wave of a survey, such as the NSCG 2003.

     Step 1. Standardize weights across NSCG and NSCRG waves. First, we want to preserve the relative

weights within each survey while accounting for varying sample sizes across surveys. We divide the survey

weight by the sum of weights of all observations from the survey and then multiply by the number of

observations.


                                                         -adj               weightit
                                              weightsurv
                                                    is        =            Ns
                                                                                             Ns
                                                                           i=1   weightis
     .

     Step 2: Estimate the population probabilities of each college major and graduate degree combination.

     In the second step, we estimate the fraction              pbase
                                                                cg     of college graduates in each      c, g cell   over the period of

full sample, where no advance degree (g                = 0)   form a separate cell for each          major c. To     do so, we use the

NSCG 1993, 2003, 2010, and 2013. Each is a stratied random sample of the population of college graduates

to estimate at the time of observation. For these waves of the NSCG, the weights provided by the NCSES

weight the samples to the population of college graduates who have had a BA for 3 or more years.
                                                                                                                                   51 The

NSCG 2015 is also a stratied random sample of the population of college graduates but we chose not to

use it to avoid giving excessive weight to the distribution of college graduates from 2010 on when estimating

pbase
 cg .       The formula is


                                                                Ns               -adj
                                                                i=1   weightsurv
                                                                            is         1 {Cis = c, Gis = g }
                                 s{1993,2003,2010,2013}
                       pbase
                        cg   =
                                                                                  Ns               -adj
                                                                                  i=1   weightsurv
                                                                                              is
                                                 s{1993,2003,2010,2013}
.

     Step 3:      Adjust weights for the pooled NSCG and NSRCG samples so that the weighted fractions of

observations in cell c,g in combined sample match                   pbase
                                                                     cg     for all c,g combinations.

     First, we compute the fractions in the pooled sample implied by the unadjusted weights:


                                                      Ns               -adj
                                                            weightsurv       1 {Cis = c, Gis = g }
                                  ppooled
                                   cg     =       s   i=1         is
                                                                      Ns               -adj
                                                                s     i=1   weightsurv
                                                                                  is

     Then we multiply the normalized weights from Step 1 for individuals for whom                                 Cis = c, Gis = g     by

pbase  pooled
 cg ./pcg     :



                               -adj                                              pbase
                                                                                  cg                    -adj
                 weightsurv,edu
                       is           =              1 {Cis = c, Gis = g }                    weightsurv
                                                                                                   is            for all   i, s.
                                           c,g                                   ppooled
                                                                                  cg


In the empirical analysis the mix of observations depends on the dependent variable in the regression. In

the case of earnings, in many cases a given survey wave contributes an observation on current earnings and

an observation on past earnings. We compute                   pbase
                                                               cg   using only the current earnings observation. However,
      pooled
when pcg     , we include two observations for             i, s  one for the current observation and one for earnings last
                                                                    surv -adj
years' earnings. We assign the same value                of weightis          , but in a small number of cases the education

cell is dierent because the individual obtained a degree in the current year.

    51 We   are ignoring the possibility that the mix of degrees across elds is dierent for people who received their college degree
more recently.




                                                                      48
   We construct separate values for the occupation regression sample using observations for which occupation

is available. In section 7 and the notes of gures and tables, we state the sample frame of the analysis without

reiterating that the weights are adjusted for the relevant sample frame.

   Finally, we want to avoid the case in which the importance of one single observation is too small or too
                                                    -adj
large. We trim the adjusted weights   weightsurv,edu
                                            is             using 1/10 and 10 times of the median of the weights

of all observations in the combined data.



                
                                   -adj                        -adj                         -adj
                med{weightsurv,edu
                            it          }/10 if weightsurv,edu
                                                      it            < med{weightsurv,edu
                                                                                   it            }/10
                
                weightsurv,edu-adj                          surv,edu-adj               surv,edu-adj
                
                                             if med{weightit              }/10 < weightit
                
                      it
     weightit =                                              surv,edu- adj
                                              < med{weightit               }  10
                
                med{weightsurv,edu-adj }/10 if med{weightsurv,edu-adj }  10 < weightsurv,edu-adj
                
                            it                              it                            it


B.3.3   Earnings premium of BA elds from ACS

We pool the 2009 - 2014 American Community Survey to construct a large cross sectional data. We apply

sample restrictions to only include people who are between 24 and 59 years old, working full time, and

earn at least $5,000 a year.   We regress the log of annual earnings on dummies for 172 college majors, a

cubic of age interacted with gender, race\Hispanic interacted with gender, and three dummies for having a

master's degree, PhD, and professional degree, subject to the ACS survey weights. The coecients on the

disaggregated college major categories are the BA major earnings premium from the ACS. We also extract the

population distribution of BA elds from the regression sample. Then we use a crosswalk between BA eld

classication of the ACS and the SESTAT database to merge the premium into the SESTAT data. When

multiple majors in ACS are mapped to a single major in SESTAT, we calculate the population weighted

average of the major premium.



B.3.4   Occupation premium from ACS

We estimate the occupation premiums using ACS data and an approach that is similar to the one used to

estimate the BA major earnings premiums. The regression has the same set of control variables, except that

we now include the 331 occupation dummies instead of college major dummies. We construct an occupation

crosswalk among ACS, SESTAT and the 1990 Census. Section 2.1 describes the use of 1990 Census occupation

in the empirical analysis.




                                                      49
Appendix gures




Figure B1: Gender dierences in average ln(earnings) by dierences in the average occupation premiums of
advanced elds
Note: The gure plots the male-female dierence for each advanced eld in the average of the log of earnings (in 2013 dollars)
against the dierence in the average occupation premium, using sample weights. The dots indicate the gender dierences. The
shaded circles indicate the share of each advanced eld among all graduate degree holders. The straight line is the tted simple
regression line between the two averages, with the shares of the advanced elds as weights. The standard error of the slope is
0.53. The gure shows that men are in higher paying occupations than women in all advanced elds except for humanities and
arts, but only a small fraction of the earnings dierentials are accounted for by gender dierences in occupation choices.




                                                              50
Figure B2: Gender dierences in average ln(earnings) by dierences in the average BA major premiums of
advanced elds
Note:   The gure plots the male-female dierence for each advanced eld in the average of the log of earnings against the
dierence in the average BA major premium, using sample weights. The BA premiums are OLS estimates for the pooled sample
of males and females and are reported in Table B4. The dots indicate the gender dierences. The shaded circles indicate the
share of each advanced eld among all graduate degree holders. The straight line is the tted simple regression line between the
two averages, with the shares of the advanced elds as weights. The standard error of the slope is 0.97. The gure shows men
have higher earnings than women in all advanced elds. The gender gap in the BA major premium is scattered around 0.03.
The poor t of the regression line shows that gender dierences in the link between BA eld and graduate eld do not explain
much of the gender gap in earnings.




                     Figure B3: FE-cg and OLS estimates of the Advanced degree premiums
Note: The gure compares the FE-cg and OLS coecients from sample weighted additive regressions of the log of earnings
based on (10) and (7). The gure also presents 90% condence intervals of the estimates. The horizontal axis lists advanced
elds in ascending order of the sample weighted average of earnings of the advanced elds. It shows that OLS underestimates
the returns to low-paying elds (e.g.   humanities, psychology, education, and biology), while it overestimates the returns to
high-paying elds (e.g. medicine, business, MBA, nursing, and other science and engineering related elds).




                                                             51
     Appendix tables
                              Table B1: Aggregation of advanced elds and degree type and disaggregated earnings statistics


          Aggregated
                                                                      Adv.deg.                      Occupational           OLS         % of
           advanced           Disaggregated advanced degree eld                     Earnings                                                   Freq.
                                                                        type                           premium       Earnings premium sample
            degrees

                                                                                 Mean       SD      Mean      SD      Coef      SE
                (1)                             (2)                     (3)        (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)     (9)     (10)     (11)
                         Law/prelaw/legal studies                     Master     105,202   72,430   -0.482   0.287    0.257    0.168   0.111    160
         Law
                         Law/prelaw/legal studies                      Prof      129,198   91,144   -0.313   0.139    0.454    0.014   6.837   9,800
                         Business, general                            Master     122,688   72,023   -0.457   0.231    0.356    0.022   1.993   4,630
                         Business administration and management       Master     113,929   68,271   -0.450   0.213    0.274    0.009   9.662   21,030
         MBA
                         Business and managerial economics            Master     120,945   85,184   -0.482   0.238    0.256    0.051   0.217    510
                         Other business management/admin services     Master     97,921    52,658   -0.498   0.223    0.209    0.019   1.814   3,940
                                  1                                   Master     102,845   62,510   -0.416   0.257    0.221    0.110   0.103    290
                         Medicine
         Medicine                 1
                         Medicine                                      Prof      166,066 105,014    -0.122   0.176    0.682    0.017   3.614   8,180
                         Dramatic arts                                Master     66,386    36,273   -0.682   0.209    0.068    0.053   0.244    330
         Master's in     Fine arts, all elds                          Master     61,697    37,282   -0.730   0.206    -0.071   0.037   0.667    830
         Arts            Music, all elds                              Master     60,427    32,910   -0.779   0.211    0.031    0.034   0.586    700
52




                         Other visual and performing arts             Master     80,921    85,443   -0.716   0.194    0.120    0.070   0.301    450
                         Animal sciences                              Master     59,289    37,505   -0.692   0.251    0.036    0.075   0.076    520
                         Biochemistry and biophysics                  Master     79,335    58,369   -0.657   0.217    0.077    0.064   0.117    850
                         Biology, general                             Master     66,155    31,980   -0.713   0.186    -0.019   0.022   0.595   3,190
                         Botany                                       Master     56,521    23,504   -0.703   0.191    -0.073   0.052   0.081    450
                         Cell and molecular biology                   Master     71,332    51,272   -0.684   0.194    0.020    0.046   0.121    840
                         Ecology                                      Master     64,680    31,178   -0.685   0.185    -0.101   0.045   0.189   1,140
                         Environmental science or studies             Master     74,070    36,512   -0.607   0.193    0.104    0.032   0.311   1,890
         Master's in
                         Food sciences and technology                 Master     78,724    38,726   -0.608   0.201    0.156    0.045   0.101    690
         Biological/
                         Forestry sciences                            Master     71,480    34,106   -0.704   0.242    -0.056   0.082   0.113    680
         Agricultural/
                         Genetics, animal and plant                   Master     70,007    38,129   -0.682   0.185    0.038    0.058   0.051    310
         Environmen-
                         Microbiological sciences and immunology      Master     76,755    44,657   -0.651   0.196    0.051    0.048   0.157   1,070
         tal/ Life
                         Nutritional sciences                         Master     67,112    40,243   -0.564   0.174    0.138    0.042   0.158    780
         Sciences
                         Other agricultural sciences                  Master     64,629    24,497   -0.657   0.244    -0.020   0.045   0.124    720
                         Other biological sciences                    Master     73,623    61,272   -0.651   0.231    0.056    0.029   0.253   1,670
                         Other conservation and natural resources     Master     71,643    35,157   -0.636   0.187    0.007    0.042   0.135    720
                         Pharmacology, human and animal               Master     89,019    38,292   -0.623   0.194    0.144    0.081   0.034    230
                         Physiology and pathology, human and animal   Master     74,716    40,548   -0.578   0.219    0.103    0.049   0.108    590
                         Plant sciences                               Master     60,825    30,983   -0.706   0.197    -0.043   0.044   0.174   1,020
                         Zoology, general                             Master     64,923    33,899   -0.671   0.199    -0.092   0.041   0.137    790
     ....continued

      Aggregated
                                                                  Adv.deg.                      Occupational           OLS         % of
       advanced           Disaggregated advanced degree eld                     Earnings                                                   Freq.
                                                                    type                           premium       Earnings premium sample
        degrees

                                                                             Mean       SD      Mean      SD      Coef      SE
            (1)                             (2)                     (3)        (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)     (9)     (10)     (11)
                     Accounting                                   Master     110,561   75,745   -0.446   0.185    0.228    0.031   1.223   1,660
                     Actuarial science                            Master     138,848 127,744    -0.180   0.221    0.387    0.158   0.024    70
                     Agricultural economics                       Master     100,771   65,004   -0.510   0.218    0.276    0.060   0.245    630
     Master's in
                     Business marketing/marketing management      Master     118,355   75,609   -0.449   0.212    0.314    0.026   1.622   3,000
     Business
                     Financial management                         Master     133,233   94,901   -0.428   0.185    0.385    0.016   3.143   5,380
     related elds
                     Marketing research                           Master     112,879   66,870   -0.429   0.148    0.318    0.058   0.223    340
                     Other agricultural business and production   Master     74,722    43,486   -0.684   0.268    0.044    0.132   0.058    130
                     Applied mathematics                          Master     89,175    49,318   -0.481   0.209    0.137    0.039   0.123    900
                     Computer and information sciences, general   Master     99,185    47,977   -0.466   0.166    0.223    0.022   0.734   3,250
                     Computer programming                         Master     95,840    48,945   -0.445   0.120    0.185    0.073   0.067    300
                     Computer science                             Master     101,759   46,697   -0.423   0.128    0.219    0.011   2.160   11,130
     Master's in
                     Computer systems analysis                    Master     109,293   45,663   -0.457   0.135    0.293    0.054   0.123    510
     Computer
                     Data processing                              Master     110,374   46,270   -0.449   0.087    0.240    0.123   0.010    60
     and
                     Information services and systems             Master     101,763   54,086   -0.476   0.176    0.256    0.027   0.650   2,920
     Mathematical
                     Mathematics, general                         Master     79,005    44,533   -0.617   0.240    0.004    0.024   0.621   3,280
53




     Sciences
                     Other computer and information sciences      Master     112,048   81,085   -0.478   0.168    0.286    0.057   0.219   1,030
                     Other mathematics                            Master     84,671    41,432   -0.547   0.206    0.092    0.065   0.052    290
                     Operations research                          Master     108,181   50,083   -0.458   0.182    0.207    0.033   0.286   1,170
                     Statistics                                   Master     95,699    56,526   -0.481   0.171    0.211    0.047   0.212   1,660
                     Computer teacher education                   Master     66,336    19,417   -0.764   0.160    0.094    0.046   0.220    370
                     Counselor education and guidance             Master     64,189    33,368   -0.812   0.198    0.078    0.014   1.965   3,330
                     Education administration                     Master     75,754    32,076   -0.657   0.231    0.175    0.013   3.417   4,390
                     Educational psychology                       Master     67,757    31,928   -0.751   0.207    0.144    0.025   1.097   2,100
                     Elementary teacher education                 Master     62,691    30,146   -0.837   0.146    0.145    0.012   3.980   3,760
                     Mathematics teacher education                Master     68,248    29,446   -0.774   0.181    0.038    0.034   0.622   1,280
                     Other education                              Master     64,361    26,111   -0.767   0.195    0.084    0.011   4.292   5,770
     Master's in     Physical education and coaching              Master     65,002    27,837   -0.759   0.184    0.034    0.025   0.652    730
     Education       Pre-school/kindergarten/early childhood
                                                                  Master     57,832    20,199   -0.897   0.220    0.100    0.033   0.391    460
     elds            teacher education
                     Science teacher education                    Master     65,037    28,627   -0.797   0.144    0.017    0.041   0.470   1,160
                     Secondary teacher education                  Master     64,301    28,431   -0.778   0.171    0.032    0.015   2.088   2,980
                     Social science teacher education             Master     68,230    27,461   -0.799   0.180    0.020    0.037   0.219    370
                     Special education                            Master     64,846    27,392   -0.791   0.169    0.137    0.015   2.299   2,640
     ....continued

      Aggregated
                                                                      Adv.deg.                       Occupational          OLS         % of
       advanced           Disaggregated advanced degree eld                         Earnings                                                   Freq.
                                                                        type                           premium       Earnings premium sample
        degrees

                                                                                 Mean       SD      Mean      SD      Coef      SE
           (1)                              (2)                         (3)        (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)     (9)     (10)     (11)
                     Aerospace, aeronautical, astronautical/space
                                                                      Master     103,845   48,129   -0.425   0.184    0.153    0.031   0.276   3,510
                     engineering
                     Agricultural engineering                         Master     80,853    32,363   -0.500   0.205    -0.002   0.046   0.044    320
                     Architectural engineering                        Master     94,784    65,428   -0.524   0.158    0.053    0.061   0.055    330
                     Bioengineering and biomedical engineering        Master     88,730    61,222   -0.576   0.217    0.055    0.051   0.108   1,140
                     Chemical engineering                             Master     104,890   52,568   -0.343   0.161    0.086    0.025   0.331   4,050
                     Civil engineering                                Master     93,649    43,704   -0.411   0.131    0.086    0.012   0.925   8,780
                     Computer and systems engineering                 Master     112,213   59,232   -0.402   0.116    0.249    0.015   0.624   4,710
                     Electrical, electronics & communication eng.     Master     107,549   55,170   -0.380   0.111    0.185    0.010   1.890   15,150
                     Engineering, general                             Master     106,889   62,748   -0.406   0.177    0.172    0.056   0.116    950
     Master's in     Engineering sciences, mechanics and physics      Master     106,161   59,253   -0.414   0.124    0.153    0.038   0.104    790
     Engineering     Environmental engineering                        Master     96,342    41,933   -0.392   0.131    0.129    0.020   0.271   2,290
                     Geophysical and geological engineering           Master     102,917   58,728   -0.416   0.191    0.131    0.060   0.021    220
                     Industrial and manufacturing engineering         Master     96,409    50,219   -0.448   0.147    0.159    0.017   0.427   4,870
                     Materials eng., incl. ceramic and textile sci.   Master     94,784    39,126   -0.427   0.135    0.133    0.029   0.170   1,480
                     Mechanical engineering                           Master     98,708    48,334   -0.430   0.127    0.108    0.012   1.062   10,390
                     Metallurgical engineering                        Master     101,133   37,411   -0.413   0.122    0.125    0.080   0.055    420
54




                     Mining and minerals engineering                  Master     101,566   30,280   -0.259   0.281    0.142    0.098   0.020    110
                     Naval architecture and marine engineering        Master     101,181   44,625   -0.407   0.124    0.038    0.091   0.020    160
                     Nuclear engineering                              Master     105,983   42,801   -0.402   0.122    0.124    0.037   0.069    540
                     Other engineering                                Master     97,250    38,570   -0.426   0.142    0.141    0.015   0.375   3,080
                     Petroleum engineering                            Master     123,686   65,289   -0.174   0.264    0.244    0.067   0.036    290
     Master's in
     Health Serv.    Health services administration                   Master     97,990    57,941   -0.482   0.231    0.305    0.026   1.087   2,430
     Admin.

                     Audiology and speech pathology                   Master     64,964    24,209   -0.584   0.189    0.249    0.027   0.788   1,820
                     Health/medical assistants                        Master     91,810    27,164   -0.510   0.195    0.475    0.064   0.167    430
                     Health/medical technologies                      Master     93,689    77,068   -0.608   0.214    0.226    0.066   0.052    240
                     Health/medical technologies                       Prof      97,134    69,006   -0.395   0.334    0.330    0.188   0.008    30
                                                     2
                     Medical preparatory programs                     Master     138,530   95,514   -0.504   0.357    0.533    0.212   0.005    30
                                                     2
                     Medical preparatory programs                      Prof      170,943   76,922   -0.107   0.173    0.771    0.064   0.040    150
     Master's in
                     Other health/medical sciences                    Master     79,325    56,450   -0.623   0.236    0.205    0.028   0.675   1,960
     Health
                     Other health/medical sciences                     Prof      151,881 108,648    -0.165   0.182    0.580    0.083   0.062    160
     related elds
                     Pharmacy                                         Master     103,885   47,918   -0.514   0.212    0.150    0.090   0.066    280
                     Pharmacy                                          Prof      119,708   36,556   -0.501   0.121    0.569    0.030   0.295    830
                     Physical therapy and other rehabilitation/
                                                                      Master     70,843    30,035   -0.586   0.184    0.178    0.020   1.010   2,480
                     therapeutic services
                     Physical therapy and other rehabilitation/
                                                                       Prof      81,710    52,269   -0.454   0.166    0.442    0.040   0.063    120
                     therapeutic services
                     Public health (including environmental health
                                                                      Master     72,052    37,026   -0.592   0.207    0.143    0.026   0.755   2,780
                     and epidemiology)
     ....continued

      Aggregated
                                                                     Adv.deg.                     Occupational           OLS         % of
       advanced           Disaggregated advanced degree eld                        Earnings                                                  Freq.
                                                                       type                          premium       Earnings premium sample
        degrees

                                                                                Mean      SD      Mean      SD      Coef      SE
            (1)                            (2)                         (3)       (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)     (9)     (10)    (11)
                     English Language, literature and letters        Master     65,404   45,832   -0.754   0.202    -0.025   0.026   0.983   1,390
                     History, other                                  Master     69,223   47,775   -0.723   0.243    -0.041   0.034   0.669   930
                     Liberal arts/general studies                    Master     72,957   36,450   -0.721   0.230    0.115    0.056   0.264   410
     Master's in
                     Linguistics                                     Master     60,610   24,301   -0.776   0.179    0.015    0.041   0.239   480
     Humanity
                     Other foreign languages and literature          Master     68,682   51,804   -0.730   0.206    0.006    0.047   0.360   620
     elds
                     Other philosophy, religion, theology            Master     55,200   30,245   -0.951   0.276    -0.242   0.021   2.172   2,600
                     Other philosophy, religion, theology             Prof      55,830   35,782   -0.967   0.273    -0.308   0.068   0.210   210
                     Communications, general                         Master     77,388   46,563   -0.598   0.235    0.115    0.051   0.375   580
     Master's in
                     Criminal justice/protective services            Master     72,796   35,771   -0.656   0.271    0.114    0.039   0.393   730
     Other Non-
                     Journalism                                      Master     73,140   37,932   -0.683   0.161    0.086    0.051   0.232   310
     Science and
                     Library science                                 Master     61,382   22,630   -0.829   0.189    0.038    0.019   1.115   1,270
     Engineering
                     Other communication                             Master     75,445   38,793   -0.589   0.237    0.124    0.041   0.341   530
     elds
                     Parks, recreation, leisure, and tness studies   Master     63,807   27,732   -0.668   0.226    -0.016   0.032   0.378   550
     Master's in
                     Nursing (4 years or longer program)             Master     97,580   43,604   -0.497   0.160    0.310    0.014   1.761   4,420
     Nursing
                     Astronomy and astrophysics                      Master     76,841   66,085   -0.521   0.198    -0.100   0.109   0.029   310
55




                     Atmospheric sciences and meteorology            Master     84,414   39,998   -0.464   0.135    0.109    0.047   0.073   740
                     Chemistry, except biochemistry                  Master     78,480   42,777   -0.594   0.180    0.002    0.032   0.539   4,920
     Master's in     Earth sciences                                  Master     75,623   30,621   -0.677   0.175    0.085    0.037   0.060   440
     Physical and    Geological sciences, other                      Master     84,125   49,799   -0.554   0.162    0.120    0.055   0.105   950
     related         Geology                                         Master     88,967   50,269   -0.552   0.177    0.140    0.028   0.340   3,040
     sciences        Other physical sciences                         Master     77,832   35,081   -0.599   0.218    0.090    0.045   0.059   440
                     Oceanography                                    Master     69,253   36,117   -0.531   0.183    -0.048   0.077   0.039   320
                     Physics, except biophysics                      Master     90,224   51,549   -0.496   0.188    0.042    0.028   0.367   3,320
                     Science, unclassied                             Master     72,035   37,243   -0.684   0.211    0.007    0.061   0.056   220
                     Clinical psychology                             Master     63,205   41,447   -0.711   0.223    0.010    0.030   0.550   1,990
                     Clinical psychology                              Prof      83,371   39,581   -0.734   0.133    0.259    0.080   0.011    70
                     Counseling psychology                           Master     60,631   30,622   -0.774   0.234    0.003    0.014   2.080   6,450
                     Experimental psychology                         Master     75,988   54,790   -0.666   0.255    0.008    0.120   0.089   330
                     General psychology                              Master     66,436   38,568   -0.681   0.229    0.083    0.025   0.589   1,900
     Master's in
                     General psychology                               Prof      87,277   43,936   -0.600   0.309    0.212    0.230   0.023    40
     Psychology
                     Industrial/Organizational psychology            Master     85,080   50,556   -0.575   0.203    0.266    0.047   0.245   780
     and
                     Other psychology                                Master     65,227   33,495   -0.720   0.212    0.069    0.034   0.542   1,990
     Social Work
                     Social Work                                     Master     64,243   30,094   -0.779   0.229    0.100    0.012   2.649   7,190
                     Social psychology                               Master     70,795   39,624   -0.688   0.284    0.056    0.092   0.051   190
     Master's in     Other public aairs                              Master     73,667   40,665   -0.631   0.290    0.104    0.068   0.113   280
     Public Admin Public administration                              Master     89,440   44,348   -0.504   0.257    0.220    0.021   1.668   3,190
              ....continued

                Aggregated
                                                                                    Adv.deg.                        Occupational            OLS         % of
                 advanced            Disaggregated advanced degree eld                            Earnings                                                       Freq.
                                                                                      type                               premium      Earnings premium sample
                  degrees

                                                                                               Mean        SD       Mean       SD      Coef      SE
                     (1)                                (2)                            (3)       (4)       (5)          (6)    (7)      (8)     (9)     (10)     (11)
              Master's in      Architecture/environmental design                     Master    87,258    50,704     -0.561    0.209    0.106    0.024   1.184    2,780
              Other Science Electrical and electronics technologies                  Master    102,294   47,102     -0.417    0.150    0.173    0.094   0.100     410
              and              Industrial production technologies                    Master    83,343    39,522     -0.578    0.295    -0.016   0.059   0.103     320
              Engineering      Mechanical engineering-related technologies           Master    105,103   40,134     -0.497    0.260    0.099    0.108   0.074     280
              related elds     Other engineering-related technologies                Master    105,277   82,203     -0.501    0.204    0.203    0.043   0.166     600
                               Anthropology and archaeology                          Master    58,124    33,100     -0.689    0.225    -0.059   0.045   0.182    1,180
                               Area and ethnic studies                               Master    66,078    36,109     -0.714    0.230    0.014    0.056   0.206    1,030
                               Criminology                                           Master    68,783    32,991     -0.719    0.258    0.066    0.059   0.088     500
                               Economics                                             Master    105,543   75,831     -0.474    0.220    0.205    0.032   0.563    3,050
56




                               Geography                                             Master    76,084    42,931     -0.610    0.227    0.086    0.050   0.246    1,090
              Master's in
                               History of science                                    Master    66,304    29,327     -0.679    0.199    -0.183   0.138   0.022     40
              Other Social
                               Home Economics                                        Master    59,901    26,707     -0.723    0.253    0.069    0.048   0.140     390
              and Related
                               International relations                               Master    97,854    69,609     -0.539    0.246    0.286    0.043   0.455    1,980
              Sciences
                               Other social sciences                                 Master    63,727    30,073     -0.661    0.248    0.013    0.028   0.466    2,010
                               Philosophy of science                                 Master    50,447    27,031     -0.768    0.245    -0.300   0.130   0.024     60
                               Political science and government                      Master    77,622    47,870     -0.616    0.257    0.003    0.034   0.489    1,830
                               Public policy studies                                 Master    101,283   75,027     -0.515    0.235    0.328    0.035   0.340    1,940
                               Sociology                                             Master    69,505    37,245     -0.664    0.256    0.077    0.034   0.406    2,110
     Note: Column 1 presents 19 aggregated advanced degree elds that are constructed from 168 disaggregated advanced degrees. For each disaggregated advanced degree, columns
     2-11 present its eld, type (Master or Professional Degree), mean and standard deviation of earnings, mean and standard deviation of occupation premiums, its coecient and
     standard error from a disaggregated additive earnings regression, percentage of the sample, and cell count rounded to the nearest 10. The full regression sample is used, but
     disaggregated advanced degrees with less than 10 observations are removed from the table. The specication is Table 5 column (3), with disaggregated BA and advanced elds.
     Sample weights are used for all statistics except cell count. Standard errors are clustered at the person level.
     1 Medicine includes dentistry, optometry, osteopathic, podiatry, veterinary, etc.
     2 Medical preparatory programs include pre-dentistry, pre-medical, pre-veterinary etc.
                  Table B2: Aggregation of BA elds and disaggregated earnings statistics


   Aggregated                                                                                          % of
                               Disaggregated BA major             Earnings        BA earnings prem.            Freq.
    BA major                                                                                          sample
                                                               Mean       SD       Coef      SE
       (1)                               (2)                     (3)      (4)       (5)      (6)       (7)      (8)
                  Animal sciences                              62,806    43,934    0.020    -0.023    0.419    4,950
                  Biochemistry and biophysics                  88,181    75,649    0.265    -0.028    0.294    4,300
                  Biology, general                             79,620    63,967    0.181    -0.014    2.939    35,660
                  Botany                                       65,369    42,522    0.008    -0.051    0.068     840
                  Cell and molecular biology                   89,098    86,890    0.290    -0.046    0.114    1,670
                  Ecology                                      70,675    57,826    0.142    -0.045    0.145    2,170
                  Environmental science or studies             62,961    41,413    0.129    -0.022    0.351    5,920
                  Food sciences and technology                 77,619    45,014    0.270    -0.046    0.101    1,530
Biological/
                  Forestry sciences                            73,551    46,255    0.109    -0.030    0.206    3,190
Agricultural/
                  Genetics, animal and plant                   72,097    55,168    0.136    -0.058    0.034     500
Environmental
                  Microbiological sciences and immunology      76,676    62,416    0.193    -0.025    0.287    4,130
Sciences
                  Nutritional sciences                         63,911    42,787    0.165    -0.030    0.142    1,740
                  Other agricultural sciences                  64,587    36,361    0.075    -0.029    0.193    2,390
                  Other biological sciences                    65,749    55,669    0.141    -0.023    0.308    4,050
                  Other conservation and natural resources     67,677    33,563    0.088    -0.033    0.122    1,980
                  Pharmacology, human and animal               83,469    35,184    0.337    -0.074    0.017     230
                  Physiology and pathology, human and animal   86,081    59,735    0.260    -0.032    0.091     990
                  Plant sciences                               64,380    41,842    0.044    -0.027    0.286    3,780
                  Zoology, general                             88,888    71,059    0.164    -0.026    0.315    3,680
                  Accounting                                   93,321    65,467    0.415    -0.013    4.472    13,850
                  Actuarial science                            104,809   72,046    0.619    -0.067    0.081     440
                  Agricultural economics                       81,926    55,519    0.247    -0.030    0.764    2,480
                  Business, general                            84,714    60,120    0.272    -0.017    1.870    6,810
Business          Business administration and management       82,202    56,846    0.280    -0.012    6.670    25,550
                  Business and managerial economics            94,691    80,465    0.364    -0.024    0.548    2,330
                  Financial management                         97,808    76,583    0.411    -0.017    1.673    5,790
                  Other agricultural business and production   65,963    45,361    0.027    -0.033    0.281    1,170
                  Other business management/admin services     81,077    57,721    0.306    -0.018    1.364    5,860
                  Communications, general                      69,073    48,364    0.214    -0.020    1.318    4,660
Communications/
                  Journalism                                   72,908    51,007    0.233    -0.020    0.923    3,100
Journalism
                  Other communication                          69,323    48,863    0.208    -0.023    0.799    2,860
                  Applied mathematics                          92,966    61,064    0.382    -0.027    0.283    4,030
                  Computer and information sciences, general   82,855    43,553    0.402    -0.017    0.654    8,630
                  Computer science                             90,138    50,269    0.463    -0.013    2.149    32,580
                  Computer systems analysis                    85,660    42,261    0.416    -0.031    0.115    1,600
                  Information services and systems             79,842    45,251    0.372    -0.017    0.631    8,420
Computer and
                  Mathematics, general                         84,575    55,762    0.301    -0.016    1.662    22,870
Mathematical
                  Other computer and information sciences      67,244    39,418    0.235    -0.031    0.162    1,810
Sciences
                  Other mathematics                            86,193    55,054    0.358    -0.039    0.118    1,650
                  Operations research                          87,616    45,550    0.411    -0.043    0.063     790
                  Statistics                                   90,329    54,625    0.403    -0.038    0.089    1,570
Economics         Economics                                    99,065    78,429    0.424    -0.020    2.478    23,620
                  Computer teacher education                   73,395    28,357    0.158    -0.058    0.015     100
                  Counselor education and guidance             59,352    47,126    0.044    -0.059    0.027     140
                  Education administration                     67,103    33,103    0.079    -0.045    0.066     270
                  Educational psychology                       63,446    33,626    0.052    -0.035    0.326    1,250
                  Elementary teacher education                 54,536    26,975    0.000    0.000     4.005    11,870
                  Mathematics teacher education                62,190    33,601    0.030    -0.022    0.415    2,320
Education         Other education                              63,008    41,225    0.035    -0.012    1.574    6,110
                  Physical education and coaching              64,992    42,854    0.050    -0.015    1.145    3,930
                  Pre-school/kindergarten/early childhood
                                                               48,917    22,602    -0.071   -0.024    0.360    1,000
                  teacher education
                  Science teacher education                    64,136    31,041    0.023    -0.031    0.309    1,580
                  Secondary teacher education                  62,575    37,320    0.037    -0.013    1.318    5,050
                  Social science teacher education             66,758    46,397    0.011    -0.032    0.392    1,630
                  Special education                            58,748    32,300    0.068    -0.018    0.607    2,040


                                                        57
....continued
   Aggregated                                                                                              % of
                                Disaggregated BA major                Earnings        BA earnings prem.            Freq.
    BA major                                                                                              sample
                                                                   Mean       SD       Coef      SE
         (1)                             (2)                         (3)      (4)       (5)      (6)       (7)      (8)
                  Aerospace, aeronautical, astronautical/
                                                                   96,734    51,320    0.439    -0.019    0.425    11,690
                  space engineering
                  Agricultural engineering                         82,656    41,570    0.309    -0.034    0.097    1,750
                  Architectural engineering                        88,338    55,145    0.376    -0.030    0.167    2,800
                  Bioengineering and biomedical engineering        93,217    78,309    0.416    -0.033    0.084    2,170
                  Chemical engineering                             105,915   56,474    0.549    -0.014    0.830    21,980
                  Civil engineering                                92,902    52,216    0.430    -0.012    1.536    35,630
                  Computer and systems engineering                 99,868    50,898    0.561    -0.017    0.526    10,280
                  Electrical, electronics & communication eng.     99,985    50,901    0.490    -0.012    2.902    62,550
                  Engineering, general                             98,580    57,579    0.403    -0.024    0.189    2,990
                  Engineering sciences, mechanics and physics      95,539    51,822    0.385    -0.034    0.148    2,790
Engineering
                  Environmental engineering                        87,038    44,628    0.399    -0.030    0.079    1,760
                  Geophysical and geological engineering           103,194   92,392    0.415    -0.056    0.020     450
                  Industrial and manufacturing engineering         96,965    59,247    0.434    -0.017    0.636    14,290
                  Materials eng., incl. ceramic and textile sci.   84,466    38,845    0.371    -0.028    0.125    2,900
                  Mechanical engineering                           96,580    52,185    0.463    -0.012    2.376    54,190
                  Metallurgical engineering                        102,952   56,173    0.419    -0.037    0.090    1,740
                  Mining and minerals engineering                  96,717    46,315    0.368    -0.051    0.044     780
                  Naval architecture and marine engineering        97,234    50,374    0.416    -0.041    0.069    1,270
                  Nuclear engineering                              106,421   53,578    0.539    -0.033    0.046     960
                  Other engineering                                102,526   63,879    0.444    -0.026    0.227    3,790
                  Petroleum engineering                            112,905   67,436    0.587    -0.050    0.079    1,540

English/          English Language, literature and letters         73,062    53,022    0.169    -0.018    2.473    9,760
Languages/        Linguistics                                      59,086    36,703    0.055    -0.050    0.215     940
Literature        Other foreign languages and literature           70,319    46,634    0.155    -0.022    0.867    4,240
                  Dramatic arts                                    61,147    48,211    0.010    -0.034    0.330    1,230
Fine/             Fine arts, all elds                              62,306    47,197    0.070    -0.021    1.242    4,570
Performing Arts   Music, all elds                                  58,739    36,400    -0.013   -0.026    0.710    2,610
                  Other visual and performing arts                 64,322    44,504    0.116    -0.024    0.846    2,790
                  Audiology and speech pathology                   59,560    25,423    0.063    -0.029    0.323    2,220
                  Health/medical assistants                        79,479    59,271    0.353    -0.063    0.039     260
                  Health/medical technologies                      71,163    42,663    0.268    -0.022    0.492    4,270
                                                  2
                  Medical preparatory programs                     127,099 117,319     0.296    -0.049    0.188    1,390
Health                     1
                  Medicine                                         128,452 109,212     0.436    -0.057    0.180    1,360
related elds
                  Other health/medical sciences                    67,863    45,891    0.199    -0.024    0.486    3,090
                  Pharmacy                                         106,997   45,002    0.571    -0.022    0.527    3,390
                  Physical therapy and other rehabilitation/
                                                                   70,451    43,693    0.254    -0.022    0.701    3,560
                  therapeutic services
                  Public health (including environmental health
                                                                   62,011    36,053    0.092    -0.031    0.210    1,580
                  and epidemiology)
                  Business marketing/marketing management          86,438    65,819    0.350    -0.017    2.346    7,680
Marketing
                  Marketing research                               77,662    61,670    0.262    -0.034    0.275     860
Nursing           Nursing (4 years or longer program)              74,238    36,288    0.341    -0.014    3.209    16,590
                  History, other                                   80,302    64,129    0.168    -0.019    2.017    7,990
Other
                  Liberal arts/general studies                     76,998    59,180    0.188    -0.022    1.070    4,660
Humanities
                  Other philosophy, religion, theology             61,804    50,514    -0.035   -0.024    0.925    3,370
                  Criminal justice/protective services             65,057    35,967    0.112    -0.023    0.914    3,840
                  Health services administration                   69,545    45,647    0.208    -0.033    0.403    2,100
Other Non-S
                  Library science                                  54,970    23,660    0.029    -0.056    0.031     140
and E elds
                  Non-Science and Enginnering Group                96,426    64,765    0.354    -0.096    0.012     90
                  Parks, recreation, leisure, and tness studies    58,374    37,773    0.024    -0.023    0.528    2,110




                                                           58
....continued
   Aggregated                                                                                                   % of
                                Disaggregated BA major                     Earnings        BA earnings prem.             Freq.
      BA major                                                                                                 sample
                                                                        Mean       SD        Coef       SE
          (1)                               (2)                           (3)      (4)        (5)      (6)       (7)       (8)
                    Architecture/environmental design                   85,881    57,170     0.297    -0.021    0.940    6,440
                    Computer programming                                85,317    38,492     0.430    -0.027    0.251    2,410
Other Science
                    Data processing                                     84,417    30,106     0.408    -0.055    0.031     330
and
                    Electrical and electronics technologies             86,607    40,264     0.389    -0.022    0.427    5,100
Engineering-
                    Industrial production technologies                  83,706    44,807     0.277    -0.031    0.404    3,100
related
                    Mechanical engineering-related technologies         89,066    41,486     0.383    -0.026    0.281    3,120
elds
                    Other engineering-related technologies              87,997    48,416     0.349    -0.028    0.320    2,760
                    Suppressed-All Science & Engineering Major         102,422    27,672     0.354    -0.120    0.003      30
                    Anthropology and archaeology                        60,732    46,956     0.059    -0.022    0.512    5,100
                    Area and ethnic studies                             65,280    49,978     0.164    -0.029    0.341    3,870
                    Criminology                                         60,478    31,244     0.103    -0.025    0.281    2,250
                    Geography                                           66,977    47,031     0.104    -0.022    0.463    4,430
                    History of science                                  77,201    46,282     0.168    -0.065    0.058     380
Other Social and
                    Home Economics                                      57,533    32,746     0.066    -0.025    0.357    2,950
Related Sciences
                    International relations                             79,790    61,409     0.298    -0.024    0.459    4,460
                    Other social sciences                               65,084    43,991     0.113    -0.020    0.859    6,900
                    Philosophy of science                               90,081    67,829     0.229    -0.053    0.089     580
                    Public policy studies                               82,619    89,735     0.246    -0.078    0.058     670
                    Sociology                                           63,440    43,041     0.118    -0.014    2.816    23,730
                    Astronomy and astrophysics                          66,081    47,546     0.157    -0.084    0.018     510
                    Atmospheric sciences and meteorology                74,059    42,787     0.227    -0.039    0.067    1,860
                    Chemistry, except biochemistry                      88,570    62,226     0.294    -0.017    1.226    24,630
                    Earth sciences                                      66,022    38,846     0.105    -0.039    0.093    1,900
Physical and        Geological sciences, other                          78,506    45,287     0.284    -0.041    0.040    1,200
Related Sciences    Geology                                             82,645    53,234     0.216    -0.023    0.450    10,090
                    Other physical sciences                             79,809    50,933     0.165    -0.038    0.137    2,040
                    Oceanography                                        65,837    33,667     0.075    -0.086    0.026     440
                    Physics, except biophysics                          90,579    55,126     0.321    -0.021    0.516    12,560
                    Science, unclassied                                 78,764    47,143     0.244    -0.039    0.084    1,050
                    Law/prelaw/legal studies                            75,065    54,414     0.123    -0.040    0.166    1,320
                    Other public aairs                                  68,448    46,681     0.107    -0.069    0.057     360
Political Science
                    Political science and government                    85,973    67,174     0.262    -0.017    3.393    27,520
                    Public administration                               75,468    42,062     0.190    -0.043    0.076     700
                    Clinical psychology                                 76,679    57,403     0.161    -0.034    0.305    2,880
                    Counseling psychology                               60,641    35,447     0.069    -0.024    0.308    2,790
                    Experimental psychology                             86,226    62,091     0.207    -0.046    0.142    1,280
Psychology or       General psychology                                  60,781    45,541     0.102    -0.013    4.229    35,150
Social Work         Industrial/Organizational psychology                79,966    49,200     0.276    -0.038    0.159    1,340
                    Other psychology                                    68,456    45,698     0.135    -0.020    0.461    4,010
                    Social Work                                         54,321    26,671     0.007    -0.019    0.498    5,050
                    Social psychology                                   66,967    38,831     0.139    -0.031    0.191    1,730
Note: Column 1 presents 19 aggregated BA elds that are constructed from 144 disaggregated BA elds. For each disaggregated
eld, columns 2-8 present its eld name, mean and standard deviation of earnings, its coecient and standard error from a
disaggregated additive earnings regression, percentage of the sample, and cell count rounded to the nearest 10. Disaggregated
BA elds with less than 10 observations are removed from the table. See notes for Table B1.
1 Medical preparatory programs include pre-dentistry, pre-medical, pre-veterinary etc.
2 Medicine includes dentistry, optometry, osteopathic, podiatry, veterinary, etc.




                                                              59
                                                            Table B3: Aggregation of occupations


                         Consistent
     Aggregated                                                                                                               Occupation
                       disaggregated                         Raw occupation names                  Source      Earnings                     %      Freq.
     occupation                                                                                                                premium
                        occupation
                                                                                                            Mean      SD
         (1)                    (2)                                     (3)                          (4)     (5)      (6)        (7)        (8)     (9)
                   Agricultural and          Agricultural and food scientists                      Census   59,650   23,833     -0.730     0.122   180
                   food scientists           Agricultural and food scientists                      SESTAT 59,249     29,087     -0.730     0.128   2,270
                                             Biochemists and biophysicists                         SESTAT 51,216     27,342     -0.757     0.075   1,760
                                             Biological scientists                                 Census   55,615   19,922     -0.757     0.286   430
                   Biological scientists
     Biological                              Biological scientists (e.g., botanists, ecologists,
                                                                                                   SESTAT 53,968     29,809     -0.757     0.195   4,080
     Scientist                               zoologists)
                                             Other biological and life scientists                  SESTAT 63,264     32,982     -0.757     0.084   1,750
                   Foresters and             Foresters and conservation scientists                 Census   61,162   28,212     -0.764     0.170   260
                   conservation scientists   Forestry and conservation scientists                  SESTAT 59,689     21,938     -0.764     0.074   1,510
                                             Medical scientists                                    Census   74,770   85,341     -0.649     0.097   150
                   Medical scientists
                                             Medical scientists (excluding practitioners)          SESTAT 62,526     42,489     -0.649     0.136   2,270
                                             Carpenters                                            Census   44,002   18,251     -1.216     0.030    50
                                             Construction and extraction occupations               SESTAT 66,173     38,211     -1.008     0.532   3,230
                                             Construction trades, n.e.c.                           Census
                                             Drillers of oil wells                                 Census
                                             Electric power installers and repairers               Census
60




                                             Electricians                                          Census
                                             Explosives workers                                    Census
                                             Glaziers                                              Census
                   Construction and
                                             Insulation workers                                    Census
                   extraction occupations
                                             Masons, tilers, and carpet installers                 Census
                                             Miners                                                Census
                                             Painters, construction and maintenance                Census
                                             Plasterers                                            Census
     Blue Collar
                                             Plumbers, pipe tters, and steamtters                  Census
                                             Roofers and slaters                                   Census
                                             Structural metal workers                              Census
                                             Supervisors of construction work                      Census   76,791   49,214     -0.603     0.175   260
                                             Aircraft mechanics                                    Census
                                             Auto body repairers                                   Census
                                             Automobile mechanics                                  Census
                   Installation,
                                             Bus, truck, and stationary engine mechanics           Census
                   maintenance,
                                             Elevator installers and repairers                     Census
                   and repair
                                             Heating, air conditioning, and regeration mechanics Census
                   occupations
                                             Heavy equipment and farm equipment mechanics          Census
                                             Industrial machinery repairers                        Census   62,210   26,513     -0.864     0.022    30
                                             Installation, maintenance, and repair occupations     SESTAT 55,770     27,536     -0.888     0.344   2,110
     ....continued
                           Consistent
     Aggregated                                                                                                               Occupation
                         disaggregated                        Raw occupation names                 Source      Earnings                     %      Freq.
     occupation                                                                                                                premium
                          occupation
                                                                                                            Mean      SD
         (1)                       (2)                                 (3)                          (4)      (5)      (6)        (7)        (8)     (9)
                                              Locksmiths and safe repairers                        Census
                                              Machinery maintenance occupations                    Census
                                              Mechanics and repairers, n.e.c.                      Census   55,848   26,593     -0.963     0.021    30
                     Installation,            Millwrights                                          Census
                     maintenance,             Precision makers, repairers, and smiths              Census
                     and repair               Repairers of data processing equipment               Census   62,707   17,161     -0.865     0.025    40
                     occupations              Repairers of electrical equipment, n.e.c.            Census
                     (continued)              Repairers of household appliances and power tools    Census
                                              Repairers of industrial electrical equipment         Census   58,435   32,379     -0.903     0.050    80
                                              Small engine repairers                               Census
                                              Telecom and line installers and repairers            Census
                                              Assemblers of electrical equipment                   Census   47,988   24,934     -1.195     0.031    50
                                              Bakers                                               Census
                                              Butchers and meat cutters                            Census
                                              Cabinetmakers and bench carpenters                   Census
                                              Dental laboratory and medical appliance technicians Census
61




                                              Dressmakers and seamstresses                         Census
     Blue Collar                              Engravers                                            Census
     (continued)                              Furnace, kiln, and oven operators, apart from food   Census
                                              Graders and sorters in manufacturing                 Census
                     Precision/production
                                              Grinding, abrading, bung, and polishing workers      Census
                     occupations
                                              Hand molders and shapers, except jewelers            Census
                     (e.g., metal workers,
                                              Knitters, loopers, and toppers textile operatives    Census
                     woodworkers, butchers,
                                              Laundry workers                                      Census
                     bakers, assemblers,
                                              Machine operators, n.e.c.                            Census   48,032   27,450     -1.029     0.025    40
                     printing occupations,
                                              Machinists                                           Census
                     tailors, shoemakers,
                                              Metal platers                                        Census
                     photographic process)
                                              Misc textile machine operators                       Census
                                              Mixing and blending machine operatives               Census
                                              Molders, and casting machine operators               Census
                                              Motion picture projectionists                        Census
                                              Optical goods workers                                Census
                                              Other plant and system operators                     Census
                                              Other woodworking machine operators                  Census
                                              Packers, llers, and wrappers                         Census
                                              Painting machine operators                           Census
     ....continued
                          Consistent
     Aggregated                                                                                                                     Occupation
                         disaggregated                            Raw occupation names                   Source      Earnings                     %      Freq.
     occupation                                                                                                                      premium
                          occupation
                                                                                                                  Mean      SD
         (1)                       (2)                                     (3)                             (4)     (5)      (6)        (7)        (8)     (9)
                                                 Patternmakers and model makers                          Census
                                                 Photographic process workers                            Census
                                                 Plant and system operators, stationary engineers        Census   77,956   28,442     -0.620     0.079   120
                                                 Power plant operators                                   Census
                                                 Precision/production occupations (e.g., metal
                                                 workers, woodworkers, butchers, bakers,
                     Precision/production                                                                SESTAT 53,575     33,404     -0.891     0.455   2,770
                                                 assemblers, printing occupations, tailors,
                     occupations
                                                 shoemakers, photographic process)
                     (e.g., metal workers,
                                                 Pressing machine operators (clothing)                   Census
                     woodworkers, butchers,
                                                 Printing machine operators, n.e.c.                      Census   47,553   29,091     -1.268     0.020    30
                     bakers, assemblers,
                                                 Production supervisors or foremen                       Census   85,223   73,500     -0.553     0.214   320
                     printing occupations,
                                                 Punching and stamping press operatives                  Census
                     tailors, shoemakers,
                                                 Sawing machine operators and sawyers                    Census
                     photographic process)
                                                 Separating, ltering & clarifying machine operators      Census
                     (continued)
                                                 Shoe repairers                                          Census
                                                 Supervisors of mechanics and repairers                  Census   82,770   91,799     -0.570     0.049    70
                                                 Textile sewing machine operators                        Census
62




     Blue Collar                                 Tool and die makers and die setters                     Census

     (continued)                                 Typesetters and compositors                             Census
                                                 Upholsterers                                            Census
                                                 Water and sewage treatment plant operators              Census
                                                 Welders and metal cutters                               Census
                                                 Wood lathe, routing & planing machine operators         Census
                                                 Fire ghting, prevention, and inspection                 Census   69,406   21,190     -0.547     0.037    60
                                                 Guards, watchmen, doorkeepers                           Census   49,834   24,425     -1.027     0.075   110
                     Protective services
                                                 Other law enforcement: sheris, bailis,
                     (e.g., re ghters, police,                                                           Census   62,589   24,084     -0.785     0.031    50
                                                 correctional institution ocers
                     guards, wardens,            Police, detectives, and private investigators           Census   69,565   24,363     -0.502     0.183   280
                     park rangers)               Protective services, n.e.c.                             Census
                                                 Protective services (e.g., re ghters, police, guards,
                                                                                                         SESTAT 63,361     29,505     -0.620     0.812   4,470
                                                 wardens, park rangers)
                                                 Supervisors of guards                                   Census
                                                 Bus drivers                                             Census
                                                 Construction laborers                                   Census   64,577   41,083     -1.140     0.027    40
                                                 Crane, derrick, winch, and hoist operators              Census
                     Transportation and          Excavating and loading machine operators                Census
                     material moving             Freight, stock, and materials handlers                  Census
                     occupations                 Garage and service station related occupations          Census
                                                 Gharbage and recyclable material collectors             Census
                                                 Helpers, constructions                                  Census
                                                 Helpers, surveyors                                      Census
     ....continued
                           Consistent
     Aggregated                                                                                                                      Occupation
                         disaggregated                            Raw occupation names                   Source      Earnings                      %      Freq.
     occupation                                                                                                                       premium
                          occupation
                                                                                                                   Mean      SD
         (1)                       (2)                                       (3)                           (4)      (5)      (6)        (7)        (8)     (9)
                                                   Laborers outside construction                         Census   42,077    20,957     -1.253     0.027    40
                                                   Locomotive operators (engineers and remen)            Census
                                                   Misc material moving occupations                      Census
                                                   Operating engineers of construction equipment         Census
                                                   Packers and packagers by hand                         Census
                                                   Parking lot attendants                                Census
                     Transportation and
     Blue Collar                                   Production helpers                                    Census
                     material moving
     (continued)                                   Railroad conductors and yardmasters                   Census
                     occupations (continued)
                                                   Ship crews and marine engineers                       Census
                                                   Supervisors of motor vehicle transportation           Census
                                                   Taxi cab drivers and chaueurs                         Census
                                                   Transportation and material moving occupations       SESTAT 71,268       50,506     -1.111     0.511   3,230
                                                   Truck, delivery, and tractor drivers                  Census   52,636    20,393     -1.134     0.071    110
                                                   Vehicle washers and equipment cleaners                Census
63




                     Accountants, auditors,        Accountants, auditors & other nancial specialists    SESTAT 83,266       49,820     -0.460     4.149   18,890
                     and other nancial             Accountants and auditors                              Census   68,276    45,815     -0.504     1.365   2,050
                     specialists                   Other nancial specialists                             Census   80,949    73,892     -0.348     0.402    600
                                                   Actuaries                                             Census   102,133   45,671     -0.021     0.029    40
                     Actuaries
                                                   Actuaries                                            SESTAT 105,810      70,554     -0.021     0.084    750
     Business
                                                   Advertising and related sales jobs                    Census   76,125    55,704     -0.456     0.073    110
     related
                     Insurance, securities,        Financial services sales occupations                  Census   134,128 163,482      -0.075     0.168    250
     occupations
                     real estate and business      Insurance, securities, real estate and business services SESTAT 90,705   64,672     -0.438     2.328   10,810
                     services                      Insurance sales occupations                           Census   87,815    73,643     -0.547     0.280    420
                                                   Real estate sales occupations                         Census   88,257    86,343     -0.665     0.241    360
                     Personnel,    training,   and Personnel, HR, training & labor relations specialists Census   59,446    31,873     -0.548     0.313    470
                     labor relations specialists Personnel, training, and labor relations specialists   SESTAT 70,584       39,913     -0.548     1.071   6,550
                     Bookkeepers, accounting       Accounting clerks and bookkeepers                    SESTAT 43,726       25,009     -0.925     0.542   2,680
                     & auditing clerks             Bookkeepers, accounting & auditing clerks             Census   42,382    22,251     -0.925     0.169    250
     Clerical        Legal assistants              Legal assistants, paralegals, legal support, etc      Census   50,875    27,718     -0.721     0.088    130
     occupations                                   Other admin. (e.g. record clerks,
                                                                                                        SESTAT 45,213       22,856     -0.961     1.954   12,050
                                                   telephone operators)
                     Secretaries
                                                   Secretaries                                           Census   37,242    13,215     -0.961     0.306    460
                                                   Secretaries, receptionists, typists                  SESTAT 38,997       18,795     -0.961     0.794   4,000
     ....continued
                           Consistent
     Aggregated                                                                                                                    Occupation
                         disaggregated                               Raw occupation names              Source      Earnings                      %      Freq.
     occupation                                                                                                                     premium
                           occupation
                                                                                                                Mean       SD
         (1)                      (2)                                        (3)                         (4)      (5)      (6)        (7)        (8)     (9)
                                                   Computer programmers (business, scientic,
                                                                                                       SESTAT 77,677      31,735     -0.347     0.805   10,080
                     Computer software             process control)
                     developers                    Computer software developers                        Census   66,864    25,773     -0.347     1.580   2,370
                                                   Computer system analysts                            SESTAT 95,182      35,907     -0.347     1.140   19,310

     Computer        Computer systems              Computer system analysts                            SESTAT 82,129      38,259     -0.497     1.510   18,850

     Scientist       analysts and computer         Computer systems analysts and computer scientists   Census   75,645    28,718     -0.498     2.068   3,110
                     scientists                    Other computer information science occupations      SESTAT 80,334      36,682     -0.497     0.556   5,460
                                                   Computer system analysts                            SESTAT 84,658      34,572     -0.495     0.534   6,360
                     Operations    and   systems
                                                   Other computer information science occupations      SESTAT 82,121      34,435     -0.490     0.930   10,960
                     researchers and analysts
                                                   Operations and systems researchers & analysts       Census   71,213    31,218     -0.488     0.872   1,310
                                                   Dentists                                            Census   119,418   78,485     -0.166     0.021    30
                                                                                       1
                                                   Diagnosing/treating practitioners                   SESTAT 146,338     89,398     -0.075     0.781   6,810
                     Diagnosing/treating           Optometrists                                        Census
     Doctor                        1
                     practitioners                 Physicians                                          Census   163,841 160,189      -0.007     0.501    750
                                                   Podiatrists                                         Census
                                                   Veterinarians                                       Census   77,544    40,817     -0.588     0.031    50
                     Aeronautical/aerospace/       Aeronautical/aerospace/astronautical engineers      SESTAT 92,300      31,093     -0.368     0.243   7,310
64




                     astronautical engineers       Aerospace engineer                                  Census   85,627    26,466     -0.291     0.725   1,090
                                                   Architects                                          Census   78,767    59,187     -0.596     0.400    600
                     Architects
                                                   Architects                                          SESTAT 78,727      37,023     -0.596     0.390   3,280
                                                   Chemical engineers                                  Census   86,844    29,124     -0.240     0.336    510
                     Chemical engineers
                                                   Chemical engineers                                  SESTAT 90,207      35,361     -0.240     0.219   6,730
                                                   Civil, including architectural/sanitary engineers   SESTAT 77,830      30,790     -0.403     0.646   16,270
                     Civil engineers
                                                   Civil engineers                                     Census   82,141    50,508     -0.403     1.233   1,850
                                                   Electrical and electronics engineers                SESTAT 88,864      31,353     -0.346     0.949   21670
                     Electrical engineer
                                                   Electrical engineer                                 Census   83,573    29,135     -0.346     2.243   3,370
                                                   Industrial engineers                                Census   75,197    25,322     -0.446     0.659    990
                     Industrial engineers
                                                   Industrial engineers                                SESTAT 76,667      26,352     -0.446     0.286   6,320
     Engineer
                                                   Mechanical engineers                                Census   81,080    28,711     -0.430     0.806   1,210
                     Mechanical engineers
                                                   Mechanical engineers                                SESTAT 83,101      30,121     -0.430     0.876   21,150
                     Metallurgical and             Materials and metallurgical engineers               SESTAT 79,418      29,678     -0.421     0.093   2,510
                     materials engineers,          Metallurgical and materials engineers, variously
                                                                                                       Census   76,669    21,897     -0.421     0.088    130
                     variously phrased             phrased
                                                   Agricultural engineers                              SESTAT 70,848      26,307     -0.730     0.015    280
                                                   Bioengineers or biomedical engineers                SESTAT 70,930      34,727     -0.757     0.046   1,120
                                                   Computer engineer - hardware                        SESTAT 90,814      36,939     -0.368     0.169   3,130
                     Not-elsewhere-classied        Environmental engineers                             SESTAT 77,208      29,818     -0.368     0.220   4,750
                     engineers                     Marine engineers and naval architects               SESTAT 88,791      33,002     -0.368     0.023    540
                                                   Not-elsewhere-classied engineers                    Census   82,506    48,836     -0.368     1.492   2,240
                                                   Nuclear engineers                                   SESTAT 92,938      34,781     -0.368     0.054   1,150
                                                   Other engineers                                     SESTAT 87,563      31,245     -0.368     0.239   5,260
     ....continued
                          Consistent
     Aggregated                                                                                                                   Occupation
                         disaggregated                         Raw occupation names                   Source      Earnings                      %      Freq.
     occupation                                                                                                                    premium
                          occupation
                                                                                                               Mean       SD
           (1)                  (2)                                      (3)                            (4)      (5)      (6)        (7)        (8)     (9)
                                                Mining and geological engineers                       SESTAT 79,649      31,085     0.003      0.020   430
                     Petroleum, mining,
                                                Petroleum, mining, and geological engineers           Census   100,671   38,321     0.003      0.131   200
     Engineer        and geological engineers
                                                Petroleum engineers                                   SESTAT 105,165     43,590     0.003      0.055   1,240
     (continued)
                                                Sales engineers                                       Census   93,336    42,875     -0.267     0.178   270
                     Sales engineers
                                                Sales engineers                                       SESTAT 95,609      46,320     -0.267     0.210   2,640
                                                Animal caretakers except on farms                     Census
                                                Farm managers, except for horticultural farms         Census   51,910    26,079     -1.008     0.026    40
     Farmers,                                   Farm workers                                          Census
     Foresters       Farmers, Foresters         Farmers, Foresters and Fishermen                      SESTAT 58,084      50,648     -1.060     0.331   2,370
     and             and Fishermen              Farmers (owners and tenants)                          Census
     Fishermen                                  Gardeners and groundskeepers                          Census   45,856    21,937     -1.297     0.021    30
                                                Supervisors of agricultural occupations               Census
                                                Weighers, measurers, and checkers                     Census
65




     Law related                                Lawyers                                               Census   118,706 122,843      -0.275     0.361   540
                     Lawyers, judges
     occupations                                Lawyers, judges                                       SESTAT 124,854     78,445     -0.275     1.187   5,770
                                                Computer and information systems managers             SESTAT 129,166     47,104     -0.498     0.222   2,210
                                                Engineering managers                                  SESTAT 122,833     43,222     -0.343     0.205   4,070
                                                Financial managers                                    Census   93,568    79,829     -0.282     0.476   720
                                                Funeral directors                                     Census
                                                Human resources and labor relations managers          Census   81,691    40,560     -0.371     0.168   250
                     Managers and
                                                Managers and administrators, n.e.c.                   Census   104,265   88,890     -0.343     2.632   3,950
                     administrators, n.e.c.
                                                Managers and specialists in marketing, advertising,
     Manager                                                                                          Census   99,562    55,683     -0.314     0.446   670
                                                and public relations
                                                Managers of properties and real estate                Census   91,241    88,889     -0.582     0.114   170
                                                Managers of service organizations, n.e.c.             Census   59,189    29,813     -0.665     0.161   240
                                                Natural sciences managers                             SESTAT 96,820      45,850     -0.343     0.020   530
                                                Supervisors and proprietors of sales jobs             Census   82,439    77,605     -0.600     0.962   1,450
                                                Education admin. (e.g. registrar, dean, principal)    SESTAT 86,873      28,908     -0.632     0.198   1,160
                     Managers in education      Managers in education and related elds                Census   68,964    31,989     -0.632     0.445   670
                     and related elds           Managers of medicine and health occupations           Census   71,478    34,087     -0.431     0.131   200
                                                Medical and health services managers                  SESTAT 104,799     54,422     -0.431     0.197   1,410
     ....continued
                          Consistent
     Aggregated                                                                                                                      Occupation
                         disaggregated                         Raw occupation names                       Source      Earnings                     %      Freq.
     occupation                                                                                                                       premium
                          occupation
                                                                                                                   Mean      SD
         (1)                       (2)                                   (3)                                (4)     (5)      (6)        (7)        (8)     (9)
                                               Business and promotion agents                              Census
                                               Buyers, wholesale and retail trade                         Census   64,215   49,628     -0.654     0.056    80
                                               Construction inspectors                                    Census   56,656   18,167     -0.795     0.042    60
                                               Inspectors and compliance ocers,
                                                                                                          Census   58,098   24,249     -0.478     0.288    430
                     Other management          outside construction
                                               Insurance underwriters                                     Census   56,692   20,945     -0.476     0.041    60
                     related occupations
                                               Management analysts                                        Census   91,619   72,224     -0.357     0.414    620
     Manager
                                               Management support occupations                             Census   54,200   24,849     -0.554     0.092    140
     (continued)
                                               Other management related occupations                       SESTAT 76,436     40,771     -0.487     2.995   20,870
                                               Purchasing agents and buyers, of farm products             Census
                                               Purchasing managers, agents and buyers, n.e.c.             Census   60,705   38,306     -0.510     0.110    160
                     Top-level managers,       Chief executives and public administrators                 Census
                                                                  2
                     executives,               Top-level managers                                         SESTAT 147,000    85,050     0.000      1.226   8,240
                                         2     Top mid-level managers, executives, admin                  SESTAT 102,000    51,056     -0.343     6.102   34,940
                     administrators
                                               Retail sales clerks                                        Census
                     Retail sales clerks
                                               Sales occupations - retail (e.g., furnishings, clothing,
66




                                                                                                          SESTAT 53,508     37,650     -0.859     1.330   6,410
                                               motor vehicles, cosmetics)
     Marketing                                 Door-to-door sales, street sales, and news vendors         Census   61,679   34,114     -1.082     0.030    50
                                               Other marketing and sales occupations                      SESTAT 77,709     49,304     -0.432     2.087   11,690
                     Salespersons, n.e.c.      Sales demonstrators/promoters/models                       Census
                                               Sales occupations - Commodities except retail
                                               (e.g., industrial machinery/equipment/supplies,            SESTAT 83,778     46,500     -0.432     1.593   8,080
                                               medical and dental equip./supplies)
                                               Salespersons, n.e.c.                                       Census   53,030   38,135     -0.432     0.153    230
                                               Mathematicians                                             SESTAT 60,935     37,242     -0.460     0.009    180
     Math            Mathematicians and        Mathematicians and mathematical scientists                 Census   69,924   23,235     -0.460     0.023    40
     Scientist       mathematical scientists   Other mathematical scientists                              SESTAT 74,534     39,301     -0.460     0.012    150
                                               Statisticians                                              SESTAT 73,948     32,130     -0.460     0.064   1,380
                                               Clinical laboratory technologies and technicians           Census   54,398   17,141     -0.736     0.501    750
                                               Dental hygenists                                           Census
                                               Health record tech specialists                             Census
     Other
                     Health technologists and Health technologists and technicians, n.e.c.                Census   52,318   30,869     -0.729     0.070    110
     health                                                                        3
                     technicians, n.e.c.      Health technologists and technicians                        SESTAT 53,808     31,465     -0.727     0.708   6,380
     occupations
                                               Licensed practical nurses                                  Census
                                               Other health occupations                                   SESTAT 55,300     39,456     -0.729     0.613   4,590
                                               Radiologic tech specialists                                Census   58,288   20,140     -0.618     0.045    70
     ....continued
                           Consistent
     Aggregated                                                                                                                       Occupation
                         disaggregated                             Raw occupation names                   Source      Earnings                      %      Freq.
     occupation                                                                                                                        premium
                          occupation
                                                                                                                   Mean       SD
          (1)                    (2)                                        (3)                             (4)     (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)     (9)
                                                  Dietitians and nutritionists                            Census   48,297   15,663      -0.742     0.130    200
                                                  Occupational therapists                                 Census   55,487   18,983      -0.567     0.031    50
                     Registered nurses,           Pharmacists                                             Census   81,197   26,442      -0.210     0.158    240
     Other
                     pharmacists,                 Physical therapists                                     Census   63,901   38,913      -0.594     0.061    90
     health
                     dieticians, therapists,      Registered nurses                                       Census   62,472   19,596      -0.488     0.713   1,070
     occupations
                     physician assistants,        Registered nurses, pharmacists, dieticians,
     (continued)                                                                                          SESTAT 72,720     29,978      -0.502     2.941   15,990
                     nurse practitioners          therapists, physician assistants, nurse practitioners
                                                  Respiratory therapists                                  Census
                                                  Speech therapists                                       Census   49,988   16,748      -0.684     0.031    50
                                                  Therapists, n.e.c.                                      Census   43,173   13,534      -0.894     0.048    70
                                                  Cooks, variously dened                                  Census   39,442   30,429      -1.206     0.023    40
                                                  Food preparation and service
                     Food preparation                                                                     SESTAT 38,473     25,862      -1.270     0.399   2,320
                                                  (e.g., cookes, waitresses, bartenders)
                     and service (e.g., cookes,
                                                  Kitchen workers                                         Census
                     waitresses, bartenders)
                                                  Misc food prep workers                                  Census
     Other                                                                                                Census
                                                  Waiter's assistant
     service                                      Waiter/waitress                                         Census   30,696   14,335      -1.276     0.029    40
67




     occupations                                                                                          Census
                                                  Barbers
                     Other
                                                  Cashiers                                                Census   54,006   123,948     -1.312     0.061    90
                     service occupations,
                                                  Hairdressers and cosmetologists                         Census
                     except health
                                                  Hotel clerks                                            Census
                     (e.g., prbation ocers,
                                                  Other service occupations, except health
                     human services workers)                                                              SESTAT 48,070     30,216      -1.327     0.952   5,660
                                                  (e.g., probation ocers, human services workers)
                                                  Personal service occupations, nec                       Census
                     Clergy and religious work- Clergy and Other religious workers                        SESTAT 48,460     24,581      -1.119     0.517   2,030
                     ers                        Clergy and
                                                                                                          Census   41,458   20,576      -1.119     0.247    370
                                                  religious workers
                                                  Archivists and curators                                 Census   60,890   55,672      -0.880     0.041    60
                     Librarians, archivists,      Librarians                                              Census   47,457   14,946      -0.909     0.102    150
                     curators                     Librarians, archivists, curators                        SESTAT 53,474     20,715      -0.909     0.300   1,420
     Other
                                                  Library assistants                                      Census   35,583   11,995      -1.247     0.021    30
     social
     service         Other teachers and           Other teachers and instructors                          SESTAT 50,158     30,323      -1.082     0.133    890
                                                  Teachers , n.e.c.                                       Census   54,216   26,607      -1.082     0.187    280
     occupations instructors
                                                  Recreation workers                                      Census
                     Social workers               Social Workers                                          SESTAT 47,207     21,452      -0.888     1.203   11,620
                                                  Social workers                                          Census   48,127   19,267      -0.888     1.564   2,350
                                                  Counselors (Educational, vocational health,
                     Vocational and                                                                       SESTAT 50,727     21,606      -0.925     0.774   6,690
                                                  and substance abuse)
                     educational counselors
                                                  Vocational and educational counselors                   Census   53,116   21,339      -0.925     0.398    600
     ....continued
                           Consistent
     Aggregated                                                                                                                 Occupation
                         disaggregated                             Raw occupation names              Source      Earnings                     %      Freq.
     occupation                                                                                                                  premium
                          occupation
                                                                                                              Mean      SD
         (1)                      (2)                                            (3)                   (4)     (5)      (6)        (7)        (8)     (9)
                     Atmospheric and               Atmospheric and space scientists                  Census   70,447   26,491     -0.455     0.031    50
                     space scientists              Atmospheric and space scientists                  SESTAT 68,223     32,995     -0.455     0.028   940
                                                   Chemists                                          Census   66,646   24,890     -0.582     0.563   850
                     Chemists
                                                   Chemists, except biochemists                      SESTAT 63,755     29,902     -0.582     0.271   7,410
                                                   Geologists                                        Census   76,093   48,295     -0.553     0.270   410
     Physical        Geologists                    Geologists, including earth scientists            SESTAT 75,852     39,880     -0.553     0.138   4,290
     Scientist                                     Oceanographers                                    SESTAT 57,078     29,278     -0.553     0.007   170
                                                   Other physical scientists                         SESTAT 63,469     26,245     -0.642     0.073   1,780
                     Physical scientists, n.e.c.
                                                   Physical scientists, n.e.c.                       Census   62,430   22,161     -0.642     0.104   160
                                                   Astronomers                                       SESTAT 36,444     19,491     -0.508     0.003   150
                     Physicists and
                                                   Physicists, except biophysicists                  SESTAT 60,597     40,274     -0.508     0.039   1,380
                     astronomers
                                                   Physicists and astronomers                        Census   80,989   34,669     -0.508     0.085   130
                                                   Post-sec teachers - physical education            SESTAT 57,270     30,367     -0.807     0.043   240
                                                   Postsecondary Teachers: Agriculture               SESTAT 57,389     18,646     -0.807     0.016   190
                                                   Postsecondary Teachers: Art, Drama, and Music     SESTAT 53,491     22,380     -0.807     0.066   440
                                                   Postsecondary Teachers: Biological Sciences       SESTAT 40,103     21,257     -0.807     0.030   540
68




                                                   Postsecondary Teachers: Business Commerce and
                                                                                                     SESTAT 60,771     24,267     -0.807     0.041   330
                                                   Marketing
                                                   Postsecondary Teachers: Chemistry                 SESTAT 36,247     21,706     -0.807     0.017   360
                                                   Postsecondary Teachers: Computer Science          SESTAT 62,532     32,381     -0.807     0.031   350
                                                   Postsecondary Teachers: Earth, Environmental,
                                                                                                     SESTAT 46,624     28,110     -0.807     0.010   180
                                                   and Marine Science
                                                   Postsecondary Teachers: Economics                 SESTAT 61,073     48,267     -0.807     0.006   100
                                                   Postsecondary Teachers: Education                 SESTAT 54,962     33,762     -0.807     0.029   250
     Post-
                     Postsecondary Teachers        Postsecondary Teachers: Engineering               SESTAT 56,409     30,755     -0.807     0.024   510
     secondary
                                                   Postsecondary Teachers: English                   SESTAT 45,590     19,634     -0.807     0.059   440
     Teachers
                                                   Postsecondary Teachers: Foreign Language          SESTAT 52,732     20,505     -0.807     0.018   180
                                                   Postsecondary Teachers: Health and related sci.   SESTAT 72,834     49,884     -0.807     0.086   870
                                                   Postsecondary Teachers: History                   SESTAT 52,647     34,860     -0.807     0.012   100
                                                   Postsecondary Teachers: Mathematics and Statistics SESTAT 46,493    19,855     -0.807     0.042   820
                                                   Postsecondary Teachers: Other Natural Sciences    SESTAT 83,264     55,018     -0.807     0.014   170
                                                   Postsecondary Teachers: Other Postsecondary elds SESTAT 59,950      27,252     -0.807     0.156   1,240
                                                   Postsecondary Teachers: Other Social Sciences     SESTAT 54,214     32,158     -0.807     0.012   180
                                                   Postsecondary Teachers: Physics                   SESTAT 41,541     24,306     -0.807     0.008   260
                                                   Postsecondary Teachers: Political Science         SESTAT 54,999     35,630     -0.807     0.008    90
                                                   Postsecondary Teachers: Psychology                SESTAT 42,221     25,306     -0.807     0.014   180
                                                   Postsecondary Teachers: Sociology                 SESTAT 54,046     22,241     -0.807     0.007   110
                                                   Subject instructors (HS/college)                  Census   56,364   33,102     -0.807     0.409   610
     ....continued
                              Consistent
     Aggregated                                                                                                                   Occupation
                         disaggregated                            Raw occupation names                 Source      Earnings                     %      Freq.
     occupation                                                                                                                    premium
                              occupation
                                                                                                                Mean      SD
           (1)                     (2)                                        (3)                        (4)     (5)      (6)        (7)        (8)     (9)
                     Kindergarten and earlier Kindergarten and earlier school teachers                 Census   33,058   17,467     -1.108     0.036    50
                     school teachers              Teachers: Pre-kindergarten and kindergarten          SESTAT 45,012     23,590     -1.108     0.522   2,000
                                                  Primary school teachers                              Census   51,125   20,363     -0.847     1.338   2,010
                     Primary school teachers      Special education teachers                           Census   46,737   18,944     -0.854     0.027    40
     Primary
                                                  Teachers: Elementary                                 SESTAT 53,433     23,332     -0.847     2.601   9,680
     and
                                                  Secondary school teachers                            Census   53,510   18,798     -0.831     0.643   970
     secondary
                                                  Teachers: Other precollegiate area                   SESTAT 51,416     25,826     -0.831     0.275   1,630
     teachers
                                                  Teachers: Secondary - computer, math or sciences     SESTAT 54,663     19,352     -0.831     1.022   9,220
                     Secondary school teachers
                                                  Teachers: Secondary - Other subjects                 SESTAT 55,752     20,619     -0.831     1.298   6,130
                                                  Teachers: Secondary - social sciences                SESTAT 54,770     18,540     -0.831     0.417   2,460
                                                  Teachers: Special education - primary and secondary SESTAT 53,649      20,075     -0.831     0.752   3,270
                     Economists, market           Economists                                           SESTAT 82,107     50,421     -0.372     0.080   1,370
                     researchers, and             Economists, market researchers, and survey
                                                                                                       Census   83,373   51,690     -0.372     0.591   890
                     survey researchers           researchers
                                                  Psychologists                                        Census   53,377   47,630     -0.763     0.380   570
                     Psychologists
                                                  Psychologists, including clinical                    SESTAT 53,306     27,960     -0.763     0.306   3,830
                                                  Anthropologists                                      SESTAT 43,083     21,142     -0.724     0.020   460
69




     Social
                                                  Historian, science and technology                    SESTAT
     Scientist
                                                  Historians                                           SESTAT 54,257     22,724     -0.724     0.008   120
                                                  Other social scientists                              SESTAT 74,152     39,670     -0.724     0.160   1,890
                     Social scientists, n.e.c.
                                                  Political scientists                                 SESTAT 64,287     35,679     -0.724     0.041   520
                                                  Social scientists, n.e.c.                            Census   65,312   71,082     -0.724     0.094   140
                                                  Sociologists                                         SESTAT 48,886     24,583     -0.724     0.019   310
                                                  Urban and regional planners                          Census   66,082   27,226     -0.608     0.021    30
                                                  Biological technicians                               Census   53,284   24,249     -0.841     0.045    70
                     Biological technicians
                                                  Technologists and technicians in the bio/life sciences SESTAT 45,746   21,071     -0.841     0.223   3,200
                                                  Drafters                                             Census   57,805   25,113     -0.803     0.220   330
                     Drafters
                                                  Drafting occupations, including computer drafting    SESTAT 59,017     25,307     -0.803     0.086   950
                                                  Electrical, electronic, industrial, and mechanical
                                                                                                       SESTAT 66,431     29,348     -0.779     0.292   3,750
                     Engineering      technicians, technicians
                                                   Engineering technicians, n.e.c.                     Census   66,235   17,829     -0.779     0.027    40
                     n.e.c.
                                                  Other engineering technologists and technicians      SESTAT 70,321     30,756     -0.779     0.161   2,420
     Technician
                                                  Air trac controllers                                 Census
                                                  Airplane pilots and navigators                       Census   94,320   55,848     -0.273     0.282   420
                                                  Broadcast equipment operators                        Census
                                                  Chemical technicians                                 Census   61,303   24,879     -0.734     0.073   110
                     Other science technicians
                                                  Other science technicians                            Census   57,953   28,582     -0.526     0.055    80
                                                  Programmers of numerically controlled machine tools Census
                                                  Technologists and technicians in the math sciences   SESTAT 65,090     44,731     -0.526     0.003    50
                                                  Technologists and technicians in the physical sciences SESTAT 52,549   24,942     -0.526     0.087   1,380
              ....continued
                                    Consistent
              Aggregated                                                                                                                           Occupation
                                  disaggregated                           Raw occupation names                        Source       Earnings                        %     Freq.
               occupation                                                                                                                           premium
                                    occupation
                                                                                                                                Mean        SD
                    (1)                     (2)                                      (3)                                (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)      (9)
                              Surveyors, cartographers, Surveying and mapping technicians                            SESTAT 52,682        22,051      -0.783     0.034    440
              Technician
                              mapping scientists and     Surveyors, cartographers, mapping scientists
              (continued)                                                                                            Census     54,147    18,817      -0.783     0.046     70
                              technicians                and technicians
                                                         Surveyors, cartographers, photogrammetrists                 SESTAT 60,635        23,985      -0.783     0.040    480
                                                         Actors, directors, producers                                Census     81,671   116,903      -0.565     0.053     80
                                                         Announcers                                                  Census
                                                         Art/entertainment performers and related                    Census
                                                         Art makers: painters, sculptors, craft-artists,
                                                                                                                     Census     49,296    28,239      -0.703     0.035     50
                              Writers, editors,          and print-makers
                                                         Athletes, sports instructors, and ocials                    Census
              Writers         public relations
                                                         Dancers                                                     Census
              and             specialists, artists,
                                                         Designers                                                   Census     64,287    60,593      -0.706     0.212    320
70




              Artists         entertaininers,
                                                         Editors and reporters                                       Census     56,452    30,718      -0.703     0.190    290
                              broadcasters
                                                         Musician or composer                                        Census     46,572    31,303      -1.054     0.034     50
                                                         Photographers                                               Census     57,770    55,605      -1.050     0.031     50
                                                         Technical writers                                           Census     65,722    41,993      -0.611     0.143    210
                                                         Writers, editors, public relations specialists,
                                                                                                                     SESTAT 65,828        44,028      -0.722     1.618   6,850
                                                         artists, entertaininers, broadcasters
                                                         Writers and authors                                         Census     61,177    40,761      -0.680     0.033     50
     Note:   Column 1 presents 20 aggregated occupation categories that are constructed from 66 disaggregated occupations that are available in both Census 1990 (source of
     our earnings and occupation observation for 1990), and the NSCG and NSRCG observations (SESTAT) for 1993-2015.                 Column 2 presents the occupation names of the 66
     disaggregated elds. The 66 disaggregated elds are constructed from 122 occupation categories from SESTAT and 290 occupation categories from Census 1990. Column 3-4
     present the name and data source (Census 1990 or either the NSCG or NSRCG (SESTAT)) of each most detailed-level occupation. For each detailed occupation, Col. 7 reports
     the occupational premium we imported from an earnings regression in ACS 2009-2014. Columns 5, 6, 8 and 9 refer to the "full" earnings regression sample. For each occupation,
     they present the weighted mean and standard deviation of earnings, the unweighted percentage of the sample, and the number of cases. If a disaggregated occupation has 10 or
     fewer observations, the name is left in the table, but all quantitative information is removed from the table. Cell counts are rounded to the nearest 10.
     1 Diagnosing/treating practitioners include dentists, optometrists, physicians, podiatrists, surgeons, veterinarians.
     2 Top-level managers also include executives, administrators (e.g., CEO/COO/CFO, president, district manager, general manager, legislator, chancellor, provost).
     3 Health technologists and technicians include dental hygienists, health record technologists/technicians, licensed practical nurses, medical or laboratory technicians, radiological

     technicians.
             Table B4: Return to graduate education on current and previous earnings subsamples


                                                          Current       Previous                    t-statistics for
                                                                                       Pooled
                                                            year           year                      the dieence
       Advanced degree                                                                 sample
                                                          earnings      earnings                        between
                                                                                                      (1) and (2)
                                                             (1)           (2)           (3)               (4)
                                                            0.498         0.641         0.549
       Medicine                                                                                          -1.100
                                                           (0.064)       (0.113)       (0.072)
                                                            0.396         0.466         0.416
       Law                                                                                               -0.520
                                                           (0.050)       (0.126)       (0.059)
                                                            0.180         0.260         0.206
       Master's in Business related elds                                                                 -0.813
                                                           (0.033)       (0.093)       (0.044)
                                                            0.115         0.088         0.110
       MBA                                                                                                0.656
                                                           (0.020)       (0.035)       (0.021)
                                                            0.110         0.087         0.103
       Master's in Engineering                                                                            0.696
                                                           (0.019)       (0.028)       (0.018)
       Master's in Computer and mathematical                0.201         0.160         0.179
                                                                                                          0.709
       sciences                                            (0.032)       (0.047)       (0.033)
       Master's in Health Services                          0.272         0.264         0.273
                                                                                                          0.054
       Administration                                      (0.080)       (0.117)       (0.091)
                                                            0.232         0.243         0.235
       Master's in Nursing                                                                               -0.160
                                                           (0.038)       (0.057)       (0.041)
       Master's in Other Science and                       -0.006        -0.034         -0.018
                                                                                                          0.287
       Engineering related elds                            (0.060)       (0.077)       (0.058)
                                                            0.235         0.112         0.193
       Master's in Public Administration                                                                  1.466
                                                           (0.057)       (0.062)       (0.052)
                                                            0.132         0.206         0.158
       Master's in Physical and related sciences                                                         -0.744
                                                           (0.053)       (0.084)       (0.054)
       Master's in Other Social and related                 0.115         0.054         0.089
                                                                                                          0.627
       sciences                                            (0.066)       (0.071)       (0.057)
                                                            0.274         0.165         0.227
       Master's in Health related elds                                                                    1.008
                                                           (0.045)       (0.098)       (0.053)
       Master's in Biology/agricultural/                    0.265         0.161         0.231
                                                                                                          1.359
       environmental/life sciences                         (0.049)       (0.059)       (0.045)
       Master's in Other Non-Science and                    0.037         0.241         0.117
                                                                                                         -1.857
       Engineering elds                                    (0.059)       (0.093)       (0.056)
                                                            0.161         0.169         0.162
       Master's in Education elds                                                                        -0.230
                                                           (0.019)       (0.030)       (0.019)
                                                            0.040        -0.318         -0.025
       Master's in Arts                                                                                   1.779
                                                           (0.093)       (0.178)       (0.099)
                                                            0.203         0.207         0.202
       Master's in Psychology and Social Work                                                            -0.064
                                                           (0.030)       (0.042)       (0.029)
                                                           -0.003         0.047         0.018
       Master's in Humanity elds                                                                         -0.439
                                                           (0.050)       (0.102)       (0.062)
       Observations                                       178,540        119,000       297,540
Note: The table reports estimates of returns to advanced degrees for additive FE-cg regression specication. The same regression
is estimated on three samples: Column 1 presents the regression estimates on current year earnings measures only. Column 2
presents the estimates on the previous year earnings measure only. Column 3 repeats Table 5 column 1 to show the estimates on
the union set of sample for columns 1 and 2. Column 4 reports the two-sample t-statistics for the dierence between coecients
in columns 1 and 2.




                                                              71
                      Table B5: Distribution of the full earnings regression sample by year


                                        Year            Percentage           Frequency
                                         (1)                 (2)                  (3)
                                        1990               10.445              62,850
                                        1993               15.436              92,950
                                        1994                2.780              28,940
                                        1995                3.685              39,060
                                        1996                2.806              29,450
                                        1997                3.437              36,560
                                        1998                2.340              24,960
                                        1999                2.919              31,560
                                        2001                0.546               6,140
                                        2002                8.664              52,470
                                        2003                8.838              54,310
                                        2005                3.618              34,010
                                        2006                3.788              35,990
                                        2007                3.620              33,660
                                        2008                3.821              35,820
                                        2009                3.398              37,620
                                        2010                3.580              39,730
                                        2012                4.433              47,850
                                        2013                4.397              48,040
                                        2014                3.730              43,020
                                        2015                3.722              43,140
                                       Total                 100               858,130
Note: Tabulation of the year of earnings for the full earnings regression sample (Table 5, col.   3). Percentages are weighted.
Unweighted cell counts are rounded to the nearest 10.




                                                             72
Table B6:     Graduate Field Choice and Occupation and Earnings Before and After Graduate School, by
Whether pre Graduate School Job is Related to a BA in Engineering


                                    Panel A: Reasons for choosing pre adv occupation
                                           pre adv obs.                pre adv earnings              post adv earnings
                                         count        %       count         mean          sd     count       mean        sd
 Closely related                         2,930       84.4      2,830        72,204     30,120     2,180     96,700    38,323
 If not closely related:
      Pay and promotion opportunities     120        3.93         110       93,304     38,757      90       113,615   38,896
      Working conditions                   40        1.64         40        66,341     35,370      30       91,721    48,120
      Job location                         30        0.65         30        77,219     29,460      20       100,080   26,216
      Change in career/prof. interests    120        5.18         110       59,577     21,836      60       87,427    35,716
      Family-related reasons               20        0.7          10        58,972     13,664      10       68,443    24,702
      Job in BA eld not available          60        1.3          60        57,552     34,647      60       87,029    35,703
      Other reasons                        50        2.2          40        64,104     16,852      30       57,400    25,506

                                                Panel B: Pre adv occupation
                                                    Freq.         %                                          Freq.       %
                           Closely related                                                 Not Closely related
 Engineer                                           1,030      74.12       Engineer                          610      56.77
 Computer scientist                                  130       8.63        Computer scientist                150      14.83
 Manager                                              70       5.66        Manager                           110      10.59

                                             Panel C: Advanced eld choice
                                                               Closely related        Not closely related
 Advanced eld
                                                               Freq.          %        Freq.       %
 Master's in Engineering                                          980       26.60         370     17.43
 MBA                                                              740       50.52         680     57.16
 Master's in Computer and mathematical sciences                   90         4.59         50      3.31
 Master's in Business related elds                                80         6.98         120     9.49
 Law                                                              40         2.96

                                  Panel D: Pre adv average earnings by advanced eld
                                                                        Closely related              Not closely related
 Advanced eld
                                                              count         mean          sd     count       mean        sd
 Master's in Engineering                                       1,140        61,248     29,193      530      65,628    30,154
 MBA                                                              870       82,347     27,267      830      82,367    34,103
 Master's in Computer and mathematical sciences                   130       70,829     28,382      80       73,707    22,740
 Master's in Business related elds                                80        90,799     40,458      130      84,833    70,035
 Law                                                              40        80,808     32,661
Note: A case study is presented for people with BA in Engineering. The term "closely related" refers to whether the pre adv
occupation is closely related to the educational training provided by the BA in Engineering.     Weighted percentages and the
weighted mean and standard deviations of earnings statistics are presented. Unweighted cell counts are rounded to the nearest
10.




                                                             73
                 Table B7: Return to advanced degrees by years of post adv experience, FE-cg


                                                                                                 Return to advanced degree
                                                               Averages
                                                                                            by years of post Adv experience
                                                 gx               
                                                                  gx           g1-28
                                            128 years,         All years,   128 years        1        5       10     20      30

                                               sample           sample        equally
                                              weighted         weighted       weighted
                                                 (1)              (2)            (3)        (4)      (5)     (6)     (7)     (8)

                                                0.627            0.619         0.658       0.072    0.380   0.659   0.867   0.606
 Medicine
                                               (0.084)          (0.084)       (0.084)     (0.089) (0.085) (0.085) (0.086) (0.094)
                                                0.451            0.462         0.469       0.280    0.353   0.431   0.542   0.595
 Law
                                               (0.056)          (0.056)       (0.056)     (0.060) (0.057) (0.058) (0.058) (0.071)
                                                0.245            0.248         0.265       0.109    0.180   0.249   0.323   0.311
 Master's in Business related elds
                                               (0.044)          (0.044)       (0.044)     (0.047) (0.044) (0.045) (0.047) (0.057)
                                                0.157            0.162         0.181       0.098    0.120   0.150   0.216   0.289
 MBA
                                               (0.020)          (0.020)       (0.021)     (0.023) (0.020) (0.022) (0.023) (0.039)
                                                0.161            0.165         0.198       0.046    0.113   0.179   0.256   0.258
 Master's in Engineering
                                               (0.019)          (0.019)       (0.019)     (0.019) (0.019) (0.020) (0.021) (0.027)

 Master's in Computer and                       0.202            0.202         0.228       0.106    0.170   0.228   0.272   0.219
 mathematical sciences                         (0.033)          (0.033)       (0.034)     (0.033) (0.032) (0.034) (0.035) (0.046)

 Master's in Health Services                    0.269            0.268         0.300       0.159    0.238   0.308   0.349   0.259
 Administration                                (0.088)          (0.088)       (0.091)     (0.089) (0.086) (0.091) (0.097) (0.139)
                                                0.186            0.181         0.163       0.183    0.204   0.209   0.149   -0.003
 Master's in Nursing
                                               (0.036)          (0.036)       (0.038)     (0.038) (0.036) (0.039) (0.042) (0.071)

 Master's in Other Science and                  -0.013           0.002         0.024      -0.188 -0.120 -0.040      0.110   0.243
 Engineering related elds                      (0.056)          (0.056)       (0.056)     (0.064) (0.057) (0.057) (0.059) (0.070)
                                                0.228            0.229         0.263       0.030    0.143   0.249   0.348   0.295
 Master's in Public Administration
                                               (0.052)          (0.052)       (0.053)     (0.061) (0.053) (0.055) (0.058) (0.085)

 Master's in Physical and related               0.238            0.245         0.285       0.032    0.147   0.259   0.380   0.362
 sciences                                      (0.052)          (0.052)       (0.053)     (0.052) (0.052) (0.054) (0.055) (0.066)

 Master's in Other Social and related           0.125            0.134         0.164       0.019    0.070   0.128   0.221   0.287
 sciences                                      (0.056)          (0.056)       (0.057)     (0.055) (0.055) (0.058) (0.060) (0.066)
                                                0.241            0.240         0.246       0.221    0.238   0.252   0.254   0.221
 Master's in Health Related Fields
                                               (0.053)          (0.053)       (0.054)     (0.053) (0.052) (0.054) (0.057) (0.071)

 Master's in Biological/agricultural/           0.295            0.298         0.331       0.149    0.236   0.318   0.397   0.362
 environmental/life sciences                   (0.045)          (0.045)       (0.046)     (0.046) (0.045) (0.047) (0.048) (0.058)

 Master's in Other Non-Science and              0.169            0.173         0.187       0.059    0.112   0.166   0.236   0.254
 Engineering elds                              (0.056)          (0.056)       (0.056)     (0.059) (0.056) (0.057) (0.059) (0.072)
                                                0.205            0.210         0.218       0.109    0.151   0.196   0.261   0.293
 Master's in Education elds
                                               (0.018)          (0.018)       (0.018)     (0.019) (0.018) (0.019) (0.019) (0.024)
                                                -0.002           0.003         0.021      -0.152 -0.077 -0.001      0.086   0.089
 Master's in Arts
                                               (0.103)          (0.103)       (0.103)     (0.109) (0.103) (0.104) (0.107) (0.122)

 Master's in Psychology and                     0.215            0.218         0.254       0.070    0.153   0.233   0.323   0.315
 Social Work                                   (0.029)          (0.029)       (0.030)     (0.029) (0.029) (0.030) (0.032) (0.040)
                                                0.050            0.060         0.063       0.010    0.012   0.025   0.088   0.201
 Master's in Humanity elds
                                               (0.060)          (0.060)       (0.060)     (0.062) (0.060) (0.061) (0.063) (0.070)
Note: Returns to each advanced degree by years of post advanced degree experience are reported.             We run an additive FE-
cg regression of the log of earnings on BA elds interacted with a cubic function of (age-35), advanced degrees interacted
with a quadratic function of number of years     x   since graduate school completion, and a set of demographics as controls. The
specication is equation (8) on the full sample. Sample weights are used and inference is based on clustering at the individual
level. Then the estimate for the return to a specic advanced degree and a specic value of experience is calculated from the
regression coecients on the advanced degree and the interaction between this advanced degree and the quadratic in years since
graduate school. Column 1 presents the average of        gx   over 1 to 28 years after graduate school completion, weighted by the
distribution of observations in the regression sample. Column 2 presents the corresponding averages, but over all possible years
after graduate school completion, again weighted by the sample distribution of observations. Column 3 presents         g1-28 , the
equally average of   gx   from 1 year to 28 years of post advanced degree experience. Columns 4-8 present the return   gx for x=1,
5, 10, 20, and 30 years of post advanced experience.


                                                                  74
                  Table B8: Return to advanced degrees by years of post-adv experience, OLS


                                                                                           Return to advanced degree
                                                         Averages
                                                                                      by years of post Adv experience
                                             x              칧           g1-28
                                        128 years,      All years,    128 years        1        5      10      20      30

                                           sample         sample        equally
                                          weighted       weighted      weighted
                                             (1)            (2)           (3)         (4)      (5)     (6)     (7)     (8)

                                            0.707          0.699         0.738       0.147    0.457   0.738   0.949   0.690
 Medicine
                                           (0.016)        (0.016)       (0.016)     (0.033) (0.020) (0.020) (0.024) (0.043)
                                            0.457          0.467         0.474       0.292    0.363   0.438   0.545   0.594
 Law
                                           (0.015)        (0.015)       (0.015)     (0.028) (0.017) (0.019) (0.022) (0.048)
                                            0.338          0.341         0.358       0.200    0.272   0.342   0.418   0.405
 Master's in Business related elds
                                           (0.012)        (0.012)       (0.013)     (0.025) (0.015) (0.015) (0.019) (0.039)
                                            0.283          0.288         0.308       0.220    0.245   0.277   0.344   0.412
 MBA
                                           (0.008)        (0.008)       (0.009)     (0.015) (0.009) (0.010) (0.013) (0.034)
                                            0.145          0.149         0.184       0.025    0.096   0.166   0.243   0.239
 Master's in Engineering
                                           (0.005)        (0.005)       (0.007)     (0.007) (0.005) (0.007) (0.009) (0.019)

 Master's in Computer and                   0.204          0.203         0.232       0.095    0.171   0.238   0.281   0.203
 mathematical sciences                     (0.009)        (0.009)       (0.011)     (0.012) (0.009) (0.012) (0.015) (0.034)

 Master's in Health Services                0.304          0.304         0.342       0.178    0.267   0.347   0.400   0.311
 Administration                            (0.025)        (0.025)       (0.031)     (0.035) (0.027) (0.037) (0.044) (0.104)
                                            0.316          0.312         0.294       0.311    0.334   0.341   0.281   0.120
 Master's in Nursing
                                           (0.014)        (0.014)       (0.018)     (0.020) (0.015) (0.020) (0.025) (0.062)

 Master's in Other Science and              0.069          0.083         0.106      -0.111 -0.038     0.046   0.192   0.307
 Engineering related elds                  (0.018)        (0.018)       (0.019)     (0.039) (0.023) (0.023) (0.027) (0.048)
                                            0.211          0.212         0.246       0.008    0.124   0.234   0.333   0.273
 Master's in Public Administration
                                           (0.020)        (0.020)       (0.020)     (0.045) (0.027) (0.024) (0.028) (0.072)

 Master's in Physical and related           0.044          0.052         0.094      -0.169 -0.051     0.066   0.192   0.176
 sciences                                  (0.014)        (0.014)       (0.016)     (0.020) (0.015) (0.019) (0.022) (0.042)

 Master's in Other Social and related       0.105          0.115         0.144       0.000    0.050   0.107   0.202   0.272
 sciences                                  (0.013)        (0.013)       (0.017)     (0.015) (0.012) (0.020) (0.024) (0.037)
                                            0.214          0.213         0.214       0.206    0.215   0.221   0.217   0.190
 Master's in Health Related Fields
                                           (0.012)        (0.012)       (0.015)     (0.017) (0.013) (0.018) (0.021) (0.048)

 Master's in Biological/agricultural/       0.012          0.015         0.049      -0.137 -0.049     0.035   0.117   0.083
 environmental/ life sciences              (0.011)        (0.011)       (0.012)     (0.015) (0.011) (0.015) (0.017) (0.038)

 Master's in Other Non-Science and          0.066          0.070         0.085      -0.050    0.007   0.064   0.136   0.150
 Engineering elds                          (0.014)        (0.014)       (0.015)     (0.031) (0.019) (0.018) (0.020) (0.050)
                                            0.104          0.109         0.118      -0.001    0.045   0.094   0.164   0.195
 Master's in Education elds
                                           (0.006)        (0.006)       (0.006)     (0.010) (0.007) (0.007) (0.008) (0.017)
                                           -0.008         -0.001         0.018      -0.173 -0.091 -0.009      0.090   0.101
 Master's in Arts
                                           (0.023)        (0.023)       (0.023)     (0.052) (0.032) (0.027) (0.032) (0.069)

 Master's in Psychology and                 0.053          0.057         0.091      -0.086 -0.007     0.071   0.157   0.151
 Social Work                               (0.009)        (0.009)       (0.010)     (0.012) (0.008) (0.011) (0.014) (0.029)
                                           -0.152         -0.141         -0.138     -0.193 -0.191 -0.178 -0.113       0.002
 Master's in Humanity elds
                                           (0.014)        (0.014)       (0.014)     (0.026) (0.016) (0.017) (0.020) (0.039)
Note: The table reports OLS estimates of the returns to each advanced degree by years of post advanced degree experience      x.
It corresponds to Table B7 but is based on OLS rather than FE-cg. Sample weights are used and standard errors are clustered
at the individual level. The specication is equation (8) on the full sample, with degree combination xed eects excluded. See
the notes for Table B7.




                                                            75
                            Table B9: FE estimates of the returns to graduate education


          Dependent variable:                                        ln(earnings)          Occupational Premium
                                                                           (1)                         (2)
                                                                         -0.054                       0.577
          Medicine
                                                                        (0.107)                      (0.092)
                                                                         0.117                        0.288
          Law
                                                                        (0.058)                      (0.045)
                                                                         0.058                        0.008
          Master's in Business related elds
                                                                        (0.024)                      (0.011)
                                                                         0.058                        -0.010
          MBA
                                                                        (0.018)                      (0.009)
                                                                         0.032                        -0.002
          Master's in Engineering
                                                                        (0.021)                      (0.007)
          Master's in Computer and mathematical                          0.083                        -0.008
          sciences                                                      (0.031)                      (0.010)
          Master's in Health Services                                    0.079                        0.007
          Administration                                                (0.048)                      (0.026)
                                                                         0.070                        -0.024
          Master's in Nursing
                                                                        (0.044)                      (0.019)
          Master's in Other Science and                                  -0.143                       -0.001
          Engineering related elds                                      (0.054)                      (0.061)
                                                                         0.117                        0.086
          Master's in Public Administration
                                                                        (0.042)                      (0.034)
                                                                         -0.010                       0.006
          Master's in Physical and related sciences
                                                                        (0.036)                      (0.024)
          Master's in Other Social and related                           0.016                        0.026
          sciences                                                      (0.069)                      (0.033)
                                                                         0.123                        0.019
          Master's in Health related elds
                                                                        (0.058)                      (0.021)
          Master's in Biology/agricultural/                              0.137                        -0.005
          environmental/life sciences                                   (0.046)                      (0.017)
          Master's in Other Non-Science and                              0.157                        0.014
          Engineering elds                                              (0.045)                      (0.027)
                                                                         0.029                        0.006
          Master's in Education elds
                                                                        (0.020)                      (0.008)
                                                                         0.005                        0.015
          Master's in Arts
                                                                        (0.096)                      (0.048)
                                                                         0.075                        -0.009
          Master's in Psychology and Social Work
                                                                        (0.031)                      (0.016)
                                                                         -0.055                       -0.080
          Master's in Humanity elds
                                                                        (0.036)                      (0.031)
Note: Individual xed eects estimates of returns to advanced degrees are reported for the additive specication. Columns 1
and 2 report estimates of   g   for the log of earnings and the occupation premium, respectively. See the note to Table 5 for list
of control variables. Time invariant controls are absorbed by the person eects. Person specic averages of the sample weights
across panel observations are used. Standard errors are clustered at the person level. The estimates are for the full sample.
Estimates for the graduate sample tend to be smaller for earnings and similar for the occupation premium.




                                                                76
Table B10: Fraction of people who delay graduate education, and summary statistics related to delaying
graduate education, by advanced degree


                                                                                    Race\Hispanic
                                          % people             % college                                    Undergraduate
                                                                                      wage index
                                         who delay         educated father                                  GPA (mean[sd])
Advanced degree                                                                       (mean[sd])
                                        grad school
                                                            defer    go direct      defer    go direct       defer    go direct
                                             (1)             (2)        (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)
                                                                                    -0.036     -0.034        3.450      0.113
Medicine                                    0.379           0.568      0.591
                                                                                   [0.037]    [0.031]       [0.331]    [0.041]
                                                                                    -0.031     -0.032        3.337      0.100
Law                                         0.540           0.543      0.549
                                                                                   [0.033]    [0.030]       [0.389]    [0.041]
                                                                                    -0.034     -0.030        3.297      0.216
Master's in Business related elds           0.905           0.465      0.425
                                                                                   [0.032]    [0.029]       [0.418]    [0.074]
                                                                                    -0.035     -0.038        3.171      0.105
MBA                                         0.846           0.401      0.419
                                                                                   [0.036]    [0.039]       [0.379]    [0.056]
                                                                                    -0.047     -0.043        3.370      0.055
Master's in Engineering                     0.885           0.539      0.545
                                                                                   [0.036]    [0.033]       [0.405]    [0.014]
Master's in Computer and                                                            -0.041     -0.042        3.402     -0.023
                                            0.942           0.515      0.566
mathematical sciences                                                              [0.041]    [0.038]       [0.415]    [0.045]
Master's in Health Services                                                         -0.026     -0.029        3.381      0.003
                                            0.981           0.368      0.175
Administration                                                                     [0.040]    [0.054]       [0.366]    [0.139]
                                                                                    -0.010     -0.008        3.547     -0.066
Master's in Nursing                         0.975           0.321      0.327
                                                                                   [0.027]    [0.032]       [0.340]    [0.169]
Master's in Other Science and                                                       -0.038     -0.048        3.245      0.285
                                            0.945           0.536      0.520
Engineering related elds                                                           [0.037]    [0.044]       [0.349]    [0.178]
                                                                                    -0.040     -0.055        3.314     -0.134
Master's in Public Administration           0.960           0.341      0.320
                                                                                   [0.048]    [0.056]       [0.330]    [0.154]
Master's in Physical and related                                                    -0.034     -0.035        3.363      0.090
                                            0.956           0.487      0.575
sciences                                                                           [0.033]    [0.031]       [0.405]    [0.041]
Master's in Other Social and                                                        -0.029     -0.028        3.361      0.094
                                            0.937           0.509      0.485
related sciences                                                                   [0.040]    [0.041]       [0.403]    [0.036]
                                                                                    -0.018     -0.007        3.454      0.085
Master's in Health related elds             0.904           0.457      0.374
                                                                                   [0.036]    [0.017]       [0.373]    [0.046]
Master's in Biology/agricultural/                                                   -0.026     -0.026        3.301      0.048
                                            0.960           0.479      0.490
environmental/life sciences                                                        [0.034]    [0.031]       [0.399]    [0.048]
Master's in Other Non-Science                                                       -0.021     -0.021        3.203     -0.083
                                            0.891           0.385      0.346
and Engineering elds                                                               [0.035]    [0.035]       [0.435]    [0.159]
                                                                                    -0.018     -0.018        3.295      0.069
Master's in Education elds                  0.946           0.286      0.339
                                                                                   [0.032]    [0.031]       [0.423]    [0.047]
                                                                                    -0.025     -0.025        3.352
Master's in Arts                            0.938           0.481      0.388
                                                                                   [0.033]    [0.021]       [0.320]
Master's in Psychology and Social                                                   -0.020     -0.017        3.368      0.042
                                            0.952           0.383      0.327
Work                                                                               [0.037]    [0.031]       [0.409]    [0.048]
                                                                                    -0.027     -0.026        3.418      0.104
Master's in Humanity elds                   0.951           0.374      0.420
                                                                                   [0.033]    [0.029]       [0.364]    [0.149]
                                                                                    -0.027     -0.031        3.373      0.067
All elds                                    0.849           0.405      0.501
                                                                                   [0.036]    [0.033]       [0.404]    [0.012]
Note: Weighted summary statistics and regression results reported for analysis about individuals who go directly to graduate
school. We use the same set of sampling restrictions while relaxing the requirement that people defer going to graduate school.
Column 1 presents the fraction of people who defer graduate school. Columns 2 and 3 present the fraction of people with college
educated father by whether the individuals go directly to graduate school. Columns 4 and 5 present the mean and [standard
deviation] of a race\Hispanic wage index by whether the individuals go directly to graduate school. The race\Hispanic wage
index of each person is the coecient of his/her race\Hispanic category in the FE-cg earnings regression, without restricting
to people who defer graduate school.    Column 6 presents the mean and [standard deviation] of GPA for people who defer
graduate school. Column 7 presents the gap in GPA between people who go directly and people who defer graduate school,
estimated from a regression that controls for advanced eld, BA eld, and year graduated from BA to account for GPA ination.
Since undergraduate GPA is only available for people who entered the SESTAT system through the Survey of Recent College
Graduates, we have GPA for less than 30 individuals who go directly to get a master's in arts. We leave that cell blank.


                                                              77
          Table B11: Return to graduate education by whether people go to graduate school directly


                                                                                                 FE-cg w/ post Adv
                                                                       FE-cg
                                                                                                   exp. interaction
   Advanced degree                                                                                       
                                                        Baseline         Advgodirect         Baseline        Advgodirect
                                                            (1)                  (2)              (3)               (4)
                                                          0.441                0.117            0.646              0.058
   Medicine
                                                         (0.072)               (0.019)         (0.085)            (0.019)
                                                          0.384                0.107            0.471              0.083
   Law
                                                         (0.058)               (0.020)         (0.056)            (0.020)
                                                          0.185                0.054            0.268              0.025
   Master's in Business related elds
                                                         (0.044)               (0.045)         (0.044)            (0.044)
                                                          0.094                0.004            0.187             -0.031
   MBA
                                                         (0.021)               (0.021)         (0.021)            (0.020)
                                                          0.097                0.081            0.200              0.049
   Master's in Engineering
                                                         (0.018)               (0.013)         (0.019)            (0.013)
   Master's in Computer and mathematical                  0.173                0.115            0.231              0.104
   sciences                                              (0.034)               (0.028)         (0.033)            (0.028)
   Master's in Health Services                            0.264                -0.114           0.301             -0.110
   Administration                                        (0.093)               (0.092)         (0.091)            (0.092)
                                                          0.235                -0.117           0.164             -0.092
   Master's in Nursing
                                                         (0.041)               (0.050)         (0.038)            (0.050)
   Master's in Other Science and                          -0.026               0.138            0.032              0.086
   Engineering related elds                              (0.056)               (0.062)         (0.056)            (0.059)
                                                          0.183                -0.007           0.268             -0.038
   Master's in Public Administration
                                                         (0.053)               (0.126)         (0.054)            (0.115)
                                                          0.123                0.122            0.289              0.083
   Master's in Physical and related sciences
                                                         (0.055)               (0.064)         (0.052)            (0.064)
   Master's in Other Social and related                   0.079                0.090            0.167              0.069
   sciences                                              (0.056)               (0.038)         (0.057)            (0.038)
                                                          0.203                0.024            0.242              0.032
   Master's in Health related elds
                                                         (0.053)               (0.035)         (0.054)            (0.035)
   Master's in Biology/agricultural/                      0.170                0.128            0.333              0.099
   environmental/life sciences                           (0.045)               (0.044)         (0.046)            (0.046)
   Master's in Other Non-Science and                      0.099                0.075            0.187              0.040
   Engineering elds                                      (0.057)               (0.043)         (0.056)            (0.043)
                                                          0.153                0.046            0.222              0.011
   Master's in Education elds
                                                         (0.019)               (0.018)         (0.018)            (0.018)
                                                          -0.039               0.066            0.020              0.016
   Master's in Arts
                                                         (0.098)               (0.094)         (0.102)            (0.094)
                                                          0.195                0.066            0.256              0.049
   Master's in Psychology and Social Work
                                                         (0.029)               (0.032)         (0.030)            (0.031)
                                                          0.009                0.168            0.067              0.121
   Master's in Humanity elds
                                                         (0.062)               (0.058)         (0.060)            (0.058)
   (   g1-28 )
Note: The table reports estimates of returns to advanced degrees for two regressions. We use the same set of sampling restrictions
while relaxing the requirement that people worked before going to graduate school. In both regressions we allow people who go
directly to graduate school to have dierent returns than those who work before attending graduate school, by interacting the
dummy for going directly with advanced eld. Columns 1 and 2 use the same set of controls as the additive FE-cg regression
(Table 5, column 1).   Column 1 presents the return to advanced elds for people who delay graduate school, and column 2
presents the additional return for people who go directly to graduate school. Columns 3 and 4 use the same set of controls as the
additive FE-cg regression with post advanced degree experience interactions (Table 5 column 4). Column 3 presents the equally
weighted average return from 1 to 28 years after graduated school the advanced degree, i.e.   g1-28 ,   for people who delay going
to graduate school. Column 4 presents the additional return for people who go directly to graduate school.




                                                                  78
                                 Table B12: Internal rate of return to advanced degrees based on              
                                                                                                              gx

                                 Duration     Annual                                           Percentage      Internal     Annual      Internal
 Advanced eld                                               Net PDV              PDV
                                   of the     Tuition                                         gain from the     rate of     Tuition     rate of
                                                              Actual         counterfactual
                                 advanced     (public)                                          advanced        return     (private)     return
                                   degree                                                        degree        (public)                (private)
                                    (1)          (2)            (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)        (7)         (8)

 Medicine                            4         13,317       1,749,356          1,195,320         46.073          0.128      31,807       0.110


 Law                                 3         16,697       1,447,321          1,112,711         29.889          0.131      28,555       0.116

 Master's in Business
                                     2         6,736        1,564,818          1,362,839         14.760          0.122      12,302       0.114
 related elds

 MBA                                 2         9,311        1,498,757          1,412,722          6.024          0.083      13,807       0.079


 Master's in Engineering             1         8,131        1,597,105          1,410,017         13.245          0.150      14,058       0.142

 Master's in Computer and
                                     1         8,131        1,489,751          1,271,668         17.100          0.193      14,058       0.181
 mathematical sciences
 Master's in Health Services
                                     2         6,736        1,318,574          1,110,790         18.559          0.140      12,302       0.131
 Administration

 Master's in Nursing                 2         8,131        1,671,515          1,576,468          6.013          0.095      14,058       0.088

 Master's in Other Science and
                                     1         8,131        1,134,376          1,200,232         -5.590          0.017      14,058       0.015
 Engineering related elds
 Master's in Public
                                     2         6,736        1,297,170          1,149,133         12.753          0.106      12,302       0.100
 Administration
 Master's in Physical and
                                     1         8,131        1,169,990           953,526          22.629          0.182      14,058       0.170
 related sciences
 Master's in Other Social and
                                     1         6,736        1,453,844          1,326,920          9.503          0.121      12,302       0.115
 related sciences

 Master's in Health related elds 2             8,131        1,146,890          1,002,601         14.281          0.134      14,058       0.121

 Master's in Bio/agricultural/
                                     1         8,131        1,011,181           785,955          28.580          0.242      14,058       0.221
 environmental/life sciences
 Master's in Other Non-Science
                                     1         6,736        1,004,275           897,306          11.863          0.143      12,302       0.132
 and Engineering elds

 Master's in Education elds          1         6,736         967,050            836,826          15.503          0.173      12,302       0.158


 Master's in Arts                    2         6,736         859,923            963,971          -10.877       Negative     12,302     Negative

 Master's in Psychology and
                                     2         6,736         901,674            805,382          11.822          0.103      12,302       0.094
 Social Work

 Master's in Humanity elds           1         6,736         844,386            843,110           0.115          0.051      12,302       0.046

Note: The statistics are calculated from regression coecients underlying the FE-cg estimates with post-advanced degree experience specic eects
reported in Table 5, column 4. For each advanced degree, we calculate the predicted value of actual income in levels (with graduate education) and
counterfactual income (without graduate education) from age 27 to 59. When evaluating the log earnings model we set the earnings error term
to 0, the parental education variables to their weighted sample means and the calendar year to 2012. We also set the race\ethnicity indicators to
non-Hispanic white. For each graduate degree we calculate the population weighted average of predicted earnings at each age over the distribution
of gender and of undergraduate major for that graduate degree. We subtract the tuition of the graduate degree from people's actual income to
obtain net income. We assume graduate programs are full-time, and students have zero earnings when they are enrolled. The assumed duration of
the degree is in Column 1. The average tuition at public institutions in 2012 from the National Center of Education Statistics is in column 2. Then
we calculate the present discounted value of the lifetime net income, assuming the interest rate is 0.05. Column 3 is the PDV of actual income
net of tuition. Column 4 is the PDV of counterfactual income. All monetary values in the table are in 2013 dollars. Column 5 is the percentage
increase in net income 100((Col. 3-Col. 4)/Col. 4). In column 6, we report estimates of the internal rate of return of each advanced eld at
public institutions. The internal rate of return is the discount factor that equates actual and counterfactual lifetime net income. In column 7, we
present the average tuition at private institutions in 2012 from the National Center of Education Statistics. In column 8, we report estimates of
the internal rate of return of each advanced eld at private institutions.




                                                                        79
                    Table B13: Earnings related summary statistics by advanced degree: Men


                                                                    Average BA       Average      Advanced        Fraction
                                       Earnings      ln(earnings)      major       occupation         eld         Working
                                                                     premium        premium      composition      Full time

                                        179,162         11.901         0.227          0.447
Medicine                                                                                             4.634          0.883
                                        [108,708]       [0.669]        [0.104]       [0.176]
                                        138,966         11.636         0.244          0.262
Law                                                                                                  8.332          0.918
                                        [97,718]        [0.662]        [0.115]       [0.133]

Master's in Business related            131,611         11.611         0.334          0.142
                                                                                                     8.742          0.892
elds                                    [90,494]        [0.593]        [0.122]       [0.188]
                                        120,089         11.559         0.335          0.129
MBA                                                                                                 17.775          0.907
                                        [71,042]        [0.530]        [0.129]       [0.212]
                                        104,112         11.452         0.444          0.168
Master's in Engineering                                                                             10.873          0.893
                                        [51,217]        [0.466]        [0.083]       [0.138]

Master's in Computer and                104,452         11.447         0.369          0.118
                                                                                                     6.677          0.866
mathematical sciences                   [52,789]        [0.484]        [0.126]       [0.164]

Master's in Health Services             115,731         11.507         0.229          0.146
                                                                                                     0.821          0.910
Administration                          [71,035]        [0.555]        [0.107]       [0.235]
                                        139,359         11.766         0.316          0.099
Master's in Nursing                                                                                  0.408          0.874
                                        [58,539]        [0.409]        [0.064]       [0.119]

Master's in Other Science and            94,570         11.328         0.289          0.034
                                                                                                     2.256          0.899
Engineering related elds                [57,539]        [0.509]        [0.116]       [0.218]

Master's in Public                       95,825         11.357         0.219          0.103
                                                                                                     1.915          0.897
Administration                          [46,146]        [0.494]        [0.104]       [0.237]

Master's in Physical and related         88,163         11.232         0.271          0.034
                                                                                                     2.223          0.812
sciences                                [48,463]        [0.594]        [0.089]       [0.189]

Master's in Other Social and             91,206         11.236         0.227          0.003
                                                                                                     3.595          0.807
related sciences                        [65,066]        [0.610]        [0.129]       [0.253]

Master's in Health                      100,243         11.360         0.226          0.068
                                                                                                     2.047          0.847
related elds                            [63,802]        [0.564]        [0.140]       [0.249]

Master's in Bio/agricultural/            74,364         11.082         0.167          -0.083
                                                                                                     3.047          0.821
environmental/life sciences             [43,550]        [0.527]        [0.092]       [0.216]

Master's in Other Non-Science            77,734         11.135         0.162          -0.071
                                                                                                     2.228          0.856
and Engineering elds                    [44,125]        [0.507]        [0.100]       [0.244]
                                         74,295         11.134         0.113          -0.133
Master's in Education elds                                                                          13.285          0.742
                                        [34,914]        [0.404]        [0.112]       [0.229]
                                         71,597         11.002         0.073          -0.160
Master's in Arts                                                                                     1.732          0.667
                                        [57,582]        [0.585]        [0.104]       [0.210]

Master's in Psychology and               74,452         11.093         0.131          -0.117
                                                                                                     3.920          0.818
Social Work                             [39,684]        [0.510]        [0.093]       [0.265]
                                         62,565         10.888         0.127          -0.312
Master's in Humanity elds                                                                            5.490          0.779
                                        [43,649]        [0.549]        [0.122]       [0.287]
                                        105,265         11.390         0.262          0.062
Total                                                                                                 100           0.855
                                        [71,933]        [0.591]        [0.157]       [0.269]
Note: Columns 1-4 repeat the statistics presented in Table 1 while restricting the sample to men. Weighted means and [standard
deviations] are reported.
Column 5: Percentages reported for observations with each advanced degree and gender combination.
Column 6: The fraction of full time worker is reported for each advanced degree on the sample of people between 23 and 59
years old, and who obtained their BA degree after 19 years old. The sample excludes people with PhD degrees now or in the
future and people who attend graduate school directly after college completion. The sample also excludes observations of people
enrolled in advanced degrees.




                                                              80
                 Table B14: Earnings related summary statistics by advanced degree: Women


                                                                   Average BA       Average       Advanced      Fraction
                                       Earnings     ln(earnings)       major       occupation           eld     Working
                                                                     premium        premium      composition    Full time

                                        130,634         11.562         0.219          0.432
Medicine                                                                                               2.565     0.708
                                        [85,508]       [0.694]        [0.094]        [0.193]
                                        108,433         11.417         0.203          0.249
Law                                                                                                    5.212     0.748
                                        [71,221]       [0.606]        [0.104]        [0.155]

Master's in Business                     98,129         11.348         0.296          0.091
                                                                                                       3.826     0.715
related elds                            [63,646]       [0.541]        [0.126]        [0.202]
                                         95,271         11.328         0.275          0.073
MBA                                                                                                    8.615     0.751
                                        [53,749]       [0.537]        [0.131]        [0.217]
                                         87,879         11.277         0.420          0.139
Master's in Engineering                                                                                2.137     0.755
                                        [49,485]       [0.474]        [0.107]        [0.153]

Master's in Computer and                 85,506         11.238         0.325          0.062
                                                                                                       3.478     0.719
mathematical sciences                   [42,739]       [0.507]        [0.135]        [0.197]

Master's in Health Services              85,117         11.247         0.233          0.050
                                                                                                       1.423     0.756
Administration                          [41,719]       [0.463]        [0.106]        [0.212]
                                         91,394         11.354         0.330          0.067
Master's in Nursing                                                                                    3.475     0.665
                                        [37,239]       [0.380]        [0.046]        [0.167]

Master's in Other Science and            77,102         11.140         0.255         -0.001
                                                                                                       0.867     0.721
Engineering related elds                [36,561]       [0.500]        [0.121]        [0.219]

Master's in Public                       77,428         11.135         0.201          0.002
                                                                                                       1.614     0.770
Administration                          [38,849]       [0.521]        [0.101]        [0.267]

Master's in Physical and related         69,018         10.999         0.244         -0.047
                                                                                                       0.970     0.678
sciences                                [37,935]       [0.563]        [0.098]        [0.182]

Master's in Other Social and             68,728         11.002         0.185         -0.075
                                                                                                       3.668     0.627
related sciences                        [41,043]       [0.524]        [0.116]        [0.250]

Master's in Health                       70,893         11.081         0.160         -0.016
                                                                                                       6.442     0.600
related elds                            [32,073]       [0.429]        [0.114]        [0.200]

Master's in Bio/agricultural/            63,226         10.937         0.180         -0.098
                                                                                                       3.027     0.666
environmental/life sciences             [33,870]       [0.493]        [0.096]        [0.197]

Master's in Other Non-Science            62,389         10.950         0.140         -0.192
                                                                                                       3.674     0.639
and Engineering elds                    [32,159]       [0.427]        [0.095]        [0.221]
                                         61,990         10.962         0.079         -0.228
Master's in Education elds                                                                             32.382    0.584
                                        [25,764]       [0.389]        [0.098]        [0.180]
                                         57,886         10.827         0.070         -0.170
Master's in Arts                                                                                       1.895     0.474
                                        [32,914]       [0.540]        [0.082]        [0.204]

Master's in Psychology and               59,916         10.905         0.112         -0.199
                                                                                                       10.552    0.648
Social Work                             [30,524]       [0.439]        [0.076]        [0.216]
                                         59,838         10.886         0.147         -0.216
Master's in Humanity elds                                                                              4.179     0.550
                                        [31,746]       [0.481]        [0.085]        [0.230]
                                         74,078         11.082         0.167         -0.082
Total                                                                                                   100      0.641
                                        [44,595]       [0.506]        [0.137]        [0.260]
Note: This table repeats the statistics presented in Table B13, but restricting the sample to women.




                                                             81
                                  Table B15: Returns to graduate education by undergraduate elds



                                                                                                             Occupation                     # of pre Adv
           Advanced eld   Undergraduate eld                                    ln(earnings)                                     Earnings
                                                                                                              premium                       earnings obs

                                                                           FE-cg               FE-cg Avg
                                                                FE-cg
                                                                        
                                                                                      OLS                  FE-cg
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                       OLS       Mean       person-year
                                                                            full               128 years                          [SD]        [person]
                                                                                                g1-28
                                                                  (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)           (8)
                                                                -0.107     -0.049    0.335       0.005     0.114      0.162     104,487         140
                          Bio/agricultural/environmental sci.
                                                                (0.087)    (0.089)   (0.038)    (0.089)    (0.036)    (0.015)   [71,152]        [70]
                                                                0.157      0.185     0.239       0.215     0.008      0.062     106,338         110
                          Business
                                                                (0.065)    (0.062)   (0.016)    (0.063)    (0.016)    (0.006)   [63,644]        [90]
                                                                0.093      0.086     0.244       0.127     0.007      0.051     111,408         220
                          Computer and mathematical sci.
                                                                (0.053)    (0.053)   (0.026)    (0.053)    (0.018)    (0.010)   [63,853]       [120]
                                                                0.098      0.171     0.280       0.200     -0.006     0.069     124,810         100
                          Economics
     (1)   MBA                                                  (0.070)
                                                                0.083
                                                                           (0.057)
                                                                           0.127
                                                                                     (0.036)
                                                                                     0.221
                                                                                                (0.058)
                                                                                                 0.165
                                                                                                           (0.028)
                                                                                                           0.002
                                                                                                                      (0.013)
                                                                                                                      0.037
                                                                                                                                [79,541]
                                                                                                                                125,730
                                                                                                                                                [60]
                                                                                                                                                870
                          Engineering
                                                                (0.024)    (0.023)   (0.013)    (0.024)    (0.010)    (0.005)   [68,201]       [460]
                                                                0.153      0.200     0.403       0.238     0.052      0.188     103,004         80
                          Other Social and related sci.
                                                                (0.076)    (0.075)   (0.049)    (0.075)    (0.041)    (0.018)   [70,458]        [40]
                                                                0.131      0.159     0.292       0.211     0.063      0.104     116,660         60
                          Physical and related sci.
                                                                (0.123)    (0.119)   (0.049)    (0.119)    (0.042)    (0.020)   [64,735]        [40]
                                                                0.140      0.133     0.399       0.184     0.043      0.194      98,845         80
                          Psychology or Social Work
                                                                (0.102)    (0.100)   (0.042)    (0.100)    (0.037)    (0.019)   [59,509]        [50]
82




                                                                0.271      0.305     0.277       0.328     0.030      0.081     113,906         70
                          Business
           Master's in                                          (0.090)    (0.092)   (0.020)    (0.092)    (0.019)    (0.006)   [81,716]        [60]

     (2)   Business       Economics
                                                                0.039
                                                                (0.105)
                                                                           0.117
                                                                           (0.092)
                                                                                     0.361
                                                                                     (0.045)
                                                                                                 0.133
                                                                                                (0.092)
                                                                                                           -0.011
                                                                                                           (0.025)
                                                                                                                      0.100
                                                                                                                      (0.015)
                                                                                                                                141,223
                                                                                                                                [103,505]
                                                                                                                                                70
                                                                                                                                                [40]
           related elds                                         0.084      0.138     0.269       0.163     0.014      0.030     137,198         150
                          Engineering
                                                                (0.051)    (0.050)   (0.030)    (0.050)    (0.023)    (0.009)   [80,653]        [70]
                                                                0.093      0.163     0.035       0.208     0.026      -0.079     66,709         160
                          Bio/agricultural/environmental sci.
                                                                (0.061)    (0.060)   (0.025)    (0.060)    (0.019)    (0.013)   [37,250]        [80]
                                                                0.175      0.153     -0.147      0.175     0.072      -0.191     69,224         180
                          Computer and mathematical sci.
                                                                (0.066)    (0.066)   (0.026)    (0.066)    (0.029)    (0.017)   [30,063]       [100]
                                                                0.153      0.185     0.204       0.209     0.017      -0.009     64,584         230
                          Education
                                                                (0.028)    (0.025)   (0.008)    (0.025)    (0.009)    (0.004)   [27,230]       [180]

     (3)   Master's in                                          0.174      0.230     0.110       0.254     0.022      -0.064     65,574         170
           Education      Other Social and related sci.
                                                                (0.047)    (0.048)   (0.024)    (0.048)    (0.023)    (0.012)   [31,374]        [90]
                                                                0.172      0.233     -0.128      0.281     0.064      -0.214     66,977         90
                          Physical and related sci.
                                                                (0.078)    (0.075)   (0.045)    (0.076)    (0.048)    (0.019)   [27,996]        [50]
                                                                0.035      0.024     -0.056      0.058     0.039      -0.119     73,058         80
                          Political science
                                                                (0.095)    (0.095)   (0.049)    (0.095)    (0.043)    (0.022)   [38,120]        [40]
                                                                0.243      0.226     0.089       0.266     0.037      -0.074     61,028         190
                          Psychology or Social Work
                                                                (0.043)    (0.043)   (0.018)    (0.043)    (0.021)    (0.010)   [28,240]       [120]
        ...continued

                                                                                                                                      Occupation                   # of pre Adv
                 Advanced eld               Undergraduate eld                                        ln(earnings)                                       Earnings
                                                                                                                                       premium                     earnings obs

                                                                                                 FE-cg               FE-cg Avg
                                                                                      FE-cg
                                                                                              
                                                                                                            OLS                    FE-cg
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                               OLS       Mean      person-year
                                                                                                  full               128 years                            [SD]       [person]
                                                                                                                      g1-28
                                                                                        (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)       (7)           (8)
                                                                                       0.119     0.170     0.110       0.220        0.015     0.038     101,372        1,070

          (4)    Master's in                Engineering
                                                                                      (0.021)    (0.021)   (0.006)    (0.022)      (0.012)    (0.002)   [50,854]       [630]
                 Engineering                Physical and related sci.
                                                                                       0.080     0.137     0.248       0.197        0.044     0.143      99,008          60
                                                                                      (0.085)    (0.082)   (0.022)    (0.082)      (0.040)    (0.006)   [46,062]       [40]

                 Master's in                Computer and mathematical sci.
                                                                                       0.147     0.137     0.142       0.173        0.002     0.023      95,083        330

          (5)    Computer and                                                         (0.055)
                                                                                       0.056
                                                                                                 (0.053)
                                                                                                 0.093
                                                                                                           (0.012)
                                                                                                           0.133
                                                                                                                      (0.054)
                                                                                                                       0.136
                                                                                                                                   (0.015)
                                                                                                                                    0.000
                                                                                                                                              (0.005)
                                                                                                                                              0.034
                                                                                                                                                        [46,515]
                                                                                                                                                        102,825
                                                                                                                                                                       [180]
                                                                                                                                                                       150
                 mathematical sci.          Engineering
                                                                                      (0.050)    (0.047)   (0.015)    (0.047)      (0.013)    (0.004)   [50,290]       [80]

          (6)    Master's in Physical       Physical and related sci.
                                                                                       0.154     0.241     0.057       0.304        0.000     0.011      83,140        190
                 and related sci.                                                     (0.061)    (0.058)   (0.018)    (0.059)      (0.025)    (0.007)   [47,637]       [130]

          (7)    Master's in Bio/           Bio/agricultural/environmental sci.
                                                                                       0.274     0.335     0.017       0.388        0.039     -0.015     66,208        190
                 agri/env/life sci.                                                   (0.054)    (0.054)   (0.013)    (0.054)      (0.017)    (0.006)   [39,591]       [120]

          (8)    Master's in Nursing        Nursing
                                                                                       0.248
                                                                                      (0.045)
                                                                                                 0.188
                                                                                                 (0.038)
                                                                                                           0.305
                                                                                                           (0.015)
                                                                                                                       0.170
                                                                                                                      (0.040)
                                                                                                                                    0.020
                                                                                                                                   (0.011)
                                                                                                                                              0.012
                                                                                                                                              (0.006)
                                                                                                                                                         95,418
                                                                                                                                                        [43,342]
                                                                                                                                                                       150
                                                                                                                                                                       [90]
                                                                                       0.331     0.365     0.431       0.376        0.198     0.170      84,859          90

          (9)    Master's in Health         Bio/agricultural/environmental sci.
                                                                                      (0.049)    (0.049)   (0.022)    (0.050)      (0.027)    (0.010)   [45,510]       [50]
83




                 related elds               Health related elds
                                                                                       0.058     0.045     0.109       0.057        0.052     0.042      77,600          70
                                                                                      (0.132)    (0.130)   (0.020)    (0.131)      (0.042)    (0.009)   [47,330]       [40]

               Master's in                  Other Social and related sci.
                                                                                       0.232     0.262     0.101       0.292        0.037     -0.074     63,118          90

          (10) Psychology and                                                         (0.065)
                                                                                       0.238
                                                                                                 (0.067)
                                                                                                 0.208
                                                                                                           (0.019)
                                                                                                           0.090
                                                                                                                      (0.066)
                                                                                                                       0.272
                                                                                                                                   (0.030)
                                                                                                                                    0.024
                                                                                                                                              (0.011)
                                                                                                                                              -0.045
                                                                                                                                                        [28,577]
                                                                                                                                                         62,264
                                                                                                                                                                       [50]
                                                                                                                                                                       290
               Social Work                  Psychology or Social Work
                                                                                      (0.035)    (0.033)   (0.012)    (0.034)      (0.020)    (0.007)   [36,053]       [180]

               Master's in                  Other Social and related sci.
                                                                                       0.151     0.196     0.138       0.236        0.075     0.041      70,954          60

          (11) Other Social                                                           (0.083)
                                                                                       0.036
                                                                                                 (0.081)
                                                                                                 0.027
                                                                                                           (0.020)
                                                                                                           0.079
                                                                                                                      (0.081)
                                                                                                                       0.070
                                                                                                                                   (0.036)
                                                                                                                                    0.105
                                                                                                                                              (0.009)
                                                                                                                                              0.018
                                                                                                                                                        [39,081]
                                                                                                                                                         82,602
                                                                                                                                                                       [40]
                                                                                                                                                                         40
               and related sci.             Political science
                                                                                      (0.146)    (0.132)   (0.035)    (0.130)      (0.065)    (0.015)   [58,283]       [30]
        ( graduate degree sample, which only includes people who have an advanced degree when they are last observed;          FE-cg with experience prole, averaged over 128
        years)
     Note: Estimates of returns to advanced degree by undergraduate elds are reported. Columns 1-4 present estimates from earnings regressions, and columns 5-6 present output
     from occupation premium regressions. Columns 1 and 5 present the returns to each advanced degree by each BA eld from the FE-cg regression. Column 2 presents the returns
     from the FE-cg regression on the full sample. Columns 3 and 6 present the OLS estimates. Column 4 presents       g1-28 ,   the average of return to each advanced degree by BA
     eld from 1 to 28 years of post advanced degree experience.    A detailed explanation of the construction of these averages is provided in the notes for Table B7.    Column 7
     presents the observation-level cell count of pre advanced degree earnings observations for the FE-cg earnings regression (col. 1), which is the regression with smallest sample
     among all regressions reported in this table. Column 8 presents the individual-level cell count of the same regression, which counts multiple observations of one individual as
     one. Unweighted cell counts are rounded to the nearest 10.
