                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 IS FISH BRAIN FOOD OR BRAIN POISON? SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE, METHYL-
               MERCURY AND CHILD COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT

                                      Mark R. Rosenzweig
                                    Rafael J. Santos Villagran

                                       Working Paper 26957
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26957


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Mark R. Rosenzweig and Rafael J. Santos Villagran. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Is Fish Brain Food or Brain Poison? Sea Surface Temperature, Methyl-mercury and Child
Cognitive Development
Mark R. Rosenzweig and Rafael J. Santos Villagran
NBER Working Paper No. 26957
April 2020
JEL No. J13,O15,Q22,Q53

                                         ABSTRACT

We exploit variation in the composition of local fish catches around the time of birth using
administrative and census data on adult cognitive test scores, schooling attainment, and
occupation among coastal populations in Colombia to estimate the causal effects of early-life
consumption of methylmercury (MeHg) and DHA, elements contained in fish, on cognitive
development. Using an IV strategy based on an equilibrium model of fish supply that exploits
time-series variation in oceanic SST anomalies on both coasts of Colombia from 1950 to 2014 as
instruments, we find that net of cohort and municipality fixed effects increases in high-
(low-)MeHg fish catches around a cohort's birth negatively (positively) affect the cohort's verbal
and math test scores upon exiting high school and their likelihood of continuing their schooling,
while increasing (decreasing) the likelihood the cohort is disproportionally represented in
manual-labor occupations.


Mark R. Rosenzweig
Department of Economics
Yale University
Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
mark.rosenzweig@yale.edu

Rafael J. Santos Villagran
Calle 19A No. 1-37 Este
Office W828
Department of Economics
Universidad de Los Andes
Bogota
Colombia
rj.santos@uniandes.edu.co
 




       For pregnant women and very young children in particular, fish can be an essential
       component of a nutritious diet, as it contributes to neurodevelopment during the most
       crucial stages of an unborn or young child's growth. FAO, 2018, p.69.


       Over three billion people in the world obtain 20% of their total animal protein from fish,

with per-capita fish-consumption growing at over 1.8% per year since 1961. While protein is a

smaller percentage of the diets of households in low-income countries, fish in such countries

form a higher fraction of total protein intake compared with populations in high-income

countries. The FAO regards the increased consumption of fish and the relatively greater fish

consumption in developing countries as beneficial, specifically by enhancing the neurological

development of children. However, the United Nations 2018 Global Mercury Assessment report

indicates that the consumption of fish by pregnant women and recent mothers is a "concern" due

to many fish species containing high levels of organic mercury (methylmercury) that inhibit

brain development (UN, 2018, p.52).

       There is medical evidence supporting both points of view on the cognitive benefits and

shortcomings of early-life fish consumption, based on the fact that fish are unique among foods

in containing unusually high levels of elements that both stimulate and inhibit brain development

in fetuses and young children. The beneficial components found in fish and seafood are two of

the three main omega-3 fatty acids - eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid

(DHA). The body cannot produce sufficient amounts of these acids so that consuming fish is

important to maintain optimal levels of these fatty acids in the body. DHA is the principal

omega-3 fatty acid in brain grey matter, and it has been shown that DHA is beneficial for brain

development by promoting the structural development of neurons (Tofail et al., 2006). On the

other hand, methylmercury, which is almost exclusively found in fish, is known to cross the

                                                1 
 
 


blood brain barrier in young children, targeting the central nervous system and inhibiting the

division of neuronal cells and disrupting the cytoarchitecture of the brain (Clarkson, et al., 2003).

         Thus, while fish is indeed brain food, it may also be brain poison. The medical evidence

on the beneficial aspects of fish consumption and specifically of DHA on cognition is large, and

mostly reports positive or insignificant effects on cognitive outcomes. In a major review article

(Innis, 2008) concludes that low levels of DHA reduce cognitive function in infants and young

children. Some of the studies in the medical literature employ randomized control trials. For

example, Drover et al. (2011) follow an RCT in which there is randomized variation in the DHA

content of infant formula during the first year of life. Cognitive tests assessed at 18 months of age

indicate that children with DHA in their formulas had better language skills than did the controls

with no DHA supplementation. MRI studies embedded in RCTs, such as McNamara et al. (2010),

find that DHA supplementation increases prefrontal cortex activation, the brain region associated

with planning complex cognitive behavior, during sustained attention tests among infants.

         None of the evidence on the direct adverse effects of methylmercury (MeHg)

consumption on human cognition, however, are based on RCT's. This is not surprising. While

there are no prohibitions on randomized diet interventions with hypothesized beneficial

supplements, such as iron (Bobonis et al., 2006), or iodine (Field et al., 2009) or proteins

(Puentes et al., 2016) or non-nutrient interventions that are unlikely in the worst case to cause

harm, such as early-age behavioral interventions (e.g., Gertler et al., 2014), it is not possible to

undertake an intervention that feeds poison to human subjects.1 Thus, all of the existing evidence

                                       
1
  For the same reason, it is difficult to identify the effects of the ingestion of inorganic arsenic, found in tubewell
water in Bangladesh, for example, on human outcomes using an RCT. Pitt el al. (forthcoming) use molecular
genetics models and variation in family linkages to identify arsenic ingestion on cognitive ability and health
outcomes. Here we use climate models and findings from marine biology and medical science to aid in the
identification of the effects of methylmercury consumption.

                                                             2 
 
 


on the adverse cognitive effects of methylmercury is observational, based for example on the

methylmercury found in the hair samples of mothers and assessments of their young children.2

Because the variation in methylmercury consumption is based on dietary choices, the findings,

for example, that populations near coasts, with elevated fish consumption and high measured

mercury found in hair samples, are characterized by children with lower IQ, cannot rule out that

low incomes are the fundamental cause.

        There are thus three main deficiencies in the existing medical evidence on the effects of

fish consumption on the brain development of children. First, no individual study separates the

distinct effects of DHA and methylmercury, as is noted in the medical literature (Kvestad et al.

(2018). Second, there is little evidence linking early-age fish consumption to adult outcomes.

Third, there is no causal evidence on the adverse effects of the methylmercury content of fish on

cognitive development in human populations at any age.

        In this paper, we exploit variation in the composition of local fish catches around the time

of birth using large-scale administrative and census data on adult cognitive test scores, schooling

attainment, and occupation among coastal populations in Colombia to estimate the distinct causal

effects of both methylmercury and DHA on cognitive development. Our identification strategy

uses the insights and models of climate science and marine biology, embedded in an equilibrium

economic model in which exogenous changes in relative fish supplies affect relative prices.


                                    
2
  An exception is Kvestad et al. (2018) RCT, which attempted to assess the effects of methylmercury (MeHg)
consumption among children on cognitive tests. In their study, children 4 to 6 years old are randomized lunch meals
with fish or meat for 16 weeks. However, the fish lunch meal consisted of Mackerels and Herrings, which are fish
species with low mercury content, as we document below. Thus, while Total Hair MeHg (THHg) increased in the
fish group, children in that group outperformed children in the meat group in cognitive tests. One cannot rule out
that children supplemented with fish experienced the benefits from the Docosahexaenoic content of these low-
mercury fish, which is what we find. There are two other limitations to the study design: First, parents might have
responded to the meal interventions by adjusting nutrition within the household. Second, the intervention period
does not correspond to the period when the brain is forming.

                                                         3 
 
 


Bacteria in the sea transform inorganic mercury that is in water to methylmercury, with the

amounts of the latter in fish increasing along the fish food chain.3 Fish species thus differ in their

MeHg content because of this biomagnification, with MeHg empirically uncorrelated with DHA

across species. Because fish also differ in the range of water temperatures in which they thrive,

changes in sea surface temperatures (SSTs) due to climate (trade winds) variation alter the

relative supplies of low- and high-MeHg fish from year to year but there is no literature that

suggests that SST variation, except via rainfall fluctuations, have direct effects on human brain

development.

         Using an IV strategy that exploits time-series variation in oceanic SST anomalies on both

coasts of Colombia as instruments, net of municipality fixed effects, we find that increases in

high MeHg fish catches around a cohort's birth, net of rainfall variation in the same interval,

negatively affect the cohort's verbal and math test scores upon exiting high school and their

likelihood of continuing their schooling, while positively increasing the likelihood the cohort is

disproportionally represented in manual-labor occupations. In contrast, for given levels of early-

life high-MeHg fish supply, increases in early-life catch sizes of low-MeHg fish raise verbal and

math test scores and educational attainment and lower the likelihood of being a manual laborer.

We find no evidence, however, that variation in the composition of fish supply at later ages,

given the variation in early childhood, has any effect on these adult outcomes, consistent with the

fact that children are more vulnerable to the ingestion of poisons because of the incomplete

development of the adult blood-brain barrier at young ages (Currie and Vogl, 2013). We also


                                     
3
  There are two sources of inorganic mercury that is found in the sea ­ pollution of the air, primarily by coal-
burning, from industry, dating back to the industrial revolution and direct seepage mainly from the historical mining
of gold in the Americas. The vast majority of mercury is from the sixteenth century, as mercury is an indestructible
inorganic element. Reduction in industrial emissions today thus will have little effect on the mercury content of the
world's waters for the foreseeable future.

                                                          4 
 
 


find that while the net effect of total fish catches around birth on these skill measures is

insignificant, increases in the total catch size, but not the composition of the catch, increase

height, consistent with fish being a high-protein food and with MeHg affecting only brain

development and not physical growth.

       The issue of the cognitive effects of fish consumption on cognitive outcomes is

particularly salient not only for low-income countries but for poor populations within those

countries. In Colombia, fish is significantly more likely to be fed to young children among the

poorest households, even among households not residing near coasts. The 2010 Demographic

and Health Survey for Colombia provides information on foods fed to children aged 9-24 months

in the day before the survey. Figure 1 displays the fraction of children in this age group by the

five household wealth categories provided in the survey for the all mothers in Colombia aged 13-

49 and for those residing in coastal communities. The data, weighted to be representative of the

population in the survey year, indicate that for Colombia as a whole, children in the bottom 20%

of the wealth distribution are over three times more likely to be fed fish than children whose

mothers are in the middle wealth category. Among those children residing on the Colombia

coasts, the ratio across wealth categories is similarly high, but the children on the coasts in the

lowest wealth category are 1.7 times more likely to be fed fish than the average Colombian child

in the same household wealth category.

       Figure 2 shows that children in the poorest households are also less likely to consume

animal protein compared with children residing in all other households, although the wealth

gradient is far less steep. Together, Figures 1 and 2 indicate that fish constitutes a much larger




                                                  5 
 
 


fraction of overall protein consumption among children in the poorest households in Colombia.4

Figure 3 based on data from the second round of the Encuesta Longitudinal Colombiana de la

Universidad de los Andes (ELCA, 2013) hints at the cognitive effects of overall fish

consumption. These data provide results for the Ravens test for children aged three to nine years

and are representative of the population in the four (of six) bottom income categories in the

Colombia population. The households are geo-coded, enabling construction of a measure of

coastal distance for each household. The figure shows, by per-capita income quintiles, age-

standardized test scores for children in communities less than and more than 100 kilometers from

a coast. As can be seen, test scores are lower in the bottom two income categories among coastal

as opposed to non-coastal children. This gap is statistically significant. However, the pattern is

reversed in the next two quintiles, despite the fact that fish consumption among young children is

still much more likely in coastal households in these categories. These patterns of course are only

informative about the average effects of fish consumption. They key point of the literature on the

properties of fish is that the composition of fish consumed matters, given the potential opposite

effects of DHA and MeHg and the heterogeneity across fish species in both elements.

            Our study of the causal effects of low-MeHg and high-MeHg fish availability around the

birth of children ­ from conception through age three ­ on later-life outcomes is part of a large

and still growing economics literature using natural experiments examining the life-cycle effects

of early-age environmental and economic change. Studies of this type in low-income countries

focus, however, on the overall effects of income deprivation. For example, Adhvaryu et al.

(2019) exploit early-life variations in cocoa prices on adult mental health in Ghana, but as cocoa



                                       
4
     Overall (not shown), children aged 9 to 24 months in the lowest wealth category are 50% more likely to have not
            been fed any protein compared with children in the rest of the population.

                                                            6 
 
 


is a major exported cash crop, the variation in price identifies income effects. Thus, there are

multiple mechanisms by which the forcing variable and the outcomes are linked and it is not

possible to identify the causal effect of any one mechanism. Maccini and Yang's (2009) study of

the effects of early-life rainfall on adult outcomes in Indonesia does not identify the specific

behaviors due to deprivation that affect the outcomes examined. Our study uses variations in

early-life fish supply which, by affecting relative prices in equilibrium, affect diet composition,

from which we can, as we show, separately identify the negative cognitive effects of high-MeHg

and the positive cognitive effects of low-MeHg fish consumption.

        Given that the source of MeHg in fish is a pollutant, mercury, our study also contributes

to the literature on the direct effects of early-life exposure to pollutants (e.g., Almond et al.,

2009). And, given that our principle determinant of the variation in fish supply composition is

climate variation, our study also links to the literature on the effects of climate variation around

birth on human outcomes (e.g., Deschenes et al., 2009), although our study identifies a specific

mechanism linking climate variability in childhood to adult cognition.

        In section II, we set out a simple price-theory consumption model to first illustrate the

difficulty of identifying the effects of low-and high-mercury fish on cognition from any RCT that

subsidizes low-mercury fish consumption, which would be the only feasible experiment. The

main message is that it is not possible to identify the sign of the effect on any outcome measure

from encouraging a switch to any specific food, as the effect will depend on which other foods

are consumed less and on their effects. We then embed the model in a general-equilibrium

context to show that by using information on aggregate fish catches of the two types of fish we

can identify the sign of the effects of each fish type on cognition if fish markets are local.




                                                   7 
 
 


        Section III contains a description of the data on catch sizes by fish species on the Atlantic

and Pacific coasts of Colombia covering the period 1950-2014, information on the DHA and

MeHg content of the 43 locally-caught and consumed fish species, and displays the time-series

of Atlantic and Pacific SSTs over the same period. Using the definition of SST anomalies

(temperature changes) used by climate scientists to define El Niño and La Niña episodes in the

Pacific, we show that by using eight variables that categorize these anomalies by incidences of

negative and positive deviations along with the mean values of those deviations on each coast,

we can explain over 30% of the variation in total fish catches and over a third of the variation in

high-MeHg fish catches over the 65-year period due to the heterogeneity in temperature ranges in

which fish species can survive. We also show that our SST variable set for the Pacific coast

explains as much of the variation in Colombia sea-coast rainfall (90%) over the period 1963-

2015 as does the set of variables used in the standard Ocean Niño Index (ONI) model of climate

scientists.

        In section IV we show using the Colombia DHS that with a large set of controls

characterizing mothers and households, young children in coastal municipalities are twice as

likely to be fed fish compared with non-coast children and that within coastal municipalities fish

is significantly more likely to be fed to children the higher the proportion of the municipality's

border that is oceanic coastline. We also show that the relationship between retail price of fish

and distance to the coast has a negative gradient, while that for meat has a positive gradient. We

then estimate, using the time-series of total fish catches and the (real) price series of fish, the

effect of total fish supply on the real price of fish using an IV strategy in which the eight SST

anomalies variables are used to predict fish catch size. The estimates indicate, as expected, that,




                                                   8 
 
 


net of rainfall variation, the coastal fish price is lower when fish are abundant, as is assumed in

the model, with the IV estimate indicating that the OLS relationship is positively biased.

       In the next section we describe our identification strategy for estimating the early-life

causal effects of the supply of low- and high-MeHg fish by pregnant mothers and young children

on children's skill outcomes (test scores, schooling, occupation classification) later in life. The

IV-FE econometric model exploits the relationships between the SST variables and species-

specific fish catches and the fact that within coastal areas the fraction of the coastline matters for

fish consumption. The key exclusion restriction is that, conditional on rainfall and municipality

and cohort fixed effects, the set of anomalies in ocean-specific SSTs affect skill outcomes only

through their effects on the variation in the fish catches.

       Section VI contains the estimates, based on government administrative records of the

exams (SABER 11) taken by all exiting high school seniors in Colombia in the years 1980

through 2015, of the effects of early childhood fish catches on both math and verbal achievement

test scores. The IV-FE estimates indicate that while total catch sizes in the first four years of life

post conception have no significant effects on either test score, increases in early-life high-MeHg

fish catches, net of the size of the low-MeHg fish catch around birth, significantly decrease both

scores at age 17, while for given size of early-life high-MeHg fish supply, an increase in the size

of the low-MeHg catch significantly increases both test scores. These findings, which are robust

to the inclusion of early-life rainfall variation, are consistent with the medical literature and

folklore that fish is indeed "brain" food, but represent as far as we know the first casual estimates

indicating that some fish, because of their MeHg content, are poison for the brain.

       In the next section, we show in a placebo test using a long time-series of administrative

records on all applicants around age 18 seeking a government ID card that, consistent with the

                                                   9 
 
 


medical literature indicating that early-life protein affects adult height, an increase in the total

fish catch around birth increases height. However, as expected, the composition of the fish catch

with respect to MeHg does not affect physical growth. We also show using the test score records

that early-in-life fish catch sizes matter more for cognitive development than do fish catch

variations occurring later in the life cycle, as suggested by the medical literature on child

development.

        In section VIII we use data from the Colombia Census of 1993 to estimate the effects of

the composition of around-birth coastal fish catches on adult schooling attainment and

occupation for persons born in coastal municipalities. Consistent with our findings on test scores,

we find that early-life high-MeHg fish catches lower the probability of attaining any post-

secondary schooling and increase the probability that one has a manual-labor job, while the

opposite is true, ceteris paribus, for the size of the low-MeHg fish catch. Finally, in the

conclusion we summarize our findings in the context of the externalities of industrial pollution

and suggest how climate change may alter diets and the future cognitive development of children

in poor families.

II. Model

    We set out a simple price-theory consumption model to first illustrate the difficulty of

identifying the effects of low-and high-mercury fish on cognition from an experiment randomly

subsidizing low-mercury fish consumption. This generalizes to the fact that it is not possible to

identify the sign of the effect on any health measure from encouraging a switch to any particular

food, as the effect will depend on which other foods are consumed less and on their effects on

health. We then embed the model in a general-equilibrium context to show that using



                                                  10 
 
 


information on aggregate fish catches of the two types of fish can identify the sign of the effects

of each fish type on cognition if fish markets are local.

      We assume that a household with a very young child jointly consumes three foods that are

imperfect substitutes in the utility function U ­ low-mercury and high-mercury fish (L and H,

respectively) as well as another food C. Both types of fish are produced locally, and not

tradeable, while the third consumption good C (e.g, beef) is a tradeable good whose price does

not depend on the supply of local fish. The household also derives utility from the cognitive skill

s of its single child. The utility function is:


(1)                                      U  u  L, H , C   v  s 


         Fish are "brain food" and cognitive skill is a Cobb-Douglas function of the two types of

fish and other tradable inputs such as books, school tuition, represented by x:


(2)                                               s  L H  x  .


The medical literature suggests that   0 and   0 - low mercury fish increases cognitive skill

because of omega-3, but mercury-laden fish, which also contain omega-3, block cognitive

development among young children, it is poison. The household is unaware of the differential

effects of the two types of fish, and just believes that any fish is "brain food":


(3)                                     s  s  L  H , x  , s1 , s2  0


         Child height, to which the household is indifferent, is also a function of all three foods.

We assume innocuously and for simplicity that the three foods, which are protein-rich, have

identical effects on height, where 0        1 , as there is no medical literature indicating

that omega-3 enhances physical growth or that mercury inhibits physical growth:

                                                      11 
 
 


(4)                                          h  H  L C  .


        The household is a price-taker with exogenously-given income Y, and its budget

constraint is


(5)                                    Y  pH H  pL L  px x  C


The household maximizes (1) subject to (3) and (5). The price of the non-local C-good is the

numeraire.

        We now consider an experiment in which we randomly subsidize the price of low-

mercury fish, with the price of high-mercury fish held constant (or, equally, prices of H are equal

level in treatment and control groups) and assess the effect on cognitive skill. Given the solution

to the household's maximization program, it is easy to show that the elasticity of cognitive skill

with respect to a change in pL , s pL , is


(6)                                 s p   L p   H p   xp  0 .
                                       L     L         L      L




        A reduction in the price of low-mercury fish unambiguously increases cognitive skill, if

the medical literature is correct. However, as can be seen in (6), this is due both to the increase in

the consumption of low-mercury (good) fish and to the reduction in high-mercury fish, which is

a substitute (we assume that the effect on the x-good is second-order). The sign of (6) therefore is

not indicative of the individual effects of high-and low-mercury fish. Expression (6) can be

negative as long as  HpL   LpL ; alternatively (6) can be negative if both types of fish have

negative effects on skill and  LpL   HpL ; or (6) can be negative if   0 and   0 . An

experiment subsidizing either type of fish consumption thus does not identify the signs of either

 or  . The experimental result cannot therefore support a warning about the adverse effects of

                                                 12 
 
 


consuming high-mercury fish by pregnant mothers or young children, it only supports a

conclusion that low-mercury fish is better brain food than high-mercury fish.

        Now assume we have information on the aggregate local supply (catches) of low- and

high-mercury fish, K L and K H , respectively, and that there is an increase in K L . As indicated in

Figure 4 given a fixed supply of high-mercury fish KH , and a downward-sloping demand curve

for L, an increase in K L lowers the price of L, pL , so that all of the additional K L is consumed. At

the same time, the decline in pL shifts the demand curve for high-mercury fish downward, given

that H and L are substitutes, such that in the new equilibrium all of the (unchanged) high-

mercury fish catch is consumed as before.

        The effect on cognitive skill at the household level from an increase in the low-mercury

catch, for given high-mercury catch, will depend on by how much the aggregate increase in K L

reduces pL and on  L pL . In elasticity terms, the effect of an increase in K L on s for given fixed KH

is


(7)                                        s K   L K  0 ,
                                              L         L




from which we can see that the sign of  is identified, given that  L K L  0 . Similarly, if there is

an increase in the supply of high-mercury fish, for given low-mercury catch, the sign of  is

identified:


(8)                                        s K   H K  0 ,
                                             H          H




if   0.




                                                  13 
 
 


        The aggregate increase in K L , for given KH , which reduces the price of both H and L,

would also reduce the consumption of the substitute food C whose price, by the tradability

assumption, is unaffected by the local supply of fish. The effect on child height, in elasticity

terms, is given by


(9)                                       h K    L K  C K  ,
                                             L         L       L




from which it can be seen that the height effect from the ceteris paribus increase in the supply of

low-mercury fish may be small even if  is large when fish and other protein-rich foods are

strong substitutes, since  L K L and  c K L are of opposite sign.


        The aggregate fish catch comparative static results assume that variations in K L and KH

move independently of income Y . In the absence of perfect controls for income, a key

identification assumption for identifying the effects of the consumption of fish types on

cognition using aggregate catch data is that Y and K L and KH are not correlated. This is because

Y can have a direct effect on s by altering the amount of x.5 In the Colombia case, even in coastal

municipalities less than two percent of households earn a living from fishing, so there is no

significant direct casual effect of fish supplies on earned income. However, macro shocks to

income might change the demand for fish, and aggregate fish supply may be responsive to

income. What is required for identification is a set of variables that affects the supplies of fish of

the two type that are not correlated with income and do not directly affect cognitive skill net of

fish supplies. We discuss our identification strategy in the next section.


                                 
5
  In an RCT, randomization of the fish price by design would eliminate the correlation between the
treatment price and income.
 

                                                    14 
 
 


        Note that the effect on s or height from an increase in Y, given fixed supplies of fish,

does not identify the conventional income effect, which is for a fixed set of prices. This is

because, as seen in Figure 5 where K F is the aggregate catch of all fish and pF is the equilibrium

price of fish, if there is an increase in demand for fish due to the rise in income, the price of fish

would increase so that supply and demand are equated. The consumption of total fish would thus

stay the same, given the fixed fish catch, but there would be less resources for other inputs

compared to the fixed-price case.

III. Colombia Coastal Fish Supply and Climate Variability

        Colombia has both Atlantic and Pacific coasts: 47 municipalities have coastline (the

municipality is the lowest administrative division in Colombia). The website

www.seaaroundus.org (Lindop et al., 2015; and Wielgus et al., 2010) provides the total amount

of fish caught by year and by ocean off the coasts of Colombia for the period 1950-2014.6 The

data categorize fish by whether they are commercially fished ("industrial"), mainly for export,

and "artisanal" and "subsistence" fish that are consumed locally. It is the latter two categories of

fish that matter in determining the elevated consumption of fish by coastal populations. Figure 6

displays the four-year moving averages of the total catches of locally-consumed fish (artisanal

and subsistence) by year from 1950 to 2014 and by ocean (Atlantic and Pacific).7 As can be seen,


                                   
6
  The general description of these data is found in Zeller et al. (2016). The data augments FAO reported
fish landings by the inclusion of reconstructed data or previously unreported catches and major discards.
The reconstructed catch series for the period 1950-2010 for Colombia are 2.3 times the FAO catch reports
for the same period (Lindop et al., 2015).
 
7
  As discussed below, we will be measuring the supply of low- and high-mercury fish in the four-year
period beginning at conception to capture exposure to healthy and unhealthy fish in early childhood for
cohorts of Colombian children. Thus, all of our measures are based on four-year averages.
 

                                                   15 
 
 


on both coasts the amount of fish caught varies substantially by year, with fluctuations on the

Pacific coast being especially pronounced.

       The amounts of fish caught also vary substantially by species. Colombia has one of the

most diverse marine ecosystems, with 104 species represented in the aggregate catch data.

Species of fish matter for studying the effects of fish consumption on human development

because fish differ, as discussed, in the amounts of methyl mercury they contain. The second

column of Tables 1A and 1B reports the average mercury concentration for each of the 43

species of fish that have been available for consumption on the two Colombia coasts. The lowest

mercury concentration is found in the pink conch (0.009 milligrams per kilogram). The highest

mercury concentration is 1.77 milligrams per kilogram and it is found in hound-sharks and

smooth-hounds, with many levels of mercury concentration represented across all of the species.

       Importantly, two of the elements in high concentrations in fish that affect brain

development - Docosahexaenoic acid or DHA (one of the two beneficial omega-3 fatty acids in

fish) and methylmercury - appear to be distributed randomly across the fish species consumed

on the Colombia coasts with respect to each other. Across the 43 species of non-industrial fish

that are consumed on the coasts, the correlation between DHA and mercury concentration is a

statistically insignificant 0.093. Figure 7 displays the scatterplot for DHA and mercury. We thus

categorize the fish species solely on the basis of mercury content.

       Based on the recommendation of the Natural Resource Defense Council (www.nrdc.org),

which suggests eating less than six serving per month of fish species with more than 0.165 parts

of mercury per million, we used the information on fish-specific mercury concentrations to

separate the total fish catch into high-mercury and low-mercury catches in accord with the

model. Because of the lack of correlation between mercury content and omega-3, low-mercury

                                                16 
 
 


and high-mercury fish thus have on average the same beneficial brain development ingredients.

Figure 8 displays total catch sizes by year and by coast from 1950-2014 for the high- and low-

mercury fish species and Figure 9 plots the average mercury content of the local fish catch by

coast over the same period.

        The substantial variability in the size of the fish catches by mercury concentration across

years exhibited in Figure 8 is not random. One potential factor is variation in climate, whose

mechanisms for the Pacific have been both modeled and tested in the climate science literature.

In the Pacific, changes in sea surface temperatures (SSTs) affect the supply of oceanic nutrients

due to shifts in trade winds, which have been categorized into two classes by climate scientists.

El Niño occurs when the trade winds become weak. Trade winds are supposed to move warm

water from the Eastern to the Western Pacific. When trade winds are weak, warm water remains

in the Pacific. La Niña occurs when the trade winds are strong. Then, the warm water of the

Eastern Pacific is moved in large quantities to the Western Pacific. This climate variation, as we

will see, affects the composition of fish.

        Satellites have been able to measure sea surface phytoplankton, the base of the food web,

for the last 15 years. Reduced upwelling of nutrient phytoplankton rich cold water ­ which

occur, for example, during El Niño in the Pacific- causes species either to migrate or to move

deeper into the sea. The temperature of the sea is also affected by the occurrence of oceanic

waterfronts where currents of different temperatures encounter and generate phytoplankton-rich

waters, attracting fish.

        An important reason why variation in SSTs can affect the supplies of fish by species is

based on the fact that fish are ectotherms; they cannot regulate their body temperature like

humans. And fish species differ in their ability to thrive and survive by water temperature. The

                                                 17 
 
 


third and fourth columns of Tables 1A and 1B report the sea temperature range for which each

fish species is observed in the coastal waters of Colombia (Kaschner et al., 2016). These

temperature intervals also differ significantly by fish species. For example, while flatfish (a low-

mercury fish) are never seen in waters colder than 26.4 degrees Celsius, snappers (a high-

mercury fish) can survive in waters as cold as 20.5 degrees. The most important implication of

this variation is that different species can live in different sea surface temperatures but a given

species would have to migrate if the temperature of the sea changes. Hence, changes in SSTs

potentially cause changes in the composition of fish species in different oceans.

       SSTs also vary substantially across years. In the period 2002-2011, the average minimum

SST in the Pacific was 18 degrees and the average maximum was 29.1 degrees Celsius, the

analogous figures for the Atlantic were 22.9 and 29.8 (Cherrington et al., 2011). These

temperature bounds compare with the average minimums and maximums for the fish species of

21.4 and 31.9 degrees, respectively.

       Climate scientists define El Niño and La Niña episodes in the Pacific based on counts of

SST anomalies, where an anomaly is defined to occur when there is any change in temperature

that exceeds (falls below) 0.5 (-0.5) degrees Celsius. For the Atlantic an anomaly is defined as a

change in SST below or above 0.18 degrees, where the number 0.18 is the value of the standard

deviation in the full time series of Atlantic SST. These anomalies occur frequently on each coast.

Figure 10 displays the number of months in a year where four-year moving average of

temperature deviations centered around each month exceeded the anomaly threshold by year and

Colombian coast over the period 1950-2010. The actual temperature changes in these anomalous

periods often exceeds the thresholds by a considerable margin. Figure 11 plots the four-year

moving averages of the deviations in temperatures for both negative and positive SST anomalies

                                                  18 
 
 


by year and by Colombian coast from 1950-2010. For the Pacific coast, for example, the

averaged mean temperature deviation reached or exceeded one degree in absolute value in five of

the anomalous episodes over the 60-year period.

       Can the variation in SSTs help explain the variation in fish species, and thus the

availability of healthy (low MeHg) and unhealthy (high -MeHg) fish, across years along the

Colombian coasts? There are many factors that affect the dynamics of fish catches. For example,

overfishing, which is likely responsible for the two large peaks in the total fish catch observed in

Figure 6 for the Pacific Coast. SST variation, as noted, may also play a role, but as far as we

know there is no study that relates SST variation to the species composition of fish catches that is

implied by the measured heterogeneity among fish species in livable temperature ranges.

       Table 2 reports regression estimates of the effects of the four SST variation measures

displayed in Figures 10 and 11 on total fish catches and on low- and high-mercury fish species

catch sizes. The four independent variables are the number of months in the year above and

below the coast-specific anomaly threshold and the mean positive and negative temperature

changes in the anomalous months. Because the thresholds differ by ocean, we allow the effect of

each of the four measures on the fish catch dependent variables to vary by coast. We use

observations from 1950 to 1998, the years in which the cohorts of Colombians for whom we

have outcome measures were conceived.

       The set of eight SST variables explains over 30% of the variation in total catch size over

the 48-year period and more than a third of the variation in the catch sizes of the high-mercury

species. The incidence of colder temperatures appears to be the most important factor affecting

the sizes of the fish catches overall and by species, with the effect of opposite signs across the

coasts ­ more and stronger negative temperature deviations evidently lower fish catches on the

                                                 19 
 
 


Pacific Coast but raise them on the Atlantic Coast. Of the positive deviations in temperature,

only the size of those anomalies on the Atlantic Coast matter and only for the size of the catches

of high-Hg fish species, with greater positive deviations increasing catch size only for the high-

mercury fish. This latter result means that variations in low- and high-mercury fish species catch

sizes are not perfectly correlated, which is helpful for identifying the separate effects of the two

types of fish catches on cognitive outcomes.

        Climate variation is not only associated with variability in the stock of fish along the

Colombian coastlines. Unusual changes in trade winds (in the Pacific) also affect the amount of

rainfall, and rainfall may affect incomes in Colombia, where a not insignificant fraction of the

labor force is engaged in agriculture (17% in 2011). In particular, La Niña generates above-

average rains while El Niño generates lower-levels of rainfall and even droughts in most parts of

Colombian territory. The Ocean Niño Index (ONI) model defines an el Niño (la Niña) episode

event as a period with at least five consecutive anomalous warm (cold) months in the sea surface

of the equatorial Pacific (a change above 0.5 degrees Celsius). Using annual rainfall data from

rain stations on both coasts in Colombia from 1963-2015 and information on the Pacific SSTs

we can assess how well the ONI model performs and compare the performance of the ONI

variables with those we have used to predict fish catch variation.8

        In the first column of Table 3 we report the estimates of the effects of the two ONI

variables on Colombian coastal rainfall. The two ONI variables explain almost 90% of rainfall

variation and the coefficient signs are in accord with the ONI model, with unusually cold months

predicting positive rainfall and unusually warm months predicting less rainfall. However, as

                                    
8
 1963 is chosen as the initial year because that is the year in which there were at least five municipalities
with rainfall data/stations on the Pacific coast. In the Appendix, we describe the coastal rainfall data we
use in more detail.

                                                     20 
 
 


Table 3 also shows in the second column, just the numbers of anomalous warm (cold) months in

the Pacific in a given year, among the set of variables we used to predict fish catches, also

predict well rainfall that year, with an R-squared equal to that of the ONI model. Note that while

the ONI model, or SST anomalies, predict rainfall, there is no underlying climate model that

indicates that SSTs cause rainfall variation. The ocean temperature and rainfall variables might

be jointly affected by atmospheric variables.

        Because climate variability is associated with both coastal rainfall and fish supply

composition, to identify the effects of the time-series variation in fish consumption by MeHg

content on cognitive development we will take into account rainfall variation when we estimate

the effects of fish catch variation around the birth of child. This is because rainfall may affect

income in Colombia. Using annual data by state for the period 1979-2015, we regressed the log

of real GDP on rainfall using year and state fixed effects. Table 4 reports the fixed effects

estimates. Based on the wild-bootstrapped standard error, the rainfall coefficient is positive and

weakly statistically significant (one-tailed test) at the 0.06 level.

IV. Fish Consumption and the Coastline

        To estimate the effects of the supply of high- and low-MeHg fish around the time of birth

on cognitive development we want to focus on a population for which fish is a significant

component of the diet of young children. As was seen in Figure 1 based on the 2010 DHS data,

even within income groups fish is much more likely to be fed to children living in coastal

municipalities compared with the rest of Colombia. As noted, the Colombian DHS of 2010

records whether a child less than 24 months old was given a particular food the day before the

survey, including fish, meats, and eggs. The DHS also identifies the municipality of birth for the

child so that we are able to both identify coastal communities and merge to the DHS data

                                                   21 
 
 


additional characteristics of municipalities besides the proximity to the coast of a child in her

first years of life. The DHS also provides information on the characteristics of the mother and the

household in addition to the household wealth categorical variables.

           In the first column of Table 5 we show that the estimated higher propensity to feed fish to

young children aged 9 to 24 months in coastal compared with non-coastal communities indicated

in Figure 1 is robust to a large set of child, maternal, household and municipality-level controls.9

The point estimate indicates that net of the controls, children on the Colombian coasts are twice

as likely to be fed fish between the ages of 9 and 24 months as children born elsewhere in

Colombia, given the mean values of the variables (reported at the bottom of the table). Moreover,

as shown in the second column of the table, within coastal municipalities children are

significantly more likely to be fed fish the larger the fraction of the municipality border that is

coastline. The sea-access coefficient is significant at the 0.04 level with bootstrapped standard

errors clustered at the municipality level. The point estimate indicates that, net of the controls,

3.8% of children aged 9 to 24 months are fed fish in the most land-locked coastal municipalities

(4% coastline) compared with 96% if the municipality is an island.10 As Table 6 shows, the

closest protein substitute for fish is evidently meat, as young children in a coastal municipality

with more coastline are significantly less likely to be fed meat, but are more likely to be fed eggs,

with only the meat coefficient statistically significant. Total animal protein consumption ­ meat

plus eggs - however, is evidently unrelated to coastline size.



                                     
9
     The control variables include household wealth, the child's exact age in months, gender, race, urban
location, number of persons and children under five years old in the household, the mother's education
and age, the average altitude in meters above sea level, an index of the quality of the soil for agriculture,
whether there is maritime port, average yearly precipitation in the period 1980-2010, founding year of the
municipality, and the volume of water that flows in rivers and lakes in 2000 in cubic meters. 
10
    Two of the 47 coastal municipalities are islands.

                                                       22 
 
 


        The results in Table 5 are not surprising. As shown in Figures 12 and 13 the price of fish

is substantially lower in coastal municipalities than elsewhere while the price of meat is

substantially higher. Of course, municipalities differ by more than food prices. We want to use

variation in the availability of fish for a given municipality over time, on the presumption that

local fish supplies affect local prices. As shown in section III, coastal fish stocks vary

substantially over time and systematically with variations in ocean sea surface temperatures.

        A key assumption of the model is that the increases in local fish supply lower local fish

prices. To test this, we obtained an annual aggregate time-series of a fish price index for four

cities close to the sea (Barranquilla, Cartagena and Monteria are coastal cities in the Atlantic;

Cali is less than 100 kilometers away from the Pacific) for the years 1999-2013. We thus can

estimate the effects of variation in the total fish catches by coast on the local fish price.

        Figure 14 plots the log deviations in the real coastal-city fish price against the log-

deviations in the aggregate coastal fish catches along with the fitted regression line. As can be

seen, the relationship between coastal fish catches and the fish price is negative (it is also

statistically significant) for these coastal cities. Of course, the supply of fish on the coast may

reflect the local demand for fish, so the slope may underestimate the true fish price demand

elasticity. To estimate the causal effect of fish supply on price we use the four coast-specific SST

variables listed in Table 2 as instruments and estimate the relationship between the local fish

catches and local fish prices by IV.

        Table 7 reports the city fixed effects (FE) and IV-FE estimates of the effects of the log

total coastal fish catch on the log of the real price of fish (pesos per 500 grams) in the four cities

for the period 1999-2013. For the latter estimates we allowed the set of four coastal SST

variables to differ by coast. We also include coastal annual rainfall in the second-stage

                                                  23 
 
 


specification, which may affect fish demand, and, as was shown, is correlated with the SST

instruments and with real GDP. Both the FE and the IV-FE fish supply coefficients are

statistically significant and indicate that increases in the supply of local fish lower the local price

of fish. Local rainfall does not appear, however, to affect the local fish price, net of the supply of

fish. The diagnostic statistics indicate that the IV-FE point estimate, which is twice as large in

absolute values as the FE estimate, is well-identified. The IV-FE point estimate indicates that the

fish price demand elasticity is -0.11.

V. Identification Strategy and Econometric Model

        Based on the empirical findings that (a) a large fraction of children in coastal

municipalities are fed fish, (b) within coastal communities the fraction of the border that is

coastline is significantly and positively associated with increased fish consumption among

children, (c) the coastal fish price is responsive to coastal fish supplies on the relevant coasts, and

(d) fish catches are significantly affected by changes in coast SSTs, our identification strategy for

estimating the early-life causal effects of the consumption of low- and high-MeHg fish by

pregnant mothers and young children on children's skill outcomes s (test scores, schooling,

occupation classification) later in life is to estimate the following econometric model on cohorts

of children born in coastal municipalities using the SST variables as instruments for the fish

catches:


(10)                   si , m ,t   cm K L ,t   cm K H ,t   Rm ,t  d m  d t   i ,m ,t ,


where i is an individual, m is her municipality of birth and t her cohort. All right hand side

cohort-specific variables are defined as four-year averages enclosing the year before birth and

three years of life after birth ("around birth"). cm is the fraction of the municipality border that is


                                                    24 
 
 


coastline, K L ,t and K H ,t are, respectively, the sizes of low- and high-mercury fish catches on the

relevant coast around birth for the cohort, and Rm ,t is rainfall in municipality m around birth for

the cohort. dm and dt are coastal municipality and cohort fixed effects, the latter absorbing all

cohort-specific Colombia-wide market prices and macro shocks to income at the time of birth.

        The IV instruments are the set of variables characterizing the anomalies in sea surface

temperature (SST) around birth that we found to predict fish catches by Hg content: the number

of four-month moving averages centered around each month in the year above (below) the

anomaly threshold, +0.5 (-0.5) Celsius in the Pacific and +0.18 (-0.18) Celsius in the Caribbean,

and the mean of the positive (negative) temperature changes that were anomalous during the

corresponding four-month moving averages that year. Because the thresholds vary by ocean, we

interact each of the SST anomaly variables with an indicator for whether it is from Atlantic

coast. All first-stage variables are also interacted with the fraction of the municipality border that

is coastline. Thus, the key exclusion restriction is that, conditional on rainfall and municipality

and cohort fixed effects, the set of anomalies in ocean-specific SSTs affect skill outcomes only

through their effects on the variation in the fish catches. Based on the medical literature findings

and our equilibrium model, we expect that   0 and   0.


VI. Achievement Test Scores at Age 17 and Fish Species Availability at Birth

        In this section we use government administrative records containing achievement test

scores from exams (SABER 11) taken by all exiting high school seniors in Colombia in the years

1980 through 2015 (with the exception of the year 1994, which is officially lost) to estimate the

effects of early childhood fish consumption on later-life school achievement. We examine test-

scores for both the math and verbal components of the test, standardizing results by year. The

                                                  25 
 
 


records identify the name of the municipality and school where the exams took place. A

limitation is that they do not contain the municipality of birth or the age of the student. Given

these data restrictions, we assume that the municipality where the exam was taken is the same as

the municipality of birth and that the year of birth is the year of the exam minus 17 (which is the

average age when students take the exam).11 Thus, we have 34 birth-cohorts, with birth years

corresponding to the period 1963 through 1998. We restrict our analysis of these data to students

in the 47 coastal municipalities. Using the municipality and cohort information of the exam

records, we merged the relevant four-year average coastal fish catch and SST measures so that

they corresponded to the four-year period following the conception of each student ­ covering

the nine months in utero plus the first three years post-birth - resulting in a sample of 1,184,817

test records with fish "exposure" information.

        The first column of Table 8 reports the year and municipality fixed effects estimate of the

effect of total local fish catch size around the time of the birth of each cohort on their verbal test

score at the time of high school graduation. This is the net effect of consuming both high- and

low-mercury fish, and the coefficient is negative and statistically significant. However, when we

implement the IV estimation method, the coefficient is cut by a third and is further reduced when

we add rainfall. The diagnostic statistics indicate passage of both the under-identification and

over-identification tests. These results suggest that the average effect of the elevated fish

consumption on the coast on skill attainment is insignificant.



                                  
11
  According to the census of 1993, 75.9% of individuals 17 years old residing in coastal municipalities
were born in their current municipality. In section VIII below, where we use census data, we find that the
estimates for populations residing in coastal municipalities are similar to those obtained from populations
born in coastal municipalities but whose current residence may be different.
 

                                                    26 
 
 


        However, when we decompose the fish catches by mercury content we see that the

composition of fish species matters and the results are robust to estimation method and

specification - a higher average catch size of low-mercury fish in the first four-years of life,

given the catch size of high-mercury fish, significantly increases verbal test scores at age 17,

while for a given low-mercury catch size, an increase in the catch size of high-mercury fish

significantly lowers the verbal test score. Again, the diagnostic statistics are consistent with the

assumptions of the econometric model. The IV-FE point estimates from the complete

specification including rainfall around birth in the last column of Table 8 indicate that a one

standard deviation increase in low-(high-) mercury fish at that time increases (decreases) the

verbal test score by 0.05 (0.10) standard deviations at age 17.

        The estimate of the effect of early-age rainfall on the verbal test score when the model is

estimated using IV-FE is also negative and statistically significant. Given that rainfall evidently

increases income, this suggests that for given supplies of the two fish types, the effect of higher

incomes is to raise the price of fish and to shift the composition of the diet to (tradable) foods

with less "brain" effects and whose prices are unaffected by local weather.

        The results for math test scores, reported in Table 9, are similar to those for verbal test

scores ­ the net effect in Colombia of overall greater fish availability on the coast around the

time a child is born on later-life scholastic achievement in mathematics is insignificant.

However, increases in the availability of high-Hg fish around the time of birth, given the supply

of low-Hg fish, lower math test scores significantly. The effect of a higher supply of low-Hg

fish, given high-Hg fish availability, is positively related to the math test score just as it was for

the verbal test score, but the estimate is smaller and only marginally significant (0.12 level, two-

tailed test). The FE-IV point estimates indicate that a one standard deviation increase in the low-

                                                  27 
 
 


mercury fish catch in the first four-years of life ceteris paribus lowers the math test score by

0.075 standard deviations, while a similarly-defined increase in the low-Hg fish supply at that

early stage of life increases the math test score by only 0.02 standard deviations. Finally, parallel

to the result for verbal test scores, higher rainfall around the time of birth is associated with

lower math scores, but the rainfall estimate for math test performance is statistically

insignificant.

VII. Placebo and Robustness Tests

       The estimates in Tables 8 and 9 indicating that the composition of fish species

availability with respect to mercury content around birth affects both verbal and math test scores

at age 17 are consistent with the medical literature and folklore that fish is indeed "brain" food:

fish, unlike other foods, contain specific elements that enhance early-age cognitive development

but also block such development (MeHg) as a poison. In this section, we assess (a) whether our

results are spurious with a placebo test that estimates the effects of fish catch species

composition around birth on adult height; (b) whether early-in-life fish catch sizes matter more

for cognitive development than do fish catch variations occurring later in the life cycle, as

suggested by the medical literature on child development; and (c) whether our results are biased

by the omission of the consideration of another Colombian food staple ­ rice ­ which may also

contain elevated levels of Hg.

       Fish species availability around birth and adult height. We employ the same econometric

model (10) and data on fish catches and rainfall to estimate the effects of fish species availability

around birth on height. Fish is a high protein food, and the medical literature suggests that the

early-life consumption of protein affects physical growth. Thus, we would expect that the greater

total availability (lower price) of fish around birth would increase height. However, as far as we

                                                  28 
 
 


know, there is no medical literature suggesting that mercury affects physical development, and

thus the species composition of fish catches should be unimportant in determining height later in

life. If we do find that composition matters for height, that would call into question our

interpretation of our findings on test scores as reflecting the special cognitive properties of fish.

        We carry out our analysis of height using another large administrative database, the

Registraduría Nacional del Estado Civil. By law, when a Colombian resident turns 18 years old,

she must register as a citizen and obtain an identity card. Colombian identity cards have the

municipality of birth, the date of birth, the municipality of registry, the date of registry (87.9% of

Colombians register before 21 years of age; 48% at age 18), the gender, and the height of the

citizen. We obtained these identity-card records for people born between 1951 and 1997; the size

of each cohort varies between 154,246 (1951) and 557,761 (1995) and the total number of

records is 18,519,896. We again restrict the sample to citizens born in the 47 coastal

municipalities, but we were only able to obtain the records of those born on the coast and who

also registered in coastal municipalities (permanent coastal residents), resulting in a sample size

of 1,842,224 citizens.12

        Table 10 reports the estimates of the effects of total and species-specific fish catches in

the first four years of life on adult height, using the same instruments and specifications as were

used for test scores. The FE-IV results for height are as expected and are in contrast to those

obtained for the cognitive assessments ­ increases in the total amount of fish caught around the

time of birth significantly increase height (third column), but there is no negative effect on height

                                   
        12
           According to the 1993 census, 73.4% of people aged 18 and 21 years old and residing on the
coasts are permanent residents. We show below that this restriction on later-life residence has little effect
on estimates of early-life fish supply variation using census data.
 

                                                     29 
 
 


if the catch size of high-MeHg fish is higher relative to the catch size of low-MeHg fish; total

fish supply around birth but not fish species composition affect height in accord with the existing

medical literature. And, increases in average rainfall in the first four-years of life increase height,

consistent with rainfall increasing incomes and with the universal findings that children from

lower-income households exhibit stunting.

        Fish species availability around birth and at later ages and test scores at age 17. The

medical literature indicates that methyl-mercury inhibits intellectual development at very young

ages, which is why we employed fish catch variation in the four years after conception (one year

before birth and three years after birth). To further assess the credibility of our results, we add to

the specification (10) the catch sizes for the two types of fish defined by Hg content when the

cohorts were also at 7-10 years of age, extending the set of instruments to include SST anomalies

at those later ages. Thus, we are running a horse race between the early- and later-age exposures

to fish supplies with differing mercury content on test scores.

        Table 11 reports the estimates from the extended specification with both early- and late-

stage fish catches for verbal test scores. The statistically-preferred IV-FE estimates of the effects

of the total fish catch at early ages, in the third column, are positive and statistically insignificant,

the same result we found when the later-age total fish catch is excluded (Table 8). The later-age

total fish catch coefficient is also statistically insignificant. More importantly, in the last column

of the table, we replicate the results from Table 8 - higher low-mercury fish catch sizes in the

first four-years of life increase verbal test performance, while increases in the catches of high-

mercury fish in the same period lower the verbal test score. Both results remain statistically

significant, and the coefficient sizes are similar in magnitude to those in Table 8, with the low-

Hg coefficient slightly larger and the high-Hg coefficient slightly smaller in absolute value.

                                                   30 
 
 


Moreover, the individual coefficients for the later-age fish catches are statistically not

distinguishable from zero and jointly insignificant. This result confirms what the medical

literature evidence suggests, that early-age exposure, when the brain is developing, to the good

and bad attributes of fish causally affect cognitive development, but not later-age exposure.

        The one departure from the results obtained using the more parsimonious specification

(based on the prevailing medical literature evidence) is that the coefficient on rainfall at birth,

while still negative, is now statistically insignificant, while the rainfall coefficient associated

with ages 7-10 is negative and statistically significant. The rainfall results thus appear to be less

robust than the fish catch findings.

        The estimates from the extended specification for the determinants of math test

performance, reported in Table 12, are less informative. While the sign patterns of the IV-FE

coefficients for around-birth total fish catch (column three) and the fish catches for the two types

of fish (column six) are the same as those obtained from the parsimonious specification, none of

the early-stage coefficients are statistically significant. Like the results in Table 11, however, the

later-age fish catch coefficients are also not statistically significant. Thus, we find no evidence

that the later-age availabilities of low- and high-mercury fish, conditional on early-age exposures

to fish availability, have any effect on scholastic achievement at age 17.

        Rice and mercury. A staple of the Colombian diet is rice. There is growing evidence that

rice is also laden with mercury (Liu et al., 2019), although we know of no evidence of this for

the specific rice varieties consumed in Colombia. However, a key assumption of the model is

that non-fish alternative foods are tradeable, and tradeable food price variation is captured by the

year fixed effects. The questions is whether the tradability assumption holds for this other

potential source of mercury consumption. Colombia imports rice, with imports accounting for

                                                  31 
 
 


15% of total rice consumption. We obtained the annual retail price series for rice consumed in

Colombia and the international rice price time-series for the years 1996-2019 as well as the

annual value of domestic rice production for the same period to see if the domestic price of rice

is anchored by the international price, rather than by domestic supply or demand.

       The first column of Table 13 reports the estimates from a regression of the log of the real

domestic rice price on the log of the international price. The coefficient is positive and highly

significant, and the variation in the log of the international price explains more than 37% of the

log-variation in the domestic price. Moreover, in column two, we see that net of the international

price, variation in the domestic production of rice has no effect on the domestic rice price. Thus,

we are confident that the year fixed effects absorb the price of rice along with other Colombian

tradable commodities.

VIII. Fish Species Supply Around Birth and Adult Schooling Attainment and Occupation

       The estimates in Tables 8 and 9 indicate that the increased availability of high- and low-

mercury fish in the first four years of life have significant and opposite effects on test score

performance at age 17, with the higher availability of mercury-laden fish around birth

significantly lowering test scores and higher supplies of low-mercury fish increasing scores. In

this section we use data from the Colombia Census of 1993 to estimate the effects of the

composition of around-birth coastal fish catches on adult schooling attainment and occupation

for persons born in coastal provinces.




                                                  32 
 
 


           The 1993 census is the most recent Colombian census available to researchers that

provides information on municipality of birth and residence and schooling and occupation.13 It

has two advantages over the administrative records we used to assess the effects of early-stage

fish catches on test scores and height. First, the census provides information on age, gender and

race. Second, we do not have to restrict the sample of those born on the coast to those who are

also residing on the coast as adults; that is, we can allow out-migration to any type of

municipality. The census data thus permits comparisons of estimates obtained from the

population of permanent coastal residents, whose test and height records we used in the previous

analyses, with estimates based on the population who were born on the coast regardless of

subsequent place of residence. This will allow us to assess the selectivity bias, if any, from the

geographic restriction of the heights and test scores data bases. A limitation from using the

census of 1993 is that we would lose a large fraction of cohorts (years) if we include rainfall in

the specification because, as noted, there is insufficient rainfall data prior to 1963 due to the lack

of rain stations. Because identification relies on time-series variation, we thus exclude rainfall.

Our test score results on fish catch effects appear to have been strengthened by the inclusion of

the rainfall variable, so we think the census-based estimates are conservative.

           We examine the schooling and occupational outcomes for individuals born in coastal

municipalities who were aged 21 to 40 in 1993 and who were thus born in years 1953-1972.14

Using the school attainment information from the census, we created indicator variables for

whether the individual had obtained any post-secondary education and whether the individual



                                    
13
      The 2005 Census does not provide municipality of birth or residence. The 2018 Census did not elicit
information on schooling or occupation.
14
    We do not have time series of rainfall for most of these years because of the absence of rain stations in
Pacific coastal municipalities, as indicated in the Appendix. 

                                                      33 
 
 


was working in a blue-collar occupation, based on the categories `working class,' `agricultural

day laborer' or `domestic employee.' 13.8% of this coast-born population in 1993 had achieved

some post-secondary schooling and 41.5% were working blue-collar occupations. We merged

the census data, for the 812,128 individuals with valid schooling information and 826,852

individuals with valid occupational data who were born in coastal municipalities, with our fish

catch and SST variables corresponding to their four years of life post-conception.

       We expect, based on the test score results, that total fish catches around birth should have

no effect on post-secondary schooling attainment, while the elevated catches of high-(low-)

mercury fish should lower (increase) the likelihood of obtaining schooling beyond high school.

With respect to occupation, given our finding that the total fish catch increased height, the Roy-

model of occupation selection based on comparative advantage would predict both that those

born in high total-catch years and in years with greater relative high-Hg fish availability would

be more likely to be engaged in brawn-based, blue collar occupations (Pitt et al., 2012).

       The FE-IV schooling estimates, reported in columns two and four in Table 14, conform

to the findings for the test scores: while there is no effect of total catch size around birth on the

likelihood of going on to achieve some post-secondary schooling, increases in the early-life catch

size of low-MeHg fish increase that likelihood while higher levels of high-Hg fish catch sizes in

that period lower the likelihood, the former statistically significant at the 0.01 level and the latter

at the 0.10 level, two-tailed test. The point estimates indicate that, for a person born in a coastal

municipality with an average fraction of border that is coastline (0.3), a one standard-deviation

increase in the size of the average catches for low-Hg fish in the first four years of life, given the

high-Hg catch size, increases the likelihood of attaining some post-secondary education by 8.0%,




                                                  34 
 
 


while a one standard-deviation in the high-Hg fish catch ceteris paribus lowers that probability

by 6.7%.

        The FE-IV estimates of around-birth fish catches on adult occupation, in Table 15, also

conform to the height and test score findings and the operation of Roy selection. The greater total

availability of fish in the first four years of life for those born on the coast, which we found to

increase their adult height, increases significantly the likelihood of their being in a blue-collar

occupation as an adult. The point estimate indicates that a one standard-deviation in the average

total fish catch size in the first four years of life increases the probability of being a blue-collar

worker as an adult by a statistically significant 2.7%. Moreover, if there is an increase in the

catch size of high-MeHg fish by one standard deviation early in life, the probability of being in a

blue-collar occupation later in life rises by a statistically significant 4.3%. The effect of an

increase in low-MeHg fish around birth, as expected given the test score findings, decreases the

probability of being a manual, blue-collar worker by 2.2%, but the estimate is only marginally

statistically significant.

        The census-based schooling attainment and occupation estimates were obtained from

populations born in coastal communities but whose residence as adults was unrestricted. To

assess whether restricting the population to those both born and also continuing to reside in

coastal municipalities in 1993, corresponding to the restriction placed on the test score and

height databases, affects our findings, we estimated the effects of the around-birth fish catches on

the schooling and occupation variables on the restricted sample of permanent coastal stayers. The

estimates for schooling and occupations are reported in Tables A2 and A3, respectively, in the

appendix. The estimates are indistinguishable from those obtained from the unrestricted sample.




                                                   35 
 
 


Thus, we do not think the restriction on mobility has biased significantly the test score and height

estimates and thus inferences about the special properties, good and bad, of fish as brain food.

IX. Conclusion

          Production technologies interact with and transform the environment. The burning of

fossil fuels to produce electricity generates acid rain. The emission of greenhouse gasses to

facilitate transportation, for example, contributes to global warming. The use of the gold-

mercury amalgam since Spanish conquistadors and coal burning since the Industrial Revolution

deposited large quantities of mercury, an element that cannot be destroyed, in soils, rivers and

oceans.

          In this paper we have documented that organic mercury or methyl-mercury (i.e., mercury

combined with carbon by microscopic organisms in water and soil) is present in fish and that its

concentration increases along the food chain. We use a novel approach that relies on long time-

series in sea surface temperature (SST) anomalies associated with atmospheric climate

fluctuations to predict the methyl-mercury composition of fish catches consistent with the

findings in marine biology that fish species differ in the sea temperatures in which they thrive.

Using large administrative data sets providing high-school exit exam test scores and adult

heights and census data on schooling attainment and occupation for individuals born in coastal

communities in Colombia, for whom locally-caught fish is a diet staple, we are able to obtain the

causal effects of exposure to both low-and high- mercury fish around birth on human capital

outcomes later in life. As far as we know this is the first study that identifies the causal effect of

early-age exposure to methyl-mercury on adult cognitive development.




                                                  36 
 
 


       Both small and big fishes have similar amounts of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) which,

according to medical research is good for the developing brain (i.e., around birth). However, big

fishes have higher concentrations of organic mercury since methylmercury bioaccumulates along

the food chain. In contrast to DHA, the medical literature suggests that organic mercury blocks

the development of the brain in young children. Correspondingly, we find that when there is an

abundance of low-mercury (small-) fish around the birth of a cohort induced by higher-than-

average SSTs, children in this cohort will achieve higher test-scores and higher schooling

attainment while having a higher probability of getting a white-collar job later in life. The DHA

effect dominates the methyl-mercury effect: Fish is brain food. However, we also find that when

the composition of coastal fish catches is dominated by high-mercury (big-) fish around the birth

of a cohort, due to cooler ocean temperatures, children in this cohort will grow to have lower

test-scores and lower schooling attainment while having a lower probability of getting a white-

collar job. The methyl-mercury effect dominates the DHA effect: Fish is brain poison. We

cannot detect any effects of exposure to these types of fish in later childhood, a finding that

highlights the importance of the composition of foods when the brain is forming.

       Fish will continue to be a major source of protein, especially among poor people all over

the world. In the absence of the dissemination of information on the dangers of particular fish

species for child development, a disproportionate fraction of the children of the poor will suffer

cognitive impairments beyond those associated with lack of parental resources depending on

global climate characteristics at birth. However, it would appear that climate change, which will

increase average SSTs, will reduce the relative size of high-Hg fish populations, who prefer

cooler sea temperatures, and thus elevate on average the cognitive development of children,

especially among the poor.


                                                 37 
 
                                          Appendix

       Rainfall data come from IDEAM (Instituto de Hidrología Meteorología y Estudios

Ambientales). IDEAM has several weather stations around the territory. The number of

weather stations has increased over time, arriving later to the Pacific Coast, one of the most

remote parts of Colombia. To obtain some precision, we restrict the time-series on rainfall to

periods when we have at least five municipalities with rainfall data (active weather stations)

out of the 16 municipalities in the Pacific. Table A1 shows the number of municipalities with

at least one weather station by coast and year. Given the information provided in table A1,

we use rainfall data starting in 1963. In that year, we also have rainfall information from

weather stations in 16 of the 31 municipalities on the Atlantic.
         The map shows the weather stations in 1963 and their intersection with our coastal

municipalities. Notice that one station in the South-west of Colombia, the one inside a

circle, is not inside a coastal municipality (but close). This mistake comes from the original

database. In the original database, this station appears inside of Buenaventura, a coastal

municipality. We keep that station as belonging to the municipality of Buenaventura even if

it is 28 kilometers away from it. The weather station that appears to be located in the ocean

is a weather station located in the Colombian Islands of San Andrés and Providencia, two

of our coastal municipalities.

         Stations turn on and off over time and we use information from all operating stations

in a given coastal municipality each year. Thus, the number of stations is not constant over

time. IDEAM reports rainfall data by month. We first aggregate over the months to have

millimeters of precipitation per year. Yearly rainfall by coast is displayed in the following

graph:
       We use the annualized rainfall data to construct four-year moving averages that we

append to the data on test scores, occupations and height so that they correspond to the first

four years of life for each cohort post-conception, inclusive of the nine months in utero.
Figure 1. Percentage of Mothers Who Fed Fish to her Child Aged 9-24 Months,
       by Wealth Category and Location (Source: Colombia DHS 2010)
  40

                                  All mothers
  35
                                  Mothers on the coast
  30


  25


  20


  15


  10


   5


   0
       Bottom 20%     20-40%       40-60%         60-80%     Top 20%
Figure 2. Percentage of Mothers Who Fed Meat to her Child Aged 9-24 Months,
       by Wealth Category and Location (Source: Colombia DHS 2010)
  100
              All mothers
   90
              Mothers on the coast
   80

   70

   60

   50

   40

   30

   20

   10

    0
        Bottom 20%      20-40%       40-60%     60-80%       Top 20%
            Figure 3. Mean Standardized PVT Scores of Children Aged 3-9,
by Per-capita Income Category and Proximity to Coast (Source: Colombia ELCA 2013)
      140

                 Children<=100 Km
      120
                 Children>100 Km

      100


       80


       60


       40


       20


        0
            Bottom 20%     20-40%     40-60%       60-80%      Top 20%
      Figure 4. Equilibrium Price Setting: Rise in the Supply of KL


PL                                                                    PH


                                                                      PH0
PL0                                                                   PH1
PL1




                    KL0 KL1                KH0
                                                                       PL0
       Figure 5. Equilibrium Price Setting: Rise in Income


PF                                                           PC

 PF1
 PF0                                                         PC1
                                                             PC0




                KF                           C1 C0            PL0
    Figure 6: Total Tonnage (x10-3) of Locally-Consumed Fish Catches by Coast and Year,
                  Colombia Coasts 1950-2014, Three-Year Moving Average
70000

                                           Atlantic Coast
60000
                                           Pacific Coast


50000



40000



30000



20000



10000



    0
     1950   1955   1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015
     Figure 7. Average Hg and Omega-3 Concentrations Across 54 Species of Non-Industrial Fish,
                              Colombia Pacific and Caribbean Coasts
     2.5




      2




     1.5
Hg




      1




     0.5




      0
           0             0.5                1                1.5                2                2.5

                                                  Omega-3
                  Figure 8: Total Tonnage (x10-3) of Locally-Consumed Fish Catches
by High and Low Mercury Levels, Coast and Year, Colombia Coasts 1950-2014, Three-Year Moving Average
      50000
                                                Atlantic Coast High Hg
                                                Atlantic Coast Low Hg
      45000
                                                Pacific Coast High Hg
                                                Pacific Coast Low Hg
      40000

      35000

      30000

      25000

      20000

      15000

      10000

       5000

          0
           1950   1955   1960   1965   1970   1975   1980    1985    1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015
Figure 9: Mean Mercury Content of All Locally-Consumed Fishes Caught by Coast and Year,
                Colombia Coasts 1950-2014, Three-Year Moving Average
0.55

 0.5
                         Atlantic Coast
0.45                     Pacific Coast

 0.4

0.35

 0.3

0.25

 0.2

0.15

 0.1

0.05
    1950   1955   1960   1965    1970     1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015
          Figure 10. Number of Annual SST Anomalies by Coast and Year,
              Colombia Coasts 1950-2010, Four-Year Moving Average
9
                                                  Pacific Positive
8                                                 Pacific Negative
                                                  Caribbean Positive
7                                                 Caribbean Negative


6


5


4


3


2


1


0
 1950   1955   1960   1965   1970   1975   1980      1985     1990     1995   2000   2005   2010
Figure 11: Mean Temperature Deviations (Centigrade) of SST Anomalies by Coast and Year,
                Colombia Coasts 1950-2010, Four-Year Moving Average
 1.5
                                             Pacific Positive
                                             Pacific Negative
                                             Caribbean Positive
  1
                                             Caribbean Negative



 0.5



  0
   1950   1955   1960   1965   1970   1975   1980     1985      1990   1995   2000   2005   2010


-0.5



  -1



-1.5
           Figure 12: Price of Coastal Fish by Distance to the Coast (Kilometers)
5500


5000


4500


4000


3500


3000


2500


2000
       0       50        100        150        200        250        300        350   400
                                   Distance to coast
           Figure 13: Price of Meat by Distance to the Coast (Kilometers)

4000


3800


3600


3400


3200


3000


2800


2600


2400
       0   50        100        150        200        250        300        350   400
                               Distance to coast
       Figure 14. Log Deviations in the Log Real Price (Pesos) of Coastal Fish per 500 Grams
       and Log Deviations in the Coastal Fish Catch Size, for Four Coastal Cities, 1999-2013
                                                             0.3



                                                             0.2



                                                             0.1



                                                              0
-1.5                 -1                   -0.5                     0                  0.5

                                                            -0.1



                                                            -0.2



                                                            -0.3
                                         Log catch size
Table 1A: "Low" Hg Fish Species and Average Mercury Content (High Mercury if the
latter is above 0.165). Surface Temperatures Spans (averages 2002-2011): Atlantic
                           [22.9, 29.8], Pacific [18, 29.1]*
                                  Mercury                           Ocean (A:
                                  (part per minimum maximum         Atlantic;
           common name             million) SST**    SST**          P:Pacific)
Pink conch                          0.009     22.9   32.58              P
Sea snails                          0.009    21.43    31.8              P
Venus clams                         0.009    23.11   32.29             A, P
Mangrove cupped oyster              0.012    26.71   32.62              A
Pacific anchoveta                   0.016    18.54   33.02              P
Sea catfishes, coblers              0.024    26.73   32.53              A
Squids                              0.024    24.06   32.76             A, P
Threadfins                         0.0279    21.22   33.26              P
Lebranche mullet                     0.05    23.28   32.22              A
Mackerels, tunas, bonitos            0.05    19.22   31.89             A, P
Mullets, grey mullets                0.05    15.15   31.77             A, P
Wrasses, gropers, tuskfishes         0.05    25.44   32.26              P
Parrotfishes                        0.053     22.9   32.32              P
Flatfishes                          0.056    19.85   33.06             A, P
Jacks, pompanos                     0.071 19.695       32              A, P
Herrings, sardines, menhadens       0.078    22.17   30.97             A, P
Panama hake                         0.079    22.47   33.06              P
Mojarras, silverbellies              0.08    23.11   32.53             A, P
Blue spiny lobster                  0.093 22.035     30.07              P
Caribbean spiny lobster             0.093    26.43   32.58              A
Perch-likes                         0.121    22.04   32.22             A, P
Moray eels                          0.128    26.32   32.58              P
Table 1B. "High" Hg Fish Species and Average Mercury Content (High Mercury if the
 latter is above 0.165). Surface Temperatures Spans (averages 2002-2011): Atlantic
                            [22.9, 29.8], Pacific [18, 29.1]*

                                     Mercury                           Ocean (A:
                                     (part per minimum maximum          Atlantic;
           common name                million)    SST      SST         P:Pacific)
Lane snapper                           0,166     22,16    32,24             A
Snappers                               0,166     21,22    32,24           A, P
Southern red snapper                   0,166    26,545   32,245             P
Basses, groupers, hinds                0,167     21,48    32,16           A, P
Broomtail grouper                      0,167    17,265    33,06             P
Nassau grouper                         0,167    26,645    32,58             A
Pacific sierra                          0,18     18,58    31,48             P
Tarpon                                   0,2    20,845    32,16             A
Yellowtail snapper                      0,22     22,84    32,26             A
Drums, croakers                       0,2583     19.85     33,3           A, P
Pacific thread herring                   0,3     21,78    31,37             P
Grunts, sweetlips, bonnetmouths         0,31     19,85    33,33           A, P
Amberjacks                             0,444     24,27    31,73             A
Octopuses                              0,445     26,61    32,49             A
Snooks                                 0,502     17,34    32,29             P
Lizardfishes, sauries                  0,845     17,14    26,62             P
Sharks, rays, skates                   0,979     14,45    31,52            A,P
Swordfish                              0,995     23,39    32,31            A,P
Houndsharks                             1,77    14,245    32,01            A,P
Smoothhounds                            1,77     21,06    33,26            A,P
Average                                 0,51     20,93    32,03
Span                                    1,76     12,49     6,71
*Historic (2002-2011) average sea surface temperatures in the Atlantic and the
Pacific come from Cherrington et al (2011). **Minimum and maximum sea surface
temperatures are defined as the range of temperatures where the species can be
found in Colombian maritime areas (source: Kaschner et al, 2016 ).
Table 2. Total Fish Catch and High and Low Mercury Fish Catches against Anomalies in Sea Surface
Temperature (Total catch by year (1950 to 1998) and by Ocean (Atlantic and Pacific) in Tonnes from the
Sea Around Us Website (www.seaaroundus.org) Based on Lindop et al. (2015) and Wielgus et al.
(2010).)
                                                          (1)              (2)               (3)
                                                      Total Fish     Low Mercury High Mercury
                                                         Catch        Fish Catch        Fish Catch
 Number of months in the year above the anomaly         -5086.0        -5122.8**           -669.4
 threshold                                             (3089.6)         (1960.6)          (691.8)

Number of months in the year below the anomaly                  -8399.5***          -3797.1***          -2218.0***
threshold                                                         (1866.2)            (1415.3)            (383.4)

Mean of positive temperature changes that were                    20876.8            26033.9*              -3642.4
anomalous during the year                                        (22265.9)           (15424.3)            (4599.4)

Mean of negative temperature changes that were                 -67400.1***           -24078.2*         -17130.3***
anomalous during the year                                        (18424.4)           (13211.5)           (4005.5)

Number of months in the year above the anomaly                    -958.6               2622.0            -2406.5**
threshold X Atlantic Coast                                       (3554.1)             (2183.5)             (940.8)

Number of months in the year below the anomaly                 15050.1***           8254.6***            4187.9***
threshold X Atlantic Coast                                      (3505.1)             (2259.6)             (1027.0)

Mean of positive temperature changes that were                    67337.5             2504.8            64262.0***
anomalous during the year X Atlantic Coast                       (54732.4)           (31803.4)           (18356.3)

Mean of negative temperature changes that were                 208896.9***         111523.9***          59943.3***
anomalous during the year X Atlantic Coast                      (59958.0)           (35258.8)            (19691.7)
Observations                                                       122                 122                  122
R-Squared                                                         0.319               0.236                0.347
F-statistics                                                       16.8                7.4                  12.0
F-statistics p-value                                              (0.0)               (0.0)                (0.0)
Dependent variable: Fish Catch by Ocean (in Tonnes). The anomaly threshold in the Pacific is +/- 0.5 degrees Celsius. The
anomaly threshold in the Atlantic is +/- 0.18 degrees Celsius. A month is anomalous if the three months moving average
centered on that month exceeds the threshold. All variables are converted to yearly moving averages (1, 1, 2). Robust
standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Table 3. Annual Rainfall (mm.) in both Coasts against Cold and Warm Episodes in Sea Surface Temperature in
the Pacific (Rainfall from IDEAM and Deviations in Sea Surface Temperature from The National Weather Service
www.nws.noaa.gov )
                                                                                  (1)              (2)
                                                                              ONI Model        Our Count
                                                                                               Variables
                                                                                              Instruments
  Months in the Year within a Sequence of at Least 5 Consecutive                37.6**
  Anomalous Cold Months                                                         (16.6)

  Months in the Year within a Sequence of at Least 5 Consecutive                           -42.3*
  Anomalous Warm Months                                                                    (23.3)


  Anomalous Cold Months in the Year                                                                            28.2
                                                                                                              (17.1)

  Anomalous Warm Months in the Year                                                                          -54.1**
                                                                                                              (24.6)

  Pacific Coast Indicator                                                                4299.1***          4299.1***
                                                                                         (145.5)             (145.5)
  Observations                                                                              106                106
  R-Squared                                                                                0.897              0.897
Dependent variable: Rainfall in mm per year. Anomalous months are defined using deviations in Sea Surface Temperature: An
anomalous cold (warm) month is a month 0.5 degrees below (above) the anomaly threshold. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Table 4. Log Real State GDP against Rainfall. State and
Year Fixed Effects Estimates (DANE National
Accounts: 1980-1998)
                                              (1)

Rainfall                                         0.00009*
                                                 (0.00005)
                                                   [0.09]
Observations                                        540
Number of States                                     33
Dependent variable: Log real state GDP by year (33 states). FE
panel regressions. Standard errors clustered at the state level in
parentheses. Wild bootstrapped p-value in brackets. p<0.10, **
p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Table 5. Any Fish Consumption by Children Aged 9 to 24 Months and Access to the Sea
(2010 Colombia DHS)
                                                         (1)             (2)
                                                         All          Coastal
                                                    Municipalities Municipalities
 Coastal Municipality                                 0.175***
                                                       (0.067)

Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                                          0.960**
                                                                                             (0.363)
                                                                                              [0.04]
Observations                                                             7495                  693
Number of Municipalities                                                  221                   15
Dependent variable mean                                                  0.173                0.304
Dependent variable S.D.                                                  0.379                0.461
State Fixed Effects                                                        Y                    N
Dependent variable: Any consumption of fish the day before the survey. OLS regressions for children 9 to
24 months old. Standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. Wild bootstrapped p-
values in brackets. Individual-level controls : wealth quintiles indicators, age in months, male indicator,
black indicator, native indicator, urban location, number of persons and children under 5 years old in the
household, mother education and mother age. Municipality controls: Pacific coast dummy (only in column
2), average altitude in meters above sea level, index of aptitude of the soil for agriculture, maritime port,
average yearly precipitation in the period 1980-2010 (millimeters), founding year of the municipality and
volume of water that flows in rivers and lakes in 2000 (millions of cubic meters). * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***
p<0.01
Table 6. Any Animal Protein Consumption by Children 9 to 24 Months and Access to the Sea within
Coastal Municipalities (2010 Colombia DHS)
                                                          (1)            (2)              (3)

                                                                         Meat                 Egg                Animal
                                                                                                                 Protein
Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                    -0.472*               0.867                0.075
                                                                       (0.225)              (0.512)              (0.135)
                                                                        [0.08]               [0.26]               [0.59]
Observations                                                             694                  691                  694
Number of Municipalities                                                  15                   15                   15
Dependent variable mean                                                 0.700                0.346                0.912
Dependent variable S.D.                                                 0.458                0.476                0.283
Dependent variable: Any consumption of the corresponding protein aggregate the day before the survey. Animal protein is
consumption of either red meat, white meat, packed meat or eggs. Meat excludes the latter. OLS regressions for children 9 to 24
months old. Standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. Wild bootstrapped p-values in brackets. The
parameter estimates (and standard errors) of the individual categories of Meat against the fraction of the municipality boundary
that is coastline and the corresponding controls are: red meat: -0.330 (0.245) [0.3]; white meat: -0.800** (0.289) [0.03]; packed
meat: 0.476** (0.193) [0.07]. Individual-level controls: Wealth quintiles indicators, age in months, male indicator, black
indicator, native indicator, urban location, number of persons and children under 5 years old in the household, mother education
and mother age. Municipality controls: Pacific coast indicator, average altitude in meters above sea level, index of aptitude of
the soil for agriculture, maritime port indicator, average yearly precipitation in the period 1980-2010 (millimeters), founding
year of the municipality and volume of water that flows in rivers and lakes in 2000 (millions of cubic meters).* p<0.10, **
p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Table 7. Log Real Price of Fish in Four Cities close to the Sea (Barranquilla,
Cartagena & Monteria in the Atlantic; Cali in the Pacific) against the Log of
Total Fish Catch in each Coast. City Fixed Effects Estimates (DANE Price
Indices 1999-2013)
                                                (1)                (2)
                                                FE               IV-FE
 Log Fish Catch (in Tonnes)                 -0.0530*           -0.1129**
                                             (0.0275)           (0.0502)

Log Rain in each Coast                                0.0971                0.0329
                                                     (0.0700)              (0.0796)
Observations                                            60                     60
Number of Municipalities                                 4                      4
Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic                                             15.583
Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic p-                                           0.029
value
Hansen J statistic                                                          6.514
Hansen J statistic p-value                                                  0.368
Dependent variable: Log real price of fish. The four cities are also municipalities. IV
instruments are anomalies in the temperature of the sea surface: Number of three months
moving averages centered around each month in the year above (below) the anomaly
threshold: +0.5 (-0.5) Celsius in the Pacific and +0.18 (-0.18) Celsius in the Caribbean,
mean of the positive (negative) temperature changes that were anomalous during the
corresponding three months moving averages that year. Since the threshold varies by ocean,
we interact each of these variables with an indicator for Atlantic coast. An additional
instrument is an indicator that takes the value of one if no information on sea surface
temperature is available. Thus we use nine instruments. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Table 8. Standardized Verbal Test Scores against Total Fish Catch and against High and Low Mercury Fish Catches Around Birth. Individuals Born
and Potentially Staying in Coastal Municipalities. Municipality and year fixed effects estimates (Saber 11 High School Exit Exams for Individuals
Born in 1963-1998)
                                                                      (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)
                                                                      FE           IV-FE         IV-FE          FE          IV-FE         IV-FE
 Fish Catch around Birth (Thousand Tonnes) X                     -0.0029***       -0.0011       -0.00002
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline               (0.0010)      (0.0029)       (0.0024)

 High Mercury Fish Catch around Birth (Thousand Tonnes) X                                                                               -0.0390***        -0.0532***        -0.0521***
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                                                                                      (0.0071)          (0.0129)          (0.0114)

 Low Mercury Fish Catch around Birth (Thousand Tonnes) X                                                                                0.0074***          0.0115***         0.0129***
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                                                                                     (0.0023)           (0.0028)          (0.0026)

 Schools per Municipality (Divided by 1000)                                         0.1446            0.1674             0.1551            0.1629            0.1721            0.1622
                                                                                   (0.2790)          (0.2765)           (0.2737)          (0.2810)          (0.2773)          (0.2747)

 Average Rainfall Around Birth (Divided by 1000)                                                                        -0.0651                                               -0.0734*
                                                                                                                       (0.0411)                                               (0.0415)
 Observations                                                                      1184817           1184817           1184817            1184817           1184817           1184817
 Number of Municipalities                                                             47                 47                47                47                 47                47
 Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic                                                                      17.872            18.669                               20.177            21.179
 Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic p-value                                                               0.022             0.017                                0.005             0.004
 Hansen J statistic                                                                                   12.087            11.425                                8.337             5.847
 Hansen J statistic p-value                                                                            0.098             0.121                                0.214             0.441
Dependent variable: Verbal test scores in high-school exit exams standardized by year. Independent variables measured around birth are four year moving averages (1,1,2): the year
before birth and the three first years of life. FE and IV-FE stacked cross-sections regressions of individuals circa 17 years old. IV instruments are anomalies in the temperature of the
sea surface: Number of three months moving averages centered around each month in the year above (below) the anomaly threshold: +0.5 (-0.5) Celsius in the Pacific and +0.18 (-
0.18) Celsius in the Caribbean, mean of the positive (negative) temperature changes that were anomalous during the corresponding three months moving averages that year. Since
the threshold varies by ocean, we interact each of these variables with an indicator for Atlantic coast. All variables are also interacted with the fraction of the municipality border
that is coastline. Thus we have 8 instruments. Standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Table 9. Standardized Math Test Scores against Total Fish Catch and against High and Low Mercury Fish Catches Around Birth. Individuals Born
and Potentially Staying in Coastal Municipalities. Municipality and year fixed effects estimates (Saber 11 High School Exit Exams for Individuals
Born in 1963-1998)
                                                                       (1)            (2)             (3)         (4)           (5)            (6)
                                                                       FE            IV-FE          IV-FE         FE           IV-FE         IV-FE
 Fish Catch around Birth (Thousand Tonnes) X                      -0.0078***        -0.0045        -0.0040
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                (0.0024)       (0.0032)       (0.0028)

 High Mercury Fish Catch around Birth (Thousand Tonnes) X                                                                                -0.0267**         -0.0399**         -0.0395**
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                                                                                      (0.0119)          (0.0170)          (0.0163)

 Low Mercury Fish Catch around Birth (Thousand Tonnes) X                                                                                   -0.0025           0.0039            0.0043
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                                                                                      (0.0022)          (0.0029)          (0.0028)

 Schools per Municipality (Divided by 1000)                                       0.6004***         0.6415***         0.6340***         0.6007***          0.6386***         0.6316***
                                                                                   (0.2201)          (0.2201)          (0.2197)          (0.2200)           (0.2197)          (0.2193)

 Average Rainfall Around Birth (Divided by 1000)                                                                        -0.0363                                                -0.0344
                                                                                                                       (0.0427)                                               (0.0450)
 Observations                                                                      1184816           1184816           1184816            1184816           1184816           1184816
 Number of Municipalities                                                             47                 47                47                47                 47                47
 Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic                                                                      17.872            18.669                               20.176            21.179
 Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic p-value                                                               0.022             0.017                                0.005             0.004
 Hansen J statistic                                                                                    9.282            10.107                                7.467             8.574
 Hansen J statistic p-value                                                                            0.233             0.183                                0.280             0.199
Dependent variable: Math test scores in high-school exit exams standardized by year. Independent variables measured around birth are four year moving averages (1,1,2): the year
before birth and the three first years of life. FE and IV-FE stacked cross-sections regressions of individuals circa 17 years old. IV instruments are anomalies in the temperature of the
sea surface: Number of three months moving averages centered around each month in the year above (below) the anomaly threshold: +0.5 (-0.5) Celsius in the Pacific and +0.18 (-
0.18) Celsius in the Caribbean, mean of the positive (negative) temperature changes that were anomalous during the corresponding three months moving averages that year. Since
the threshold varies by ocean, we interact each of these variables with an indicator for Atlantic coast. All variables are also interacted with the fraction of the municipality border
that is coastline. Thus we have 8 instruments. Standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Table 10. Height (cm.) of Citizens circa 18 Years Old Born in 1963-1997 against Total Fish Catch and against High and Low Mercury Fish Catches
around Birth. Individuals Born and Registering as Citizens in the Same Coastal Municipality. Municipality and year fixed effects estimates
(Identification Cards from the National Civil Registry)
                                                                     (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)           (6)
                                                                     FE          IV-FE         IV-FE           FE         IV-FE        IV-FE
 Fish Catch around Birth (Thousand Tonnes) X                     0.0437***     0.0596**       0.0502*
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline              (0.0131)      (0.0257)      (0.0259)

 High Mercury Fish Catch around Birth (Thousand Tonnes) X                                                                                  -0.0136           0.0285            0.0869
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                                                                                      (0.0695)          (0.0732)          (0.0888)

 Low Mercury Fish Catch around Birth (Thousand Tonnes) X                                                                                 0.0679**          0.0677**            0.0422
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                                                                                     (0.0268)          (0.0283)           (0.0344)

 Male                                                                            11.5801***        11.5804***        11.5807***         11.5804***        11.5805***        11.5808***
                                                                                  (0.2217)          (0.2217)          (0.2216)           (0.2218)          (0.2217)          (0.2216)

 Average Rainfall Around Birth (Divided by 1000)                                                                      0.0005***                                               0.0005**
                                                                                                                       (0.0002)                                               (0.0002)
 Observations                                                                      1842224           1842224           1842224            1842224           1842224           1842224
 Number of Municipalities                                                             47                 47                47                47                 47                47
 Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic                                                                      13.737            11.819                               14.800            15.160
 Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic p-value                                                               0.089             0.159                                0.039             0.034
 Hansen J statistic                                                                                    5.548             7.355                                4.742             5.356
 Hansen J statistic p-value                                                                            0.593             0.393                                0.577             0.499
Dependent variable: Height of individuals reported in their citizen identification card. The height is measured by officers at the municipality Civil Registry. Individual can ask for
their identification card after turning 18 years old. Independent variables measured around birth are four-year moving averages (1, 1,2): the year before birth and the three first years
of life. FE and IV-FE stacked cross-sections regressions of individuals 18 years of age (or the age when they decide to register) and Born Between 1951 and 1997 . IV instruments
are anomalies in the temperature of the sea surface: Number of three months moving averages centered around each month in the year above (below) the anomaly threshold: +0.5 (-
0.5) Celsius in the Pacific and +0.18 (-0.18) Celsius in the Caribbean, mean of the positive (negative) temperature changes that were anomalous during the corresponding three
months moving averages that year. Since the threshold varies by ocean, we interact each of these variables with an indicator for Atlantic coast. All variables are also interacted with
the fraction of the municipality border that is coastline. Thus we have 8 instruments. Standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses.
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Table 11. Standardized Verbal Test Scores against Total Fish Catch and against High and Low Mercury Fish catches at Different Ages. Individuals
Born and Potentially Staying in Coastal Municipalities. Municipality and year fixed effects estimates (Saber 11 High School Exit Exams 1963-1998)
                                                                      (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)         (6)
                                                                      FE            IV-FE         IV-FE           FE          IV-FE        IV-FE
 Fish Catch around Birth X                                        -0.0019**        -0.0019        0.0022
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline               (0.0008)       (0.0015)       (0.0019)

 High Mercury Fish Catch around Birth X                                                                                              -0.0349***        -0.0425***        -0.0349***
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                                                                                   (0.0056)          (0.0074)          (0.0096)

 Low Mercury Fish Catch around Birth X                                                                                                0.0090***         0.0098***         0.0147***
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                                                                                   (0.0021)          (0.0029)          (0.0036)

 Fish Catch during the Years from 7 to 10 X                                      -0.0060**           -0.0015          -0.0017
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                              (0.0029)          (0.0052)         (0.0062)

 High Mercury Fish Catch during the Years from 7 to 10 X                                                                                0.0036            0.0005            0.0073
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                                                                                   (0.0092)          (0.0090)          (0.0094)

 Low Mercury Fish Catch during the Years from 7 to 10 X                                                                               -0.0088**           -0.0017           -0.0060
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                                                                                   (0.0036)          (0.0042)          (0.0091)

 Average Rainfall around Birth (Divided by 1000)                                                                      -0.0199                                               -0.0055
                                                                                                                     (0.0544)                                              (0.0762)

 Average Rainfall during the Years from 7 to 10 (Divided by                                                         -0.1475**                                            -0.1770***
 1000)                                                                                                               (0.0641)                                              (0.0640)
 Observations                                                                     1184817          1184817           1184817           1184817           1184817          1184817
 Number of Municipalities                                                            47                47                47               47                 47                47
 Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic                                                                    25.302            35.188                              14.583            24.925
 Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic p-value                                                             0.046             0.002                               0.334             0.024
 Hansen J statistic                                                                                 17.957            18.305                              17.759            14.228
 Hansen J statistic p-value                                                                          0.209             0.193                               0.123             0.286
Dependent variable: Verbal test scores in high-school exit exams standardized by year. FE and IV-FE stacked cross-sections regressions of individuals circa 17 years old. Independent
variables measured around birth are four year moving averages (1,1,2): the year before birth and the three first years of life. Independent variables measured during the years from 7 to
10 are these four year averages. IV instruments: See Table @. In addition, we use the same set of instruments for the relevant years when the cohorts are aged 7-10. Thus, we have 16
instruments. Controls not shown: Schools per Municipality (Divided by 1000). Standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Table 12. Standardized Math Test Scores against Total Fish Catch and against High and Low Mercury Fish catches at different ages. Individuals Born
and Potentially Staying in Coastal Municipalities. Municipality and year fixed effects estimates (Saber 11 High School Exit 1963-1998)
                                                                       (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)
                                                                       FE           IV-FE          IV-FE          FE           IV-FE       IV-FE
 Fish Catch around Birth X                                        -0.0061***       -0.0038*        0.0020
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                (0.0018)       (0.0020)       (0.0024)

 High Mercury Fish Catch around Birth X                                                                                              -0.0208**         -0.0219***          -0.0085
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                                                                                  (0.0090)           (0.0073)         (0.0123)

 Low Mercury Fish Catch around Birth X                                                                                                 -0.0001           0.0020            0.0075
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                                                                                  (0.0022)          (0.0029)          (0.0049)

 Fish Catch during the Years from 7 to 10 X                                    -0.0101***           -0.0067           -0.0079
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                             (0.0031)          (0.0066)          (0.0081)

 High Mercury Fish Catch during the Years from 7 to 10 X                                                                               -0.0017           -0.0169           0.0147
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                                                                                  (0.0102)          (0.0138)          (0.0121)

 Low Mercury Fish Catch during the Years from 7 to 10 X                                                                              -0.0116***          -0.0020           -0.0186
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                                                                                   (0.0038)         (0.0055)          (0.0122)

 Average Rainfall around Birth (Divided by 1000)                                                                      0.0638                                               0.1258
                                                                                                                     (0.0666)                                             (0.1043)

 Average Rainfall during the Years from 7 to 10 (Divided by                                                        -0.2505***                                           -0.2704***
 1000)                                                                                                               (0.0719)                                             (0.0659)
 Observations                                                                    1184816           1184816          1184816           1184816           1184816          1184816
 Number of Municipalities                                                           47                 47                47              47                 47                47
 Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic                                                                    25.302            35.188                             14.583            24.925
 Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic p-value                                                             0.046             0.002                              0.334             0.024
 Hansen J statistic                                                                                 16.696            17.620                             15.259            14.685
 Hansen J statistic p-value                                                                          0.273             0.225                              0.228             0.259
Dependent variable: Math test scores in high-school exit exams standardized by year. FE and IV-FE stacked cross-sections regressions of individuals circa 17 years old. Independent
variables measured around birth are four-year moving averages (1, 1, 2): the year before birth and the three first years of life. Independent variables measured during the years from 7
to 10 are these four year averages. IV instruments: See Table @. In addition, we use the same set of instruments for the relevant years when the cohorts are aged 7-10. Thus, we have
16 instruments. Controls not shown: Schools per Municipality (Divided by 1000). Standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Table 13: Colombian Real Price of Rice against International Price of Rice and against
Colombian Rice Production: 1996-2019 (Source of variables: FEDEARROZ for
Colombian data and Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis for international data)
                                                               (1)            2)

 Log of International Rice Price                                        0.2111***            0.2095***
                                                                         (0.0583)             (0.0593)

 Log of Colombian Rice Production                                                             -0.0485
                                                                                             (0.0862)
 Observations                                                                24                  24
All variables are in logs. Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Table 14: Probability of Any Post-secondary Education against Total Fish Catch and against High and Low Mercury Fish
Catches around Birth. Individuals Born in Coastal Municipalities in 1953-1972 and residing in any type of Municipality,
Coastal or Landlocked, in 1993. Municipality and year fixed effects estimates (Colombian Census of 1993)
                                                                      (1)             (2)        (3)          (4)
                                                                      FE            IV-FE        FE         IV-FE
 Fish Catch around Birth (Thousand Tonnes) X                        -0.0003        -0.0003
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline               (0.0003)       (0.0004)

 High Mercury Fish Catch around Birth (Thousand Tonnes) X                                                                 -0.0024           -0.0030*
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                                                                     (0.0018)           (0.0018)

 Low Mercury Fish Catch around Birth (Thousand Tonnes) X                                                                 0.0012*           0.0019***
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                                                                     (0.0007)           (0.0006)

 Male                                                                              -0.0053***        -0.0053***         -0.0053***        -0.0053***
                                                                                     (0.0019)          (0.0019)           (0.0019)          (0.0019)

 Black                                                                             -0.0379***        -0.0379***         -0.0379***        -0.0379***
                                                                                     (0.0075)          (0.0075)           (0.0075)          (0.0075)

 Indigenous                                                                        -0.0778***        -0.0778***         -0.0777***        -0.0776***
                                                                                     (0.0198)          (0.0198)           (0.0198)          (0.0198)
 Observations                                                                         812128            812128             812128            812128
 Number of Municipalities                                                               44                 44                44                 44
 Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic                                                                        20.001                               20.065
 Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic p-value                                                                 0.010                                0.005
 Hansen J statistic                                                                                      9.621                                6.048
 Hansen J statistic p-value                                                                              0.211                                0.418
Dependent variable: Dichotomous variable taking the value of one if the individual has any post-secondary education. Independent variables measured
around birth are four year moving averages (1,1,2): the year before birth and the three first years of life. FE and IV-FE stacked cross-section cohort
regressions of individuals in the age range 21-40. IV instruments are anomalies in the temperature of the sea surface: Number of three months moving
averages centered around each month in the year above (below) the anomaly threshold: +0.5 (-0.5) Celsius in the Pacific and +0.18 (-0.18) Celsius in
the Caribbean, mean of the positive (negative) temperature changes that were anomalous during the corresponding three months moving averages
that year. Since the threshold varies by ocean, we interact each of these variables with an indicator for Atlantic coast. All variables are also interacted
with the fraction of the municipality border that is coastline. Thus we have 8 instruments. Standard errors clustered at the municipality of birth level
in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Table 15: Probability of Working in a Blue-Collar Occupation as an Adult Aged 21-40 against Total Fish Catch and against
High and Low Mercury Fish Catches around Birth. Individuals Born in a Coastal Municipality in 1953-1972 and residing in
any type of Municipality, Coastal or Landlocked, in 1993. Municipality and year fixed effects estimates (Colombian Census
of 1993)
                                                                     (1)             (2)            (3)          (4)
                                                                     FE            IV-FE            FE         IV-FE
 Fish Catch around Birth (Thousand Tonnes) X                      0.0008**       0.0013***
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline              (0.0004)        (0.0005)

 High Mercury Fish Catch around Birth (Thousand Tonnes) X                                                             0.0054**          0.0058*
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                                                                  (0.0024)          (0.0029)

 Low Mercury Fish Catch around Birth (Thousand Tonnes) X                                                              -0.0017*           -0.0016
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                                                                  (0.0010)          (0.0014)

 Male                                                                            0.2052***         0.2052***         0.2052***         0.2052***
                                                                                  (0.0054)          (0.0054)          (0.0054)          (0.0054)

 Black                                                                           -0.1468***        -0.1468***        -0.1469***        -0.1469***
                                                                                   (0.0275)          (0.0275)          (0.0275)          (0.0275)

 Indigenous                                                                      -0.0235**         -0.0234**         -0.0236**         -0.0236**
                                                                                  (0.0088)          (0.0088)          (0.0088)          (0.0088)
 Observations                                                                      826852            826852            826852            826852
 Number of Municipalities                                                            44                 44               44                 44
 Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic                                                                     20.443                              20.197
 Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic p-value                                                              0.009                               0.005
 Hansen J statistic                                                                                   8.905                               7.916
 Hansen J statistic p-value                                                                           0.260                               0.244
Dependent variable: Dichotomous variable taking the value of one if the individual occupation is blue collar: working class, agricultural day laborers
and domestic employees. Independent variables measured around birth are four year moving averages (1,1,2): the year before birth and the three first
years of life. FE and IV-FE stacked cross-section cohort regressions of individuals in the age range 21-40. IV instruments are anomalies in the
temperature of the sea surface: Number of three months moving averages centered around each month in the year above (below) the anomaly
threshold: +0.5 (-0.5) Celsius in the Pacific and +0.18 (-0.18) Celsius in the Caribbean, mean of the positive (negative) temperature changes that were
anomalous during the corresponding three months moving averages that year. Since the threshold varies by ocean, we interact each of these variables
with an indicator for Atlantic coast. All variables are also interacted with the fraction of the municipality border that is coastline. Thus we have 8
instruments. Standard errors clustered at the municipality of birth level in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Table A1: Municipalities with at least one weather station by coast
                  and year (data source: IDEAM)
         Atlantic Coast (Number of       Pacific Coast (Number of
Year        Municipalities = 31)            Municipalities = 16)
1950                  3                              2
1951                  4                              2
1952                  4                              2
1953                  5                              2
1954                  7                              2
1955                  7                              2
1956                  8                              2
1957                  8                              2
1958                 12                              2
1959                 13                              2
1960                 14                              3
1961                 14                              3
1962                 15                              3
1963                 16                              5
1964                 17                              3
1965                 18                              4
1966                 17                              6
1967                 18                              7
1968                 17                              5
1969                 17                              8
1970                 17                              8
1971                 18                              7
1972                 20                              7
1973                 23                              7
1974                 26                              7
1975                 26                              7
1976                 26                              7
1977                 26                              7
1978                 25                              7
1979                 25                              7
1980                 26                              7
1981                 26                              7
1982                 26                              7
1983                 26                             10
1984                 26                             10
1985                 26                             10
1986                 26                             10
1987                 26                             10
1988                 27                             10
1989                 27                             10
1990                 27                             10
1991                 27                             10
1992                 27                             10
1993                 28                             11
1994                 28                             11
1995                 28                             11
1996                 28                             11
1997                 28                             11
1998                 28                             11
Table A2: Probability of Any Post-secondary Education against Total Fish Catch and against High and low Mercury Fish
Catches around Birth. Individuals Born in a Coastal Municipality in 1953-1972 and Still Residing in the Same Coastal
Municipality in 1993. Municipality and year fixed effects estimates (Colombian Census of 1993)
                                                                       (1)          (2)        (3)           (4)
                                                                       FE         IV-FE        FE          IV-FE
 Fish Catch around Birth (Thousand Tonnes) X                         -0.0003     -0.0002
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                (0.0003)    (0.0004)

 High Mercury Fish Catch around Birth (Thousand Tonnes) X                                                                 -0.0025          -0.0033**
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                                                                     (0.0017)           (0.0016)

 Low Mercury Fish Catch around Birth (Thousand Tonnes) X                                                                 0.0014*           0.0022***
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                                                                     (0.0007)           (0.0006)

 Male                                                                              -0.0118***        -0.0118***         -0.0118***        -0.0118***
                                                                                     (0.0020)          (0.0020)           (0.0020)          (0.0020)

 Black                                                                              -0.0213*           -0.0213*          -0.0213*           -0.0213*
                                                                                    (0.0122)           (0.0122)          (0.0122)           (0.0122)

 Indigenous                                                                        -0.0396***        -0.0396***         -0.0394***        -0.0393***
                                                                                     (0.0041)          (0.0041)           (0.0040)          (0.0040)
 Observations                                                                         556165            556165             556165            556165
 Number of Municipalities                                                               43                 43                43                 43
 Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic                                                                        18.654                               15.572
 Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic p-value                                                                 0.017                                0.029
 Hansen J statistic                                                                                      9.072                                8.985
 Hansen J statistic p-value                                                                              0.248                                0.174
Dependent variable: Dichotomous variable taking the value of one if the individual has any post-secondary education. Independent variables measured
around birth are four-year moving averages (1, 1, 2): the year before birth and the three first years of life. FE and IV-FE stacked cross-section cohort
regressions of individuals in the age range 21-40. IV instruments are anomalies in the temperature of the sea surface: Number of three months moving
averages centered around each month in the year above (below) the anomaly threshold: +0.5 (-0.5) Celsius in the Pacific and +0.18 (-0.18) Celsius in
the Caribbean, mean of the positive (negative) temperature changes that were anomalous during the corresponding three months moving averages
that year. Since the threshold varies by ocean, we interact each of these variables with an indicator for Atlantic coast. All variables are also interacted
with the fraction of the municipality border that is coastline. Thus we have 8 instruments. Standard errors clustered at the municipality of birth level
in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Table A3: Probability of Working in a Blue-Collar Occupation as an Adult Aged 21-40 against Total Fish Catch and against
High and Low Mercury Fish Catches around Birth. Individuals Born in a Coastal Municipality in 1953-1972 and Still
Residing in the Same Coastal Municipality in 1993. Municipality and year fixed effects estimates (Colombian Census of
1993)
                                                                     (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)
                                                                     FE         IV-FE           FE            IV-FE
 Fish Catch around Birth (Thousand Tonnes) X                     0.0009**     0.0014***
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline              (0.0003)     (0.0004)

 High Mercury Fish Catch around Birth (Thousand Tonnes) X                                                            0.0050***          0.0052**
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                                                                  (0.0018)          (0.0023)

 Low Mercury Fish Catch around Birth (Thousand Tonnes) X                                                               -0.0014           -0.0009
 Fraction of Municipality Boundary that is Coastline                                                                  (0.0008)          (0.0010)

 Male                                                                            0.1984***         0.1984***         0.1984***         0.1984***
                                                                                  (0.0081)          (0.0081)          (0.0081)          (0.0081)

 Black                                                                           -0.0756**         -0.0755**         -0.0756**         -0.0756**
                                                                                  (0.0300)          (0.0300)          (0.0299)          (0.0299)

 Indigenous                                                                      -0.0255***        -0.0253***        -0.0257***        -0.0256***
                                                                                   (0.0078)          (0.0078)          (0.0078)          (0.0078)
 Observations                                                                       566631            566631            566631            566631
 Number of Municipalities                                                             43                 43               43                 43
 Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic                                                                      18.734                              15.978
 Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic p-value                                                               0.016                               0.025
 Hansen J statistic                                                                                    7.666                               5.870
 Hansen J statistic p-value                                                                            0.363                               0.438
Dependent variable: Dichotomous variable taking the value of one if the individual occupation is blue collar: working class, agricultural day laborers
and domestic employees. Independent variables measured around birth are four year moving averages (1, 1,2): the year before birth and the three first
years of life. FE and IV-FE stacked cross-section cohort regressions of individuals in the age range 21-40. IV instruments are anomalies in the
temperature of the sea surface: Number of three months moving averages centered around each month in the year above (below) the anomaly
threshold: +0.5 (-0.5) Celsius in the Pacific and +0.18 (-0.18) Celsius in the Caribbean, mean of the positive (negative) temperature changes that were
anomalous during the corresponding three months moving averages that year. Since the threshold varies by ocean, we interact each of these variables
with an indicator for Atlantic coast. All variables are also interacted with the fraction of the municipality border that is coastline. Thus we have 8
instruments. Standard errors clustered at the municipality of birth level in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
                                        References

Adhvaryu, Achyuta, James Fenske and Anant Nyshadham. 2019. "Early Life Circumstance
and Adult Mental Health." Journal of Political Economy 127: 1516-1549

Almond, Douglas, Lena Edlund and Marten Palme. 2009. "Chernobyl's subclinical legacy:
prenatal exposure to radioactive fallout and school outcomes in Sweden." Q. J. Econ.
124:1729­1772
Bobonis, Gustavo J., Edward Miguel, and Charu Puri-Sharma. 2006. "Anemia and School
Participation." Journal of Human Resources 41 (4): 692­721.

Cherrington, A. 2011. "Sea Surface Temperature Trends in the Caribbean Sea & the
Eastern Pacific Ocean." Water Center for the Humid Tropics of Latin America & The
Caribbean (CATHALAC). Panama.

Clarkson, Thomas W., Laszlo Magos and Gary J Myers. 2003. "The toxicology of mercury-
-current exposures and clinical manifestations." The New England Journal of Medicine 349
(18): 1731-7.
Currie, Janet and Tom Vogl. 2013. "Early-Life Health and Adult Circumstance in
Developing Countries." Annual Review of Economics 5:1-36.
Deschenes, Olivier, Michael Greenstone, and Jonathan Guryan. 2009. "Climate Change and
Birth Weight." American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 99 (2): 211-217.
Drover, James R., Dennis R. Hoffman, Yolanda S. Castañeda, Sarah E. Morale, Sharon
Garfield, Dianna H. Wheaton, Eileen E. Birch. 2011. "Cognitive function in 18-month-old
term infants of the DIAMOND study: A randomized, controlled clinical trial with multiple
dietary levels of docosahexaenoic acid." Early Human Development 87, Issue 3: 223-230.
Field, Erica, Omar Robles, and Maximo Torero. 2009. "Iodine Deficiency and Schooling
Attainment in Tanzania." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (4): 140­69.

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 2018. The State of World
Fisheries and Aquaculture. Rome.

Innis, Sheila M. 2008. "Dietary omega 3 fatty acids and the developing brain," Brain
Research 1237: 35-43.
Kaschner, K., K. Kesner-Reyes, C. Garilao, J. Rius-Barile, T. Rees, and R. Froese. 2016.
AquaMaps:Predicted range maps for aquatic species. World Wide Web electronic
publication, www.aquamaps.org, Version 08/2016.

Kvestad, Ingrid, Silje Vabø, Marian Kjellevold, Ole Jakob Nøstbakken, Lisa Kolden
Midtbø, Mari Hysing, Maria Wik Markhus, Lise Madsen, Katina Handeland, Ingvild Eide
Graff, Øyvind Lie, Livar Frøyland, Kjell Morten Stormark, Lisbeth Dahl and Jannike Øyen.
2018 "Fatty fish, hair mercury and cognitive function in Norwegian preschool children:
Results from the randomized controlled trial FINS-KIDS." Environment International 121,
Part 2:1098-1105.
Lindop Alasdair, Tiffany Chen, Kyrstn Zylich and Dirk Zeller. 2015. "A reconstruction of
Colombia's Marine Fisheries Catches." Fisheries Centre. The Univeristy of British
Columbia. Working Paper # 2015-32.

Liu, Maodian, Qianru Zhang, Menghan Cheng, Yipeng He, Long Chen, Haoran Zhang,
Hanlin Cao, Huizhong Shen, Wei Zhang, Shuangcheng Tao and Xuejun Wang. 2019.
"Rice life cycle-based global mercury biotransport and human methylmercury exposure".
Nature Communications 10. 5164. 10.1038/s41467-019-13221-2.

Maccini, Sharon and Dean Yang. 2009. "Under the Weather: Health, Schooling, and
economic consequences of Early-Life Rainfall," American Economic Review 99(3):1006-
26
McNamara, Robert K, Jessica Able, Ronald Jandacek, Therese Rider, Patrick Tso, James C
Eliassen, David Alfieri, Wade Weber, Kelly Jarvis, Melissa P DelBello, Stephen M
Strakowski, Caleb M Adler. 2010. "Docosahexaenoic acid supplementation increases
prefrontal cortex activation during sustained attention in healthy boys: a placebo-controlled,
dose-ranging, functional magnetic resonance imaging study." The American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition 91, Issue 4: 1060­1067.
Pitt, Mark M., Mark R. Rosenzweig, and Mohammad Nazmul Hassan. 2012. "Human
Capital Investment and the Gender Division of Labor in a Brawn-Based Economy."
American Economic Review 102 (7): 3531-60.
Pitt, Mark M., Mark R. Rosenzweig, and Mohammad Nazmul Hassan. Forthcoming.
"Identifying the Cost of a Public Health Success: Arsenic Well Water Contamination and
Productivity in Bangladesh." Review of Economic Studies.
Puentes, Esteban, Fan Wang, Jere R. Behrman, Flavio Cunha, John Hoddinott, John A.
Maluccio, Linda S. Adair, Judith B. Borja, Reynaldo Martorell, Aryeh D. Stein. 2016.
"Early life height and weight production functions with endogenous energy and protein
inputs." Economics & Human Biology 22: 65-81.
Tofail, Fahmida, Iqbal Kabir, Jena D. Hamadani, Fahima Chowdhury, Sakila Yesmin,
Fardina Mehreen, and Syed N. Huda. 2006, "Supplementation of Fish-oil and Soy-oil
during Pregnancy and Psychomotor Development of Infants." Journal of Health,
Population and Nutrition 24: 48-56.

United Nations Environment. 2019. Global Mercury Assessment 2018. UN environment
Programme, Chemicals and Health Branch Geneva, Switzerland.

Wielgus Jeffrey, Dirk Zeller, Dalila Caicedo-Herrera and Rashid Sumaila. 2010.
"Estimation of fisheries removals and primary economic impact of small-scale and
industrial marine fishery in Colombia." Marine Policy 34: 506513.
