                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      DO INVESTORS CARE ABOUT CARBON RISK?

                                       Patrick Bolton
                                      Marcin Kacperczyk

                                      Working Paper 26968
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26968


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2020




We thank Franklin Allen, Eric Bouyé, Kent Daniel, Charles Donovan, Gerry Garvey, Lukasz
Pomorski, Ailsa Roell, Zacharias Sautner, Gireesh Shrimali, Michela Verardo, Jeff Wurgler and
the referee for helpful suggestions. We also appreciate comments from seminar participants at
Blackrock, Newcastle University, NHH Bergen, the New Frontiers in Investment Research
conference, University of Cardiff, and University College Dublin. We are grateful to Trucost for
giving us access to their corporate carbon emissions data, and to Jingyu Zhang for very helpful
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Patrick Bolton and Marcin Kacperczyk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Investors Care about Carbon Risk?
Patrick Bolton and Marcin Kacperczyk
NBER Working Paper No. 26968
April 2020
JEL No. G12,H23,Q54

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper explores whether carbon emissions affect the cross-section of U.S. stock returns. We
find that stocks of firms with higher total CO2 emissions (and changes in emissions) earn higher
returns, after controlling for size, book-to-market, momentum, and other factors that predict
returns. We cannot explain this carbon premium through differences in unexpected profitability
or other known risk factors. We also find that institutional investors implement exclusionary
screening based on direct emission intensity in a few salient industries. Overall, our results are
consistent with an interpretation that investors are already demanding compensation for their
exposure to carbon emission risk.


Patrick Bolton
Columbia Business School
804 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
pb2208@columbia.edu

Marcin Kacperczyk
Imperial College Business School
Tanaka Building
South Kensington Campus
London SW7 2AZ
United Kingdom
m.kacperczyk@imperial.ac.uk
1 Introduction
A large asset-pricing literature seeks to explain the cross-sectional pattern of stock returns based on
exposures to aggregate risk factors such as size and book-to-market ratios, or firm-specific risk linked
to observable firm characteristics. One variable that has so far been missing from the analysis is
corporate carbon emissions. This omission may be for historical reasons, as concerns over global
warming linked to CO2 emissions from human activity have only recently become salient. But, both
the evidence of rising temperatures and the renewed policy efforts to curb CO2 emissions raise the
question whether carbon emissions represent a material risk today for investors that is reflected in the
cross-section of stock returns and portfolio holdings.


        Two major recent developments, in particular, suggest that this may be the case. First, the
Paris COP 21 climate agreement of December 2015, with 195 signatories committing to limit global
warming to well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels. Second, the rising engagement of the finance
industry with climate change, largely as a result of the call to non-governmental actors to join the fight
against climate change at the COP 21. Institutional investors are increasingly tracking the greenhouse
gas emissions of listed companies and forming coalitions such as Climate Action 100+ to engage with
companies to reduce their carbon emissions.2 More and more asset owners are following the lead of
the Church of England Pension Fund, whose stated goal is "to demonstrate transparently that it has
delivered on its commitment to be aligned to the Paris Agreement".3


        Even if the U.S. has since pulled out of the Paris agreement, and even if the commitments of
the other remaining signatories are only partially credible, major curbs in CO2 emissions are likely to
be introduced over the next decade. Primarily affected by these curbs are the companies with
operations generating high CO2 emissions, or with activities linked to companies in the value chain
that have high CO2 emissions. In light of these developments, one would expect to see the risk with
respect to carbon emissions to be reflected in the cross-section of stock returns. Yet, considerable
skepticism remains, not least in the U.S. where the current administration has vowed to upend the
regulations introduced in recent years that limit CO2 emissions. For example, ExxonMobil's CEO,
Darren Woods recently declared that "Individual companies setting targets and then selling assets to
another company so that their portfolio has a different carbon intensity has not solved the problem

2See http://www.climateaction100.org/
3Statement made by Adam Matthews, the fund's director of ethics and engagement. The Church of England Pension
Fund is co-chairing the IIGCC initiative.
                                                       2
for the world." And that ExxonMobil was "taking steps to solve the problem for society as a whole
and not try and get into a beauty competition."4


           The lack of consensus among institutional investors around climate change naturally raises the
possibility that carbon risk may not yet be reflected in asset prices. To find out, this paper
systematically explores whether investors demand a carbon risk premium by looking at how stock
returns vary with CO2 emissions across firms and industries. We undertake a standard cross-sectional
analysis, asking whether carbon emissions affect cross-sectional U.S. stock returns.


           There are several ways in which one might expect CO2 emissions to affect stock returns. First,
since CO2 emissions are tied to fossil-fuel energy use, returns are affected by fossil-fuel energy prices
and commodity price risk. Relatedly, firms with disproportionately high CO2 emissions may be
exposed to carbon pricing risk and other regulatory interventions to limit emissions. The firms that
are most reliant on fossil energy are also more exposed to technology risk from lower-cost renewable
energy. Forward-looking investors may seek compensation for holding the stocks of
disproportionately high CO2 emitters and the associated higher carbon risk they expose themselves
to, giving rise to a positive relation in the cross-section between a firm's own CO2 emissions and its
stock returns. We refer to this as the carbon risk premium hypothesis.


           An interesting question is whether carbon emissions are perceived to be a systematic risk factor
and whether the carbon risk premium is tied to loadings on this risk factor. Carbon emissions could
be a systematic risk factor if expected regulatory interventions to curb emissions applied uniformly to
all emissions. For example, if a large federal carbon tax were to be introduced this would be a
systematic shock affecting all companies with significant emissions. Alternatively, most regulatory
interventions could be introduced in a piecemeal way at the state, industry and municipal level.
Similarly, technological improvements in the use of renewable energy could be mostly targeted to
particular operations or sectors. In this case one would not expect carbon emissions to be a systematic
risk factor.




4   Quoted in Exxon CEO Calls Rivals' Climate Targets a `Beauty Competition' by Kevin Crowley, Bloomberg News, March 5,
     2020, https://www.bnnbloomberg.ca/exxon-ceo-calls-rivals-climate-targets-a-beauty-competition-1.1400957
                                                            3
        A second hypothesis is that financial markets are pricing carbon risk inefficiently and the risk
associated with carbon emissions is underpriced. Carbon risk may not be fully integrated by most
investors, who by force or habit look at future cash-flow projections through local thinking à la
Gennaioli and Shleifer (2010), ignoring unrepresentative information about global warming and its
attendant risks. To be sure, the cash-flow scenarios commonly used by financial analysts do not
directly refer to carbon emissions and their possible future repricing. A recent study by In, Park, and
Monk (2019) on a different sample than ours finds that a portfolio that is long stocks of companies
with low carbon emissions and short stocks of companies with high emissions generates positive
abnormal returns. We refer to this hypothesis as the market inefficiency, or carbon alpha, hypothesis. An
important question we explore is whether financial markets underprice carbon risk (after controlling
for other known risk factors, industry, and firm characteristics) to the point that responsible investors,
who care about carbon emissions and climate change, could be "doing well by doing good".


        A third hypothesis is that stocks of firms with high emissions are like other "sin stocks"; they
are shunned by socially responsible, or ethical, investors to such an extent that the spurned firms
present higher stock returns. A key question in this respect is how investors identify the firms to be
divested from. Do they look at carbon emissions at the firm level, or do they pigeonhole firms into
broader categories such as the industry they operate in? Even socially responsible investors that care
about climate change may use sparse models (à la Gabaix, 2014) and not look much beyond industry
categorizations, such as the energy and electric utility sectors, which produce a disproportionate share
of CO2 emissions. Prominent divestors like the Rockefeller Brothers Fund, for example, who have
pledged to divest from fossil fuel companies, largely focus on energy companies that extract coal and
tar sands.5 We refer to this as the divestment hypothesis.


        A pioneer in producing company-level CO2 emissions data is the carbon disclosure project
        6
(CDP). More recently it has been joined by other leading providers of carbon data, including MSCI
ESG Research and Trucost, among others.7 While more and more institutional investors make use of
these data it is not known how much individual companies' stock returns are actually affected by the
availability of these more granular CO2 emissions data to financial analysts. Our study relies on the


5 See https://www.rbf.org/mission-aligned-investing/divestment
6 See http://www.cdp.net/en-US/Pages/About-Us.aspx
7 See https://www.msci.com/climate-change-solutions and https://www.trucost.com/policy-academic-research.


                                                        4
Trucost EDX data, which cover around 1,000 listed companies since fiscal year 2005, and over 2,900
listed companies in the U.S. since fiscal year 2016. We match these data with the FactSet returns and
balance-sheet data for all U.S.-listed companies from 2005 to 2017.


           Carbon emissions from a company's operations and economic activity are typically grouped
into three different categories: direct emissions from production (scope 1), indirect emissions from
consumption of purchased electricity, heat, or steam (scope 2), and other indirect emissions from the
production of purchased materials, product use, waste disposal, outsourced activities, etc. (scope 3).
The scope 3 category in turn is separated into upstream and downstream indirect emissions. The data
on scope 1 and scope 2 emissions are widely reported. Scope 3 emissions on the other hand are
estimated using an input-output matrix. Although scope 3 emissions are the most important
component of companies' emissions in a number of industries (e.g., automobile manufacturing) they
have not been reported by companies until recently.


           Our main broad finding is that carbon emissions significantly affect stock returns. For all three
categories of emissions we find a positive and statistically significant effect on firms' stock returns.
We portray the higher returns associated with higher emissions as a carbon premium. More specifically,
we estimate how the carbon premium is related to three different measures of corporate emissions: 1)
the total level of emissions; 2) the year-by-year change in emissions; and, 3) emission intensity, which
measures carbon emissions per unit of sales. A striking result is that the carbon premium is related to
the level of (and to changes in) emissions, but not to emission intensity. Basic economics suggests that
the premium should be tied to total emissions. The reason is that regulations limiting emissions are
likely to target activities where the level of emissions is highest.8 Similarly, technological change around
renewable energy will displace fossil fuels in firms where returns to scale are highest.


           Interestingly, there is also a significant carbon premium associated with the year-to-year
growth in emissions. It means that companies that succeed in reducing their emissions can afford to
offer lower stock returns, but companies that keep on burning more and more fossil fuel must resign
themselves to offering higher returns. Not surprisingly, we find that the level of emissions is highly


8   For example, in its planned climate stress test, the Bank of England focuses only on large firms and measures risk in
      terms of required reductions in the level of emissions (see The 2021 biennial exploratory scenario on the financial
      risks from climate change, December 2019, Bank of England discussion paper).
                                                            5
persistent. Hence, emission levels reflect a long-run risk exposure with respect to carbon emissions.
Changes in emissions, in turn reflect short-run effects. How much worse, or better, carbon risk gets.
Of course, changes in emissions could also indicate changes in earnings, but we control for this effect
by adding the company's return on equity among our independent variables.


         The carbon premium is economically significant: A one-standard-deviation increase in
respectively the level and change of scope 1 emissions leads to a 15-bps and 26-bps increase in stock
returns, or respectively a 1.8% and 3.1% annualized increase. In addition, a one-standard-deviation
increase in the level and change of scope 2 emissions leads to respectively a 24-bps and 18-bps increase
in stock returns, or a 2.9% and 2.2% annualized increase. Finally, a corresponding one-standard-
deviation increase in the level and change of scope 3 emissions increases stock returns by 33 bps and
31 bps per month, or 4.0% and 3.8% on an annual basis. Importantly, firms with higher emissions
generate higher returns, after controlling for size, book-to-market, momentum, other well-recognized
variables that predict returns, and firm characteristics such as the value of property, plant & equipment
(PPE) and investment over assets.


         Emission intensity has no significant effect on stock returns. This is a robust and notable result
in light of the fact that emission intensity, especially scope 1 emission intensity, is a widely used
exclusionary screening indicator by institutional investors. Following Hong and Kacperczyk (2009),
we explore to what extent companies with high carbon emissions are treated like "sin stocks" by
institutional investors. We find that, in aggregate, institutional investors do hold a significantly smaller
fraction of companies with high scope 1 emission intensity, but they are not underweight companies
with high levels of emissions. When we disaggregate by investor categories (mutual funds, insurance
companies, banks, pension funds, and hedge funds) we further find that insurance companies, pension
and mutual funds are underweight scope 1 emission intensity. The negative ownership effect of
moving from high to low scope 1 emission-intensity firms is economically large and accounts for
about 15-20% of the cross-sectional variation in the ownership variable. This finding is in line with
the rise in the sustainable investment movement and the popular negative exclusionary screening
investment strategy followed by funds with an ESG tilt.9


9 See Krueger, Sautner, and Starks (2019). Also, according to the Global Sustainable Investment Review 2018,
negative/exclusionary screening is the largest sustainable investment strategy globally, representing $19.8 trillion of assets
under management. http://www.gsi-alliance.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/GSIR_Review2018.3.28.pdf
                                                              6
            Remarkably we find that divestment is only based on scope 1 emission intensity, and that there
is no significant effect of the level of emissions on institutional investor portfolios. Nor are
institutional investors underweight scope 2 and scope 3 emission-intensive firms. This is true both in
aggregate and for each institutional investor category. Essentially, institutional investors have been
applying exclusionary screens (or not) solely on the basis of scope 1 emission intensity. Even more
remarkable, we find that when we exclude the industries with the highest CO2 emissions (oil & gas,
utilities, and motor industries) then there is no significant exclusionary screening at all by institutional
investors, whether based on emission levels or emission intensity. In other words, the exclusionary
screening is done entirely in these salient industries, and in all other industries there is no significant
divestment. Overall, these findings unavoidably lead us to reject the divestment hypothesis. Although
there is significant divestment by institutional investors it has no significant effect on stock returns.
Institutional investor portfolios are significantly underweight firms with high scope 1 emission
intensity, but stock returns are not affected significantly by emission intensity.


            Our main finding that stock returns are positively related to the level (and changes) of carbon
emissions is largely consistent with the view that investors are pricing in a carbon risk premium at the
firm level. This result contradicts the carbon alpha hypothesis, whereby investors holding a portfolio
long stocks of companies with low carbon emissions and short stocks of companies with high
emissions generates positive abnormal returns. Two recent studies by Garvey, Iyer, and Nash (2018)
and by In, Park and Monk (2019) suggest that portfolios that sort stocks by emission intensity (going
long stocks with low intensity and short stocks with high intensity) generate a positive alpha. In
contrast, we find that there is no significant effect of carbon intensity on stock returns. Our study
differs in two important respects from theirs. First, we cover a different time period and sample of
firms. Second, we control for industry, firm characteristics, and known risk factors, while neither study
includes all of these controls. Controlling for industry in particular significantly affects the results.10


            Another important result is that the carbon premium has only materialized recently. We show
that if we look back to the 1990s by imputing the 2005 cross-sectional distribution of total emissions
to the 1990s, there is no significant carbon premium, consistent with the view that investors at that


10   Another important difference with In, Park and Monk (2019) is that we analyze the effects of carbon emissions for each
      scope category separately, thereby avoiding double-counting, whereas their study aggregates all three categories of
      emissions together. This aggregation, however, does not materially alter the qualitative aspects of our results.
                                                              7
time likely did not pay as much attention to carbon emissions. However, if we perform the same
analysis to our sample period, by imputing the 2017 cross-sectional distribution of emissions back
throughout our sample period, then there is a highly significant carbon premium.


        To summarize, investors seem to take a somewhat schizophrenic attitude to carbon emissions.
On the one hand, institutional investors clearly want to take a proactive approach by divesting from
industries with high CO2 emissions. On the other hand, this categorical exclusionary screening
approach only partially addresses the carbon risk issue. Indeed, investors price in a carbon emission
risk premium at the firm level in all industries even though divestment is concentrated in the industries
with the highest CO2 emissions (oil & gas, utilities, and motor industries). The challenge with carbon
risk is that it cannot just be reduced to a fossil fuel supply problem. As with recreational drugs, part
of the problem lies also with the demand for energy. Once one factors in both supply and demand
aspects, all companies are sinners to various degrees when it comes to carbon emissions. A coarse
exclusionary approach focusing only on the energy and utility sectors (and using emission intensity as
the main filter) misses the full extent of the CO2 emissions problem. Accounting for carbon risk is
also required on the demand side, so to speak, which inevitably involves the careful tracking of
emissions at the firm level.


        Our study is related to a rapidly growing literature on climate change and financial markets.
An early study by Matsumura, Prakash, and VeraMunoz (2014) of S&P500 firms between 2006 and
2008 looks at the effects of direct carbon emissions on firm value, and the effects of voluntary public
disclosure of emissions (through CDP) on firm value. They find that higher emissions are associated
with lower firm values, but that voluntary disclosure mitigates the negative valuation effect of
emissions. Relatedly, Chava (2014) looks at the effects of environmental concerns, as reflected in KLD
ratings, on firms' cost of capital. He finds that firms that derive substantial revenues from the sale of
coal or oil, as reflected in a KLD rating, are associated with a higher implied cost of capital. Andersson,
Bolton, and Samama (2016) propose a carbon risk hedging strategy for passive investors based on low
carbon indexes.


        More recently, Ilhan, Sautner, and Vilkov (2020) have found that carbon emissions increase
downside risk as reflected in outof-themoney put option prices. Hsu, Li, and Tsou (2019) look at
the effects of environmental pollution on the cross-section of stock returns. They find that highly

                                                    8
polluting firms are more exposed to environmental regulation risk and command higher average
returns. Engle, Giglio, Lee, Kelly, and Stroebel (2019) have constructed an index of climate news
through textual analysis of the Wall Street Journal and other media and show how a dynamic portfolio
strategy can be implemented that hedges risk with respect to climate change news. Görgen, Jacob,
Nerlinger, Riordan, Rohleder, and Wilkens (2019) construct a carbonrisk factor and estimate a carbon
beta for firms. Monasterolo and De Angelis (2019) explore whether investors demand higher risk
premia for carbon-intensive assets following the COP 21 agreement.


        Other related studies have explored the asset pricing consequences of greater material risks
linked to climate events and global warming. Hong, Li, and Xu (2019) have found that the rising
drought risk caused by climate change is not efficiently priced by stock markets. Several studies have
looked at climate change and real estate prices. Baldauf, Garlappi, and Yannelis (2020) find little
evidence of declining prices as a result of greater flood risk due to sea level rise. Bakkensen and Barrage
(2017) find that climate risk beliefs in coastal areas are highly heterogeneous and that rising flood risk
due to climate change is not fully reflected in coastal house prices. Bernstein, Gustafson, and Lewis
(2019) find that coastal homes vulnerable to sea level rise are priced at a 6.6% discount relative to
similar homes at higher elevations. Giglio, Maggiori, Rao, Stroebel, and Weber (2018) use real estate
pricing data to infer long-run discount rates for valuing investments in climate change abatement.


        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and provides
summary statistics. Section 3 discusses the results. Section 4 concludes.


2 Data and Sample
Our primary database covers the period 2005-2017 and is largely a result of matching two data sets by
Trucost and FactSet. Trucost provides information on corporate carbon and other greenhouse gas
emissions. FactSet provides data on stock returns, corporate fundamentals, and institutional
ownership. We performed the matching using ISIN as a main identifier. In some instances, in which
ISIN was not available to create a perfect match, we relied on matching based on company names.11
Finally, when there are multiple subsidiaries of a given company, we used the primary location as a
matching entity. The ultimate matching produced 3421 unique companies out of 3481 companies

11 After standardizing the company names in FactSet and Trucost, respectively, we choose companies whose names have
a similarity score of one based on the standardized company names.
                                                        9
available in Trucost. Among the 60 companies we were not able to match, more than half are not
exchange listed and the remaining ones are small. Hence, we believe our data cover almost the entire
universe of companies with available emission data.


2.1 Data on Corporate Carbon Emissions
Firm-level carbon emissions data are assembled by seven main providers, CDP, Trucost, MSCI,
Sustainalytics, Thomson Reuters, Bloomberg, and ISS. All these providers follow the Greenhouse
Gas Protocol that sets the standards for measuring corporate emissions.12 More and more companies
disclose their greenhouse gas emissions, and most large corporations report their emissions to CDP.
Other providers rely on the CDP data and supplement it with other sources. Emissions can be
measured directly at source or more commonly by applying conversion factors to energy use. The
Greenhouse Gas Protocol distinguishes between three different sources of emissions: scope 1
emissions, which cover direct emissions over one year from establishments that are owned or
controlled by the company; these include all emissions from fossil fuel used in production. Scope 2
emissions come from the generation of purchased heat, steam, and electricity consumed by the
company. Scope 3 emissions are caused by the operations and products of the company but occur
from sources not owned or controlled by the company. These include emissions from the production
of purchased materials, product use, waste disposal, and outsourced activities.
        In some sectors, like automobile manufacturing, and for many companies, by far the most
important component of their emissions is the aggregation of all their scope 3 emissions. The
Greenhouse Gas Protocol distinguishes between 15 different categories of scope 3 emissions,
including purchased goods and services, capital goods, upstream & downstream transportation and
distribution, waste generated in operations, business travel, employee commuting, processing & use
of sold products, and end-of-life treatment of sold products.13 According to CDP's 2016 Climate
Change Report, most scope 3 emissions are concentrated in two categories, purchased goods and
services (around 44%) and use of sold products (around 48%).14 The Greenhouse Gas Protocol
provides detailed guidance on how to identify a company's most important sources of scope 3
emissions and how to calculate them. For purchased goods and services, this basically involves
measuring inputs, or "activity data", and applying emission factors to these purchased inputs that


12 See https://ghgprotocol.org.
13 See http://ghgprotocol.org/standards/scope-3-standard
14 See CDP 2016 Climate Change Report "Tracking Progress on Corporate Climate Action"


                                                      10
convert activity data into emissions data. The upstream scope 3 data from Trucost that we use is
constructed using an input-output model that provides the fraction of expenditures from one sector
across all other sectors of the economy. This model is extended to include sector-level emission
factors, so that an upstream scope 3 emissions estimate can be determined from each firm's
expenditures across all sectors from which it obtains its inputs (see Trucost, 2019).15
         Because they are easier to measure, and because disclosure requirements are stricter, data on
scope 1 and scope 2 have been more systematically reported and accurately estimated. As Busch,
Johnson, Pioch, and Kopp (2018) have shown, there is very little variation in the reported scope 1 and
2 emissions data across the data providers. Correlations in the reported scope 1 data average 0.99, and
0.98 for scope 2, across the five providers CDP, Trucost, MSCI, Sustainalytics, and Thomson
Reuters.16 However, when it comes to estimated scope 1 and scope 2 emissions (when reported data
are missing), the correlations drop to respectively 0.79 and 0.63 for the three providers, Trucost, MSCI,
and Sustainalytics, that offer these estimates. Finally, only two data providers, Trucost and ISS ESG,
provide estimates of scope 3 emissions. The Trucost EDX database we use in our main analysis
reports all three scopes of carbon emissions in units of tons of CO2 emitted in a year. We report the
summary statistics of the emissions variables in Panel A of Table 1.
         The average firm in our sample produces 1.97 million tons of scope 1 emissions, and is tied
to 1.72 million tons of scope 3 emissions. The quantity of scope 2 emissions is relatively smaller, at
342,000 tons of CO2 equivalent. Notably, the median number is the largest for scope 3 emissions, as
almost all companies in our sample are tied to a significant quantity of such emissions. The scope 1,
2, and 3 measures are in units of tons of CO2 and normalized using the natural log scale. We further
report annual growth rates in each emission measure. To mitigate the impact of outliers we winsorize
all growth measures at the 2.5% level. The carbon intensity of a company is expressed as tons of CO2
equivalent divided by the company's revenues in million U.S. dollar units, also winsorized at the 2.5%
level. The average (unwinsorized) scope 1 intensity in our sample equals 265.26 tons/million, while
the respective intensities for scope 2 and scope 3 are 39.64 tons/million and 164.22 tons/million. The
EDX database also provides information on whether the emissions data was reported or estimated,
which allows us to do a sensitivity analysis and determine how the results are affected by the exclusion


15 Downstream scope 3 emissions, caused by the use of sold products, can also be estimated and are increasingly reported
    by companies. Trucost has recently started assembling this data (see Trucost, 2019); however, we do not include this
    data in our study.
16 More than 6,300 companies worldwide answered CDP's climate change questionnaire in 2018. Of these, 76% disclosed

scope 1 emissions, 68% scope 2 emissions, and 38% scope 3 emissions (see https://www.cdp.net).
                                                          11
of the estimated data. We describe how the data breaks down into firms with respectively reported
and estimated emissions data in Table 2. As Matsumura, Prakash, and VeraMunoz (2014) already
noted, firms that do not report their emissions are typically smaller (and therefore have smaller
emissions) and are less profitable. But in other respects, firms that report their emissions have similar
characteristics to those that do not. In particular, their stock returns, volatility, leverage, book-to-
market ratios, capital expenditures, and betas are very similar.
        We also report alternative measures Trucost provides, in particular: i) CARBON DIRECT,
which adds three additional greenhouse gases to the GHG Protocol scope 1 measures; ii) CARBON
INDIRECT, which covers a slightly broader set of emissions by the direct suppliers to a company
than scope 2; iii) GHG DIRECT, measured in U.S. dollars, which covers all direct external
environmental impacts of a company. Trucost applies a monetary value to GHG emissions quantities,
which represents the global average damage of each environmental impact; and iv) GHG INDIRECT,
which covers indirect supply chain environmental impacts. These are estimated impacts based on
Trucost's environmental impact models. Again, these are reported in U.S. dollars and represent the
global average damages of each environmental impact.
        How correlated are these different emission variables? We report the cross-correlations in
Table 3.A. As one would have expected, the levels of all three categories of emissions are positively
correlated. Yet, the coefficients are relatively small. Similarly, the level of scope 1 emissions is
obviously positively correlated with scope 1 emission intensity, but the size of the coefficient is only
0.6, reflecting the fact that two firms with the same scope 1 intensity may have very different levels of
emissions. A large firm, with high emissions, can have the same emission intensity as a small firm. The
low correlation between levels and intensity is even more pronounced for scope 2 (0.24) and scope 3
(0.27). In Panel B, we also report the auto-correlation coefficients for the different measures of
emissions. Emission levels for all three categories are highly persistent, with an auto-correlation
coefficient of 0.977 for scope 1, 0.955 for scope 2, and 0.967 for scope 3. Interestingly, the year-to-
year growth in emissions also has some persistence, especially for scope 3 emissions. As for the
emission intensity variables they are, not surprisingly, also highly persistent as sales are highly
persistent.
        We further analyze the average values of all three emission sources over time. Figure 1 and
Table 4 present the results. As one might expect, there is a steady decline in scope 1 and scope 3
emissions at the firm level over time as a result of energy efficiency improvements, technological
innovations, and the increased reliance on renewable energy sources. There is a sharp decline in scope

                                                   12
1 emissions from 2015 to 2016. However, this mainly reflects the addition by Trucost of many smaller
firms to the sample in 2015, as can be seen in Figure 2. The addition of all these firms to the sample
also explains why total scope 3 emissions sharply increase from 2015 to 2016, and why total scope 1
emissions remain flat even though per-firm emissions have declined. All these results are further
confirmed by the numbers in Table 4 in which we compare averages for all firms in our sample (Panel
A) with those conditioned on the presence in the sample prior to 2015 (Panel B). We can see that
when we drop the new firms added in 2016 from the sample, the averages for 2016 and 2017 are very
close to the numbers in 2015. While we still observe some decline in scope 1 emissions, there is no
such decline in scope 2 and scope 3 emissions. If anything, the numbers for scope 3 emissions go up,
although not by much.
         We note that firms with significant emissions are represented in a wide range of industries. In
Table 5, we present the distribution of firms in our sample with respect to the six-digit Global Industry
Classification (GIC 6). Banks, biotech, and oil & gas are the most represented industries, with each
one having more than 150 firms.17 In Table 6, we provide a list of industries with the highest and the
lowest intensity of emissions. Power, electric, and multi-utility industries produce the most scope 1
emissions, while consumer finance, thrifts and mortgages, and capital markets are the cleanest. The
ranking is somewhat different when we classify industries with respect to their scope 2 and scope 3
emissions. Metals and mining, electric utilities, and construction materials are the three most scope 2
emission intensive industries (the cleanest industries mimic those based on scope 1 classification). In
turn, food products, metals and mining, and construction materials are the three most scope 3
emission intensive industries. Internet software and services, health care technologies, and software
are the three least intensive industries.18
         Finally, we observe not only substantial variation in the growth rates of emissions across
different industries, but also significant variation in the rates of all three categories of emissions across
firms within the same industry, as can be seen in Figure 3, which displays the time-series plots of the
average cross-sectional standard deviations of emission growth rates across all firms (Panel A) and
across all firms within a given GIC 6 industry (Panel B). Even though the scale of the variation in


17 Some firms in this table are classified into multiple industries; hence, the total number of firms in the table (3917)
    exceeds the number of unique firms in our sample (3421).
18 The Trucost industry classification is finer than the GIC six-digit classification. Given that we control for industry a

    natural question is how sensitive the results are to the classification itself. The classification in theory could be so fine
    that it includes only one firm in each industry or so coarse that it includes all firms in one industry. Adding industry
    fixed effects would be meaningless under these polar classification systems. As a robustness check, we also perform
    our analysis under the GIC classification and report the results in Table A.4 in the Appendix.
                                                              13
Panel A is larger than that in Panel B there is still a significant dispersion in emissions in Panel B.
Moreover, the standard deviation in carbon emission growth rates is very stable over time. In
particular, the standard deviation did not significantly change following the addition of new firms to
the sample in 2015.


2.2 Variables in Cross-sectional Return Regressions
Our empirical analysis of stock returns employs a monthly measure of returns as a dependent variable.
In our cross-sectional return regressions, the dependent variable RETi,t is the monthly return of an
individual stock i in month t. Our return data primarily comes from FactSet, but for a small subset of
delisted companies we replace the return data using delisting-adjusted values from Compustat. Finally,
we remove observations with returns greater than 100% to mitigate the impact of outliers.19
         Our control variables are defined as follows: LOGSIZEi,t is the natural logarithm of firm i's
market capitalization (price times shares outstanding) at the end of year t; B/Mi,t is firm i's book value
divided by its market cap at the end of year t; LEVERAGE is the book leverage of the company;
ROEi,t is the firm's earnings performance, given by the ratio of firm i's net yearly income divided by
the value of its equity; MOMi,t is the average of the most recent 12 months' returns on stock i, leading
up to and including month t-1; INVEST/A represents the firm's capital expenditures divided by the
book value of its assets; HHI is the Herfindahl concentration index of firms with respect to different
business segments, based on each segment's revenues; LOGPPE is the natural logarithm, of the firm's
property, plant, and equipment; BETAi,t is the market beta of firm i in year t, calculated over the one
year period using daily data; finally, VOLATi,t is the standard deviation of returns based on past 12
months of monthly returns. To eliminate the impact of outliers we winsorize B/M, LEVERAGE,
and INVEST/A at the 2.5% level, and MOM and VOLAT at the 0.5% level. We report the summary
statistics of these variables in Panel B of Table 1.

         The average firm's monthly stock return equals 1.14%, with a standard deviation of 10.86%.
The average firm has a market capitalization of $13 billion, with a median value of $3.8 billion. The
average book-to-market ratio equals 0.50, while the average book leverage equals 24%. The average
market beta equals 1.10, slightly more than that of the market.



19The number of excluded firm/month observations is 109 and its exclusion does not materially affect our results.
However, using unrestricted returns data would be problematic as the data, for example, include four observations with
monthly returns greater than 10000%.
                                                         14
2.3 Variables in Time-series Return Regressions
The variables for our time-series regressions are defined as follows: MKTRFt is the monthly return of
the CRSP value-weighted portfolio in month t, net of the risk- free rate; SMBt, HMLt, MOMt, and
CMAt are well-known portfolio return series downloaded from Ken French's Web site: SMB is the
monthly return of a portfolio that is long on small stocks and short on large stocks; HML is the
monthly return of a portfolio that is long on high book-to-market stocks and short on low book-to-
market stocks; MOM is the monthly return of a portfolio that is long on past one-year return winners
and short on past one-year return losers; CMA is the monthly return of a portfolio that is long on
conservative investment stocks and short on aggressive investment stocks. BAB is the monthly return
of a portfolio that is long on low-beta stocks and short on high-beta stocks; LIQ is the liquidity factor
of Pastor and Stambaugh; NET ISSUANCE is the monthly return of a portfolio that is long on high-
net-issuance stocks and short on low-net-issuance stocks. Net issuance for year t is the change in the
natural log of split-adjusted shares outstanding from the fiscal yearend in t-2 to the fiscal yearend in t-
1; IDIO VOL is the monthly return of a portfolio that is long on low idiosyncratic volatility stocks
and short on high idiosyncratic volatility stocks. We present the summary statistics for the various
portfolio returns in Panel C of Table 1.
        The average market risk premium in our sample is 0.7% per month. Other factors with
relatively high risk premia are net issuance and BAB. Somewhat atypically, the value factor return in
our sample is equal to 0%. Similarly, the momentum factor generates a mere 0.07% per month, and
the volatility factor has a negative return of -0.18% per month.


2.4 Variables in Divestment Regressions
Our institutional ownership regression variables are: IOi,t which is the fraction of the shares of
company i held by institutions in the FactSet Database at the end of year t. IO is calculated by
aggregating the shares held by all types of institutions at the end of the year, and then dividing this
value by the number of shares outstanding at the end of the year. We further decompose the
institutional ownership with respect to subgroups of owners. IO_BANKS is the ownership by banks;
IO_INSURANCE is the ownership by insurance companies; IO_INVESTCOS is the ownership by
investment companies (e.g., mutual funds); IO_ADVISERS is the ownership by independent
investment advisers; IO_PENSIONS is the ownership by pension funds; IO_HFS is the ownership
by hedge funds. Even though the total institutional ownership captures the intensive margin only, the


                                                    15
range of disaggregated ownership variables varies from 0% to 100% (as long as the total institutional
ownership in the data has a positive value).
        The control variables in the ownership regressions include PRINVi,t, which is the inverse of
firm i's share price at the end of year t; VOLATi,t is the standard deviation of monthly stock returns
for company i over the one-year period; VOLUMEi,t is the average daily trading volume (in $million)
of stock i over the calendar year t. NASDAQi,t is an indicator variable equal to one if a stock i is listed
on NASDAQ in year t, and zero otherwise; SP500i,t is an indicator variable equal to one if a stock i is
part of the S&P 500 index in year t, and zero otherwise. We report the summary statistics for these
variables in Panel D of Table 1.
        The average IO is 0.77, and the cross-sectional standard deviation of IO is 0.23. In other words,
in a typical year, a typical firm has about 77% of its shares held by institutions, and the standard
deviation of institutional ownership in a typical cross-section is 23%. Among the different institutional
owners, independent advisers are the biggest holders with an average stock's ownership equal to
43.8%, followed by investment companies with an average 18% ownership. Banks and insurance
companies, in turn, are the smallest institutional owners. The average daily stock return volatility in
our sample is 10% or annualized 158.7%. The average daily stock volume is $440,000. Finally, about
30% of stock-month observations are companies listed on NASDAQ, and 37% observations are
companies from the S&P 500 index.



3 Results
We begin our analysis by investigating the determinants of scope 1, scope 2, and scope 3 emissions.
We then turn to the evaluation of the carbon return premium in the cross-section of stocks. Our main
finding is that stocks of companies with high levels and growth rates of emissions have higher returns
than those of companies with low levels and growth rates of emissions for all three emission
categories. This result contradicts the carbon alpha hypothesis that portfolios short high carbon emission
stocks and long low carbon emission stocks generate abnormal returns. We next explore the time-
series properties of the cross-sectional carbon premium with respect to well-known risk factors and
find insufficient evidence in support of a carbon risk factor affecting returns. Finally, we consider the
divestment hypothesis by looking at institutional ownership patterns.




                                                    16
3.1 Determinants of Carbon Emissions
Since emissions are not reported by all companies, one basic issue to explore first is how emissions of
companies that report compare with imputed emissions of non-reporting companies. To assess the
quantitative differences on the extensive margin we compare various firm-level characteristics for the
reporting and non-reporting firms. We describe basic summary statistics of the two categories of firms
in Table A.1 of the Appendix. As one might expect, we find that larger firms are more likely to report
their emissions. Also, firms with lower book-to-market ratios and higher book leverage are more likely
to report emissions. At the same time, the two groups of firms do not differ significantly in terms of
their stock returns or investment levels.
         Next, we assess the differences in emission levels, year-by-year changes, and emission
intensities across firms using a regression framework. Our dependent variables are levels, changes,
and intensities of scope 1, scope 2, and scope 3. Since there is little theory that can guide us on what
determines the level of carbon emissions, especially with regard to their different sources, we include
a host of firm-level variables, comprising LOGSIZE, B/M, ROE, LEVERAGE, INVEST/A, HHI,
and LOGPPE. To reflect the possibility that firm-level emissions could concentrate across firms and
in time, we cluster standard errors at the firm and year levels.20 We present the results in Table 7.
         Not surprisingly, all three categories of emission levels, and changes in emissions, are
significantly positively related to LOGSIZE. However, scope 1 and 3 emission intensities are weakly
negatively related to LOGSIZE. This is yet another indication of the fact that the emission intensity
variable does not accurately distinguish the firms that are most exposed to carbon emission risk. The
level of emissions is also significantly associated with high book-to-market, high tangible capital (PPE)
and highly levered firms. On the other hand, the level of emissions is lower for firms with high capital
expenditures, although these growth firms are associated with high increases in emissions.
Interestingly, only diversification (HHI) and tangible capital significantly affects emission intensity.


3.2 Evidence on Cross-sectional Returns
For all three categories of emissions, we relate in turn the level of companies' emissions, the year-to-
year growth in emissions, and the companies' emission intensity to their corresponding stock returns
in the cross-section. We first estimate the following cross-sectional regression model using pooled
OLS:

20Standard errors in all panel regressions become significantly smaller in alternative specifications that cluster at the firm,
industry, time, or industry and time levels.
                                                             17
!,# = $ + % ()!,# + & !,#'% + µ# + e!,#                                                                   (1)

where !,# measures the stock return of company i in month t and Emissions is a generic term
alternately standing for SCOPE 1, SCOPE 2, and SCOPE 3 emissions. The vector of controls includes
a host of firm-specific variables known to predict returns, such as LOGSIZE, B/M, ROE,
LEVERAGE, MOM, INVEST/A, HHI, LOGPPE, BETA, and VOLAT. Our model also includes
year/month fixed effects. We cluster standard errors at the firm and year levels. Our coefficient of
interest is % .

           We report the results in Table 8, Panel A. Column (1) shows the results for SCOPE 1; column
(2) for SCOPE 2, and column (3) for SCOPE 3. For all three categories of emissions we find a positive
and statistically significant effect on firms' stock returns. The effect is also economically significant: A
one-standard-deviation increase in SCOPE 1 leads to a 15-bps increase in stock returns, or 1.8%
annualized, and a one-standard-deviation increase in SCOPE 2 leads to a 24-bps increase in stock
returns, or 2.9% annualized. Finally, a one-standard-deviation increase in SCOPE 3 increases stock
returns by 33 bps per month, or 4% on an annual basis.

           Since emissions tend to cluster significantly within specific industries a question of interest is
whether the firm-specific differences can be attributed to industry-specific effects. To examine this
possibility, we additionally include industry-fixed effects using the Trucost industry classification. The
results presented in columns (4) to (6) are quite striking. Including industry effects significantly
strengthens the cross-sectional dispersion of returns due to carbon emissions. In fact, the economic
significance increases by anywhere between 120% and 250% relative to the model without industry
effects.

           We further plot the time series of the cumulative values of the unadjusted and industry-
adjusted carbon premia in Figure 4. Because different emission variables have different supports, we
express the magnitudes in terms of unit standard deviation of each variable at each cross-section in
time, so that all plots of the cumulative effect show comparable numbers in terms of economic
significance. As can be seen in the figure, there are large positive cumulative returns for all measures
of total emissions. The economic magnitudes of the effect become even larger once we factor in
differences in industry exposures.



                                                      18
         We next estimate the same cross-sectional regression model (1) replacing the level of emissions
(LOG (Emissions TOT)) with the year-to-year growth in emissions ((Emissions)). The results are
reported in Table 8, Panel B. We find again a positive and statistically significant effect of the growth
in emissions on stock returns. Interestingly, controlling for industry makes almost no difference when
it comes to the effect of the growth in emissions.21 Note also that ROE has a significant positive effect
on stock returns under this specification (it is insignificant in the specification with emission levels).
We attribute this to the fact that firms with high emission growth likely also have higher earnings,
which could result in higher stock returns (to the extent that the higher earnings outcome is
unanticipated).

         We also plot the time series of the cumulative values of the unadjusted and industry-adjusted
carbon premia related to the growth in emissions in Figure 5. All measures of emissions exhibit a
steady rate of increase in the carbon premium over time.

         Finally, we estimate the cross-sectional regression model in (1) for emission intensities. We
report the results in Table 8, Panel C. There is no significant effect of emission intensity on returns
for any of the three categories of emissions, whether we control for industry or not. The cumulative
effect of emission intensity on the carbon premium, presented in Figure 6, is also quite weak, with the
exception of scope 2 for which we observe a slightly positive trend. Overall, these results reveal that
there is a significant carbon premium with respect to the level of emissions, reflecting firms' long-run
risk exposure to carbon emissions, and a premium with respect to the growth in emissions, which
capture the more short-term evolution of firms' risk exposure to future emissions.
         One open question with our analysis above is that we use carbon emission data in year t to
explain monthly returns over the same year t. This could conceivably introduce a look-ahead bias.
That is, under this specification we might unwittingly relate stock returns for some months in year t
to emission data that might not yet have been available to investors. To address this question, we
undertake the following robustness check. We relate monthly stock returns with a lag of respectively
0 to 12 months between the time when emissions are reported and the month when returns are
realized. We report the results in Table A.3. A remarkable pattern emerges from this analysis. Panel

21To allay any concern that our results may be driven by the correlation between emissions and size, we provide additional
robustness tests in which we estimate univariate regression models with respective emission variables only, and regressions
with emissions and size only. The results, reported in Table A.2 of the Online Appendix indicate that size is an important
control when one considers the level of total emissions as a regressor but it is not as important in the model with growth
rate of emissions.
                                                            19
A1 reports the results for LOG (SCOPE 1 TOT). The coefficient is statistically significant for the first
two months (without industry fixed effects), remains significant at the 5% level until month 6 (with
industry fixed effects), and is insignificant thereafter. Not surprisingly it takes time for information
about emissions to be reflected in stock prices, but eventually (after six months or so) this information
appears to be fully absorbed. Essentially the same pattern is observed for the level of scope 2 and
scope 3 emissions (with a somewhat faster (slower) integration of scope 2 (scope 3) emission
information into stock prices), as the results in Panels A2 and A3 show. The same pattern is present
for the growth in total emissions, as can be seen in panels B1, B2, and B3. However, emission intensity
is nearly always insignificant, as we report in Panels C1, C2, and C3. The only visible exception is
scope 1 emission intensity, which is significant at the 5% level in month 6. We conclude from this
analysis that our results are not biased by a look-ahead effect.

         Another possibility is that our results could be explained by the fact that firms with higher
emissions have also been exposed to unexpected positive value shocks. We explore this hypothesis by
analysing returns that strip out the effect of earnings surprises. Specifically, we subtract from the
monthly stock returns the component that is realized on earnings announcement days and re-estimate
the regression model in (1) with the adjusted returns. We report the results in Table 9 for the level of
total emissions (Panel A), for the growth rate of emissions (Panel B), and for emission intensity (Panel
C). We find no significant differential effect of earnings announcements on the carbon premium.
Stocks with higher levels and growth rates of emissions still have higher returns, and emission intensity
is still insignificant.


3.3 Carbon Premium and Risk Factors
Is the carbon premium linked to traditional risk factors? To answer this question, we estimate the
following time-series regression model using monthly data:
%,# = $ +  + e#                                                                                       (2)

where %,# is the carbon return premium estimated from the cross-sectional Fama-MacBeth regression
in equation (1); F is a set of factor-mimicking portfolios that includes MKTRF, HML, SMB, MOM,
CMA, BAB, LIQ, NET ISSUANCE, and IDIO VOL. We calculate standard errors of the coefficients
using the Newey-West procedure with 12 lags to account for autocorrelation in error terms. Our
coefficient of interest is $ , which measures the residual carbon premium controlling for other
risk/style factors. We present the results in Table 10.
                                                   20
        Panel A shows the results for the carbon premium related to total emissions. In the odd
columns, we report the unconditional carbon premium as a benchmark. In the even columns, we add
various factors MKTRF, HML, SMB, MOM, CMA, BAB, LIQ, NET ISSUANCE, and IDIO VOL.
Comparing the odd and even columns for the respective scope categories of emissions, we find that
the carbon premium remains statistically and economically significant after we adjust for differential
factor exposures. However, the economic size of the premium is about 10%-20% smaller in
magnitude. Overall, the regression intercepts from the cross-sectional return regressions are both
economically and statistically significant in the presence of various risk factors.

        Panel B shows the results for the carbon premium related to the growth rate in total emissions.
We find again that the set of standard risk factors cannot explain the average value of the carbon
premium for any of the emissions categories. This time, however, the difference in magnitudes across
specifications is much smaller. Panel C gives the results for emission intensity. Whether
unconditionally or conditionally on the risk factors, there is no significant carbon premium.

        Overall, our time-series regressions show that the carbon premium cannot be explained by
known risk factors, which reinforces the finding in Section 3.2 that the level of carbon emissions
contains independent information about the cross section of average returns.


3.4 The Divestment Hypothesis
An important possible explanation for the observed carbon premium could be under-diversification
resulting from divestment and exclusionary screening of stocks with high carbon emissions by
institutional investors implementing a sustainable investment policy. To the extent that some investors
may shun companies with high carbon emissions, risk sharing would be limited, and idiosyncratic risk
could be priced (e.g., Merton, 1987; Hong and Kacperczyk, 2009). If the extent of such divestment is
high, one would expect to see significant pricing effects.
        We test this possibility by looking at the portfolio holdings of institutional investors. Formally,
we estimate the following pooled regression model:

!,# = $ + % &,# + ' &,# + e!,#                                                                          (3)




                                                    21
We consider ownership effects based on carbon intensity, the measure which is most aligned with
explicit mandates imposed by socially sensitive asset managers.22 The vector of controls includes
LOGSIZE, PRINV, B/M, MOM, BETA, VOLAT, VOLUME, NASDAQ, and SP500. All
regressions include year/month fixed effects. Also, carbon emissions tend to vary geographically, due
to resource-driven firm locations. It is thus possible that the geographic location may also interact
with ownership incentives. We test this idea by including in the ownership regression state fixed effects
determined by the firm headquarters' locations (in even numbered columns). Our coefficient of
interest is % , which measures the degree of avoidance of firms with greater carbon emissions. We
cluster standard errors at the industry and year levels. We present the results in Table 11.
         In Panel A, we report the results for the aggregate institutional ownership measure. Columns
(1) and (2), show the results for SCOPE 1 INT, respectively without and with state fixed effects. Both
coefficients are negative and statistically significant at the 5% level. The economic effect of the
divestment is relatively modest: A one-standard-deviation increase in SCOPE 1 leads to approximately
a 1.3-percentage-point decrease in aggregate institutional ownership, which is about 6.3% of the cross-
sectional standard deviation in ownership. In contrast, the coefficients are statistically insignificant for
SCOPE 2 INT and SCOPE 3 INT, indicating that the exclusionary screens institutional investors apply
in constructing their portfolios are entirely based on SCOPE 1 INT.
         The institutional investor world pools a number of different constituencies with possibly
different investor pressures. We conjecture that certain institutions, such as insurance companies,
investment advisers, or pension funds, are more likely to face investor pressure, and thus they avoid
high-emission companies, as opposed to mutual funds and hedge funds who are natural arbitrageurs.
We test this hypothesis formally by dividing the institutional investors' universe into six categories:
banks, insurance companies, investment companies, independent advisers, pension funds, and hedge
funds. For each category, we obtain their stock-level institutional ownership and estimate the
regression model in (3) for each of them separately. Panel B reports the results broken down by
investor category. We observe a strong cross-sectional variation in the ownership patterns. Insurance
companies, investment advisers, and pension funds tend to hold less of the high scope 1 emission
companies. At the same time, we observe positive, though weaker, ownership effects for banks,
investment companies, and hedge funds, consistent with these groups being natural arbitrageurs. The


22In the Online Appendix, Table A.4, we also present the results for the less commonly used measures of total emissions
and growth in emissions. As these results confirm, these variables have no significant impact on institutional investor
portfolios.
                                                          22
divestment effects are economically large. A movement in SCOPE 1 INT from one standard deviation
below the mean to one standard deviation above the mean, corresponding to a spread between low
and high-emission firms leads to a reduction in ownership by 21%, 5%, and 4% of the cross-sectional
standard deviation of ownership for investment advisers, insurance companies, and pension funds,
respectively. In particular, given its large aggregate shares of stock holdings, the effect through
investment advisers could lead to significant pricing effects. In sharp contrast to the results for SCOPE
1 INT, we observe that (with the exception of Banks loading up positively on SCOPE 3 INT) all
coefficients for the different investor types are small and statistically insignificant, which suggests that
institutional investors do not seem to discriminate between stocks with regard to their scope 2 and
scope 3 emission intensities.
        Overall, institutional investors do significantly divest from companies associated with high
SCOPE 1 INT. They do not screen companies based on the level of their emissions (or growth in
emissions), even though the carbon premium is associated with these variables. They prefer to screen
firms based on how efficiently they use fossil fuel energy and do not seem to be concerned about
reducing their exposure to carbon emission risk per se. We conclude from these findings that, unlike
for "sin" stocks (as shown by Hong and Kacperczyk, 2009), limited risk sharing caused by divestment
cannot explain why we observe a return premium for companies with higher levels (and growth) of
emissions.


3.5 Coarse Categorization
It is often pointed out that only a handful of industries produce the most significant fraction of carbon
emissions.23 The typical salient industries that are mentioned are the oil & gas (GIC = 2), utilities (GIC
= 65-69), and motor (GIC = 19, 20, and 23). It is therefore natural to wonder whether our results are
disproportionately driven by these sectors, and whether our cross-sectional carbon premium would
become significantly smaller once we exclude these industries from our analysis.
        In Table 12, we report the results for the subset of firms, excluding the sectors mentioned
above. Panel A reports the results for total emissions, Panel B for the growth rate in emissions, and
Panel C for emission intensity. Compared with the results in Table 8, we observe that, if anything,
excluding these salient sectors strengthens the results on the firm-level carbon premium. These


23 For instance, in a 2016 report the International Energy Agency estimates that 39% of CO2 emissions come from
electricity and heat production, 30% from transport, and 11% from industrial production (see
https://www.iea.org/media/statistics/Energy_and_CO2_Emissions_in_the_OECD.pdf).
                                                      23
findings imply that there is a coarser categorization of companies by investors within the salient
industries, where returns are less sensitive to differences in emissions across firms.
         In Table 13, we report the results on institutional ownership when the salient high-CO2
industries are excluded. Consistent with Gabaix (2014), we find that coarse industry-level
categorization drives our divestment results. Indeed, there is no significant divestment in the other
industries. This is true in the aggregate as well as for the different categories of investors. It is as if
investors decided to reduce their exposure to certain industries by divesting from some firms but
holding on to the best in class in terms of scope 1 emission intensity in those industries.24


3.6. Investor Awareness
The carbon premium in stock returns could also be affected by the changing awareness of investors
about carbon risk. In particular, one would expect that periods with greater climate change awareness
would have a higher carbon premium. We evaluate this hypothesis in two ways. First, we compare the
estimated carbon premium before and after the Paris Agreement in 2015. Second, we impute carbon
emissions in the 1990s based on their levels in 2005 and estimate the carbon premium over this decade
and compare this premium to the one obtained over our sample period, when similarly imputing back
carbon emissions based on the levels of emissions in 2017.
         The Paris Agreement raised both the awareness of risks tied to carbon emissions and the
prospect of regulatory interventions to limit carbon emissions. One would therefore expect that the
carbon risk premium would increase after 2015 following the Paris Agreement. We test this hypothesis
by estimating the regression model in (1) on the two sub-periods: 2005-2015, and 2016-2017.25 We
report the results in Table 14. We find that indeed the premium associated with all three categories
of emissions is larger during the 2016-2017 subperiod, especially for scope 1 and scope 2. This could
be seen as evidence that investors care more about carbon risk following the Paris Agreement.
However, an important caveat is that our sample increases after 2015, so that the difference in returns
pre and post Paris could be attributed to the new firms that were added to our sample. We explore
this possibility in the Online Appendix and indeed find that the increase in return premium is mostly
due to the addition of the new firms. The results are reported in Table A.6. We find that when we
exclude the new firms, the carbon premium becomes insignificant in the two years following the Paris

24 In Table A.5 of the Online Appendix, we provide additional evidence on this result with respect to levels and changes
in emissions. We do not observe any divestment in terms of levels of emission, but some divestment in changes of scope
2 and scope 3 emissions. The divestment is particularly strong for pensions.
25 To enhance the statistical robustness of our results, we now cluster standard errors at the firm and year-month levels.


                                                           24
agreement. The insignificance of the carbon premium does not necessarily mean that carbon risk is
no longer priced after Paris 2015; it can simply be due to a weak statistical power.
         Climate change and carbon emissions were not yet salient issues in the 1990s. It is only in the
last two decades, with the accumulation of CO2 in the atmosphere and the repeated record-breaking
temperatures that climate change has turned into a widespread concern. Public attention and investor
focus on corporate carbon emissions were much smaller in the 1990s. This naturally raises the question
whether stock returns were already affected by corporate carbon emissions in the 1990s. If
information about firm-level emissions was scarce and/or investors did not pay attention to carbon
risk one would expect that the pricing effects, we have identified between 2005 and 2017 would be
much smaller back then. Given that our carbon emissions data begins in 2005 we cannot evaluate this
hypothesis directly. However, we can impute back the unobserved emissions data for each firm in the
1990s from the values we observe later on. In other words, since emission levels are highly auto-
correlated and the cross-sectional variation in emissions is very stable over time (see Figure 3) it seems
reasonable, as a first pass, to assume that the cross-sectional variation of emissions in the 1990s tracks
closely that observed in our data.
         Specifically, we make the assumption that each firm with stocks trading during the 1990s has
an emission intensity equal to the first officially reported value in the 2005-2017 period. We then
collect the time-series information on each company's revenues for the period 1990-1999 and impute
the total value of emissions for each firm by taking the product of the emission intensity coefficient
and the firm's time-varying sales. We thus obtain a panel of imputed total corporate emissions for the
period 1990-1999. We do exactly the same for emissions over our sample period. That is, we take the
emission intensity coefficient for 2017 and impute back total emissions over the sample period 2017-
2005 by multiplying this coefficient with the firm's sales year by year. This latter imputation has the
additional benefit of adding imputed emissions to our sample for all the new firms added in 2016, and
provides another robustness check of our findings.
         Next, we estimate the regression model in (1) using the imputed emission values for both time
periods and report the results in Table 15.26 The results in Panel A for the period of our sample indicate
that this imputation works and that there is a significant carbon premium associated with the imputed
level of emissions for all three scope categories. Notably, the magnitude of the results is even stronger

26 The process of imputation is not suitable to obtain the variation in emission growth rates since changes in emissions
would vary one to one with changes in revenues. We considered an alternative model in which we fixed the growth rates
at the first available reported value and used it for all dates in the 1990-1999 period. The results from this estimation,
available upon request, indicate that again the carbon premium is insignificant.
                                                           25
than for the reported emission data. In contrast, the results in Panel B for the 1990s indicate that
there was no significant carbon premium over this period. This finding is consistent with the quite
plausible view that investors did not yet internalize carbon risk over this time period, but began to do
so in the last two decades, as reporting on climate change, the effects of global warming, technological
progress in renewable energy, and political action to curb carbon emissions intensified.


3.7 Robustness
We have explored a number of alternative tests that shed additional light on the effects we document.
We report the specific tables in the Online Appendix. Below, we briefly summarize the main findings
in these tables.
        First, in Table A.7 we estimate the carbon premium excluding the period of the financial crisis,
which we define as the period from August 2007 to July 2009. The reason for excluding the financial
crisis is that during this period the level of emissions is artificially low because of the crisis and stock
returns are highly volatile. As a result, the relation between stock returns and carbon emissions may
be distorted by the observations from the crisis period. Broadly, we find that excluding the crisis
period does not affect our results in a major way.
        Second, we explore the robustness of our results to the alternative GIC 6-digit industry
classification. How much does this alternative classification affect changes in the estimates when
industry fixed effects are included? Again, the results, reported in Table A.8, are broadly similar to
those obtained under the finer Trucost industry classification.
        Third, we exclude the salient industries from our analysis of the carbon premium pre and post
Paris agreement. The results are reported in Table A.9. If anything, the increase in the size of the
premium is more pronounced in the non-salient industries (with the exception, possibly, of scope 3
emissions).
        Fourth, we split the sample into two categories of firms, those that report their emissions and
those for which emissions are estimated, and contrast how the carbon premium varies across the two
categories. The results are reported in Table A.10. The coefficient for the level of scope 1 emissions
is slightly smaller and slightly less significant for firms that disclose their emissions than for firms that
do not. This is not entirely surprising given that, other things equal, firms are more likely to disclose
their emissions if their performance on that dimension is better. Alternatively, firms that go out of
their way to disclose may also have taken steps to reduce their emissions. Overall, the carbon premium
is larger and more significant for the firms that do not disclose their emissions for all categories of

                                                     26
emissions and for both emission levels and the growth in emissions (with one exception for scope 3
emission levels).
        Fifth, we estimate the premium associated with the level and intensity of all three categories
of emissions added up together. This is to facilitate comparison with the results in Garvey Iyer, and
Nash (2018) and In, Park, and Monk (2019). As one might expect based on our results for the
disaggregated emissions, there is a highly significant premium associated with the level of emissions,
but not with emission intensity. The results are presented in Table A.11.
        Sixth, we also report how institutional investor portfolios are not underweight companies with
high levels of emissions (or high growth rates) in Table A.4. If anything, institutional investors load
up on scope 2 and scope 3 emission levels. This could be a mechanical effect of their exclusionary
screening policies based on scope 1 emission intensity.
        Seventh, we further report how institutional investor portfolios are affected by the level of
emissions in the companies they hold outside the salient industries tied to fossil fuels. We report the
results in Table A.5. Interestingly, institutional investor portfolios load up on all three scope emission
levels in the non-salient industries. Again, this is likely the consequence of institutional investors'
exclusionary screening in the salient industries. If they hold less in these industries they must hold
more in other industries. Table A.12 also reports the exposure to emission levels of institutional
investors' portfolios in the salient industries. Here we observe that their portfolios do not exhibit a
significant tilt away from or into firms with high emission levels (with the exception of scope 3
emissions, where they are significantly underweight).
        Eighth, we explore how sensitive the carbon premium is to the addition of other firm
characteristics besides size. Table A.2 reports the results. It turns out that, controlling for other firm
characteristics such as B/M, PPE, Leverage, etc. matters. Without these controls there is no significant
premium associated with the level of emissions (however, the growth in emissions remains highly
significant). Note also that when we add industry fixed effects, adding size as a control or not affects
results, with a significant premium associated with the level of scope 1 emissions appearing only when
we control for size.
        Ninth, we check the robustness of our ownership regressions with respect to outliers using
the natural logarithm transformation. The results, in Table A.13, indicate that there is no significant
difference compared to our baseline results.




                                                   27
        Tenth, we estimate the carbon premium on only the subset of firms for which we have carbon
emission data before 2016. The results are reported in Table A.14. Although the size of the premium
is a little smaller, it is broadly in line with the one estimated on the full sample.


4 Conclusion
How is climate change affecting stock returns? This is a fundamental question for the burgeoning
field of climate change and finance. It is also a fundamental question for policy makers who are seeking
to enlist investors in the fight against climate change. We address this question by undertaking a cross-
sectional stock returns analysis with carbon emissions as a firm characteristic and find robust evidence
that carbon emissions significantly and positively affect stock returns. There is a straightforward link
between climate change mitigation and the reduction in carbon emissions. Whether through the
production of their goods and services or through the use of their products firms are differentially
affected by policies to curb carbon emissions and by renewable-energy technology shocks. Our
evidence is that investors are discerning these cross-sectional differences and are pricing in carbon
risk. We also find that the carbon premium cannot be explained through a sin stock divestment effect.
Divestment takes place in a coarse way in a few industries such as oil & gas, utilities, and automobiles
and is entirely based on scope 1 emission intensity screens. However, there is no carbon premium
associated with emission intensity. Moreover, outside the salient industries where all the divestment
takes place we find a robust, persistent, and significant carbon premium at the firm level for all three
categories of emission levels and growth rates.




                                                     28
                                                          References
Andersson, Mats, Patrick Bolton, and Frederic Samama (2016) "Hedging climate risk," Financial Analysts Journal 72(3), 13-
32.
Bakkensen, Laura, and Lint Barrage (2018) "Flood risk belief heterogeneity and coastal home price dynamics: Going under
water?" NBER Working Paper No. 23854.
Baldauf, Markus, Lorenzo Garlappi, and Constantine Yannelis (2020) "Does climate change affect real estate prices? Only
if you believe in it" Review of Financial Studies 33, 1256-1295.
Bernstein, Asaf, Matthew Gustafson, and Ryan Lewis (2019) "Disaster on the horizon: The price effect of sea level rise,"
Journal of Financial Economics 134(2), 253-272.
Busch Timo, Matthew Johnson, and Thomas Pioch (2018) "Consistency of corporate carbon emission data" University
of Hamburg Report WWF Deutschland, Hamburg.
Chava, Sudheer (2014) "Environmental externalities and cost of capital," Management Science 60(9), 2223-2247.
Davis, Jim, Eugene F. Fama, and Kenneth French (2000) "Characteristics, covariances, and average returns: 1929-1997,"
Journal of Finance 55, 389-406.
Eccles, Robert and Svetlana Klimenko (2019) "The investor revolution," Harvard Business Review, May-June Issue, 106-116.
Engle, Robert, Stefano Giglio, Heebum Lee, Bryan Kelly, and Johannes Stroebel (2019) "Hedging climate change news,"
Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Fama, Eugene F., and James MacBeth (1973) "Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests," Journal of Political Economy
81, 607-636.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth French (2000) "Forecasting profitability and earnings," Journal of Business 73(2), 161-175.
Giglio, Stefano, Matteo Maggiori, Krishna Rao, Johannes Stroebel, and Andreas Weber (2018) "Climate change and long-
run discount rates: Evidence from real estate", Chicago Booth Research Paper No. 17-22.
Gabaix, Xavier (2014) "A sparsity-based model of bounded rationality," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4): 1661­1710.
Gennaioli, Nicola and Andrei Shleifer (2010) "What comes to mind," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(4): 1399­1433.
Garvey Gerald T., Mohanaraman Iyer, and Joanna Nash (2018) "Carbon footprint and productivity: does the "E" in ESG
capture efficiency as well as environment?" Journal of Investment Management 16(1), 59-69.
Görgen Maximilian, Andrea Jacob, Martin Nerlinger, Ryan Riordan, Martin Rohleder, and Marco Wilkens (2019) "Carbon
risk" Working Paper University of Augsburg.
Hong, Harrison, and Marcin Kacperczyk (2009) "The price of sin: The effects of social norms on markets," Journal of
Financial Economics 93(1), 15-36.
Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey Kubik, and Jose Scheinkman (2012) "Financial constraints on corporate goodness," NBER
Working Paper No. 18476.
Hong, Harrison, Frank Weikai Li, and Jiangmin Xu (2019) "Climate risks and market efficiency," Journal of Econometrics,
208(1): 265-281.
Hsu, Po-Hsuan, Kai Li, and Chi-Yang Tsou (2019) "The pollution premium," Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Ilhan, Emirhan, Zacharias Sautner, and Grigory Vilkov (2020) "Carbon tail risk," Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
In, Park, and Monk (2019) "Is 'being green' rewarded in the market?: An empirical investigation of decarbonization and
stock returns", Stanford Global Project Center Working Paper: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3020304


                                                                   29
Khan Mozaffar, George Serafeim, and Aaron Yoon (2016) "Corporate sustainability: First evidence on materiality," The
Accounting Review 91(6), 1697-1724.
Krueger Philip, Zacharias Sautner, and Laura Starks (2019) "The importance of climate risks for institutional investors,"
Review of Financial Studies, conditionally accepted.
Matsumura, Ella Mae, Rachna Prakash, and Sandra C. Vera-Muñoz (2014) "Firm-value effects of carbon emissions and
carbon disclosures," The Accounting Review 89(2), 695-724.
Merton, Robert C. (1987) "A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete information," Journal of Finance
42, 483­510.
Monasterolo Irene, and Luca De Angelis (2019) "Blind to carbon risk? An analysis of stock market's reaction to the Paris
Agreement" Working Paper University of Bologna.




                                                             30
                    Figure 1. Carbon Emissions: Time-Series Summary
           a) Average firm emissions (Tons of CO2 equivalent to revenues in $ million)
                  450
                  400
                  350
                  300
                  250
                  200
                  150
                  100
                   50
                    0
                     2005   2006   2007   2008    2009   2010   2011   2012   2013     2014    2015   2016   2017

                                            scope 1             scope 2              scope 3

                  4.5
                   4
                  3.5
                   3
                  2.5
                   2
                  1.5
                   1
                  0.5
                   0
                    2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017

                            GHG direct           GHG indirect          Carbon direct           Carbon indirect

Note: GHG Direct and GHG Indirect are impact ratios expressed as a percentage of costs in revenues (in $ m.). Carbon
direct and Carbon indirect are intensities expressed in tons of CO2 equivalent to revenues in $ million.




                                                                31
                              b) Total emissions
3500

3000

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

  0
   2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017

                       Scope 1        Scope 2          Scope 3

3500

3000

2500

2000

1500

1000

 500

   0
    2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
                Carbon direct                Carbon indirect
                 GHG direct                        GHG indirect

  Note: All emissions are in tons of CO2 equivalent.




                                      32
                        Figure 2. Carbon Emissions: Sample Selection
                                   Number of Firms with Emission Measures
3500

3000

2500

2000

1500

1000

 500

      0
       2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017


Figure 3. Standard Deviation of Carbon Emission Growth Rates
                                                            Panel A: Unconditional
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
 0
      200601
               200609
                        200705
                                 200801
                                          200809
                                                   200905
                                                            201001
                                                                     201009
                                                                              201105
                                                                                       201201
                                                                                                201209
                                                                                                         201305
                                                                                                                  201401
                                                                                                                           201409
                                                                                                                                    201505
                                                                                                                                             201601
                                                                                                                                                      201609
                                                                                                                                                               201705




                                 wscope1chg                                   wscope2chg                                   wscope3chg




                                                                                 33
                                              Panel B: Within GIC 6 industries
 0.5
 0.4
 0.3
 0.2
 0.1
   0
       200601
                200609
                         200705
                                  200801
                                           200809
                                                    200905
                                                             201001
                                                                      201009
                                                                               201105
                                                                                        201201
                                                                                                 201209
                                                                                                          201305
                                                                                                                   201401
                                                                                                                            201409
                                                                                                                                     201505
                                                                                                                                              201601
                                                                                                                                                       201609
                                                                                                                                                                201705
                                  wscope1chg                                   wscope2chg                                    wscope3chg


       Figure 4. Carbon Cumulative Return Premia: Level Effect
                                           Unadjusted Premia (Total Emissions)
 35
 30
 25
 20
 15
 10
  5
  0
 -5
       2005
       2005
       2006
       2006
       2007
       2007
       2008
       2008
       2009
       2009
       2010
       2010
       2011
       2011
       2012
       2012
       2013
       2013
       2014
       2014
       2015
       2015
       2016
       2016
       2017
       2017


                                                    Scope 1                         Scope 2                          Scope 3


                                  Industry-Adjusted Premia (Total Emissions)
 70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
  0
   2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017

                                                    Scope 1                         Scope 2                          Scope 3

Note: Figures plot cumulative carbon premia with and without industry fixed effects.


                                                                                  34
   Figure 5. Carbon Cumulative Return Premia: Growth Effect
                         Unadjusted Premia (DSCOPE)
60
50
40
30
20
10
 0
      2006
      2006
      2007
      2007
      2008
      2008
      2009
      2009
      2010
      2010
      2011
      2011
      2012
      2012
      2013
      2013
      2014
      2014
      2015
      2015
      2016
      2016
      2017
      2017
                         Scope 1         Scope 2        Scope 3


                     Industry-adjusted Premia (DSCOPE)
 80

 60

 40

 20

  0
   2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017

                          Scope 1        Scope 2        Scope 3

Note: Figures plot cumulative carbon premia with and without industry fixed effects.

  Figure 6. Carbon Cumulative Return Premia: Intensity Effect
                         Unadjusted Premia (Intensity)
12
10
 8
 6
 4
 2
 0
-2
-4
-6
-8
  2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017

                         Scope 1         Scope 2        Scope 3




                                        35
                       Industry-adjusted Premia (Intensity)
 10
  8
  6
  4
  2
  0
 -2
 -4
 -6
   2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017

                          Scope 1         Scope 2        Scope 3

 Note: Figures plot cumulative carbon premia with and without industry fixed effects.


                         Figure 7. Carbon Intensity

                             Panel A: Full Sample
      0
-0.05
 -0.1
-0.15
 -0.2
-0.25
 -0.3
-0.35
 -0.4
          200501
          200507
          200601
          200607
          200701
          200707
          200801
          200807
          200901
          200907
          201001
          201007
          201101
          201107
          201201
          201207
          201301
          201307
          201401
          201407
          201501
          201507
          201601
          201607
          201701
          201707




                                          scope 1




                                         36
                                                                                                                                                                                         -4
                                                                                                                                                                                         -3
                                                                                                                                                                                         -2
                                                                                                                                                                                         -1
                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                                                                                          4
                                                                                                                                                                                          5




                                                               0.1
                                                                     0.2



                                                           0




                        -0.5
                               -0.4
                                      -0.3
                                             -0.2
                                                    -0.1
                                                                                                                                      -1
                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                                                1.5




                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                            1




                                                                                                                                           -0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                200501
               200501                                                                                                        200501                                             200507
               200507                                                                                                        200507
                                                                                                                                                                                200601
               200601                                                                                                        200601
                                                                                                                                                                                200607
               200607                                                                                                        200607
                                                                                                                                                                                200701
               200701                                                                                                        200701
                                                                                                                                                                                200707
               200707                                                                                                        200707
                                                                                                                                                                                200801
               200801                                                                                                        200801
               200807                                                                                                                                                           200807
                                                                                                                             200807
               200901                                                                                                                                                           200901
                                                                                                                             200901
               200907                                                                                                                                                           200907
                                                                                                                             200907
               201001                                                                                                        201001                                             201001
               201007                                                                                                        201007                                             201007
               201101                                                                                                        201101                                             201101




37
               201107                                                                                                        201107                                             201107
               201201                                                                                                        201201                                             201201




     scope 1
                                                                                                                   scope 3
                                                                                                                                                                      scope 2




               201207                                                                                                        201207                                             201207
               201301                                                                                                        201301                                             201301
               201307                                                                                                        201307                                             201307
               201401                                                                                                        201401                                             201401
               201407                                                                                                        201407                                             201407




                                                                           Panel B: Excluding Salient Industries
               201501                                                                                                        201501                                             201501
               201507                                                                                                        201507                                             201507
               201601                                                                                                        201601                                             201601
               201607                                                                                                        201607                                             201607
               201701                                                                                                        201701                                             201701
               201707                                                                                                        201707                                             201707
                                                               0.1
                                                                     0.2



                                                           0




                        -0.5
                               -0.4
                                      -0.3
                                             -0.2
                                                    -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                  -4
                                                                                                                                                                                       -3
                                                                                                                                                                                            -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                 -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4




               200601




                                                                                                                                                         0.2
                                                                                                                                                         0.4
                                                                                                                                                         0.6
                                                                                                                                                         0.8
                                                                                                                                                         1.2
                                                                                                                                                         1.4
                                                                                                                                                         1.6




                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                           1




                                                                                                                                                        -0.6
                                                                                                                                                        -0.4
                                                                                                                                                        -0.2
                                                                                                                                                                         200501
               200607                                                                                                                          200501                    200507
               200701                                                                                                                          200507                    200601
               200707                                                                                                                          200601                    200607
                                                                                                                                               200607
               200801                                                                                                                                                    200701
                                                                                                                                               200701
               200807                                                                                                                                                    200707
                                                                                                                                               200707
               200901                                                                                                                                                    200801
                                                                                                                                               200801
                                                                                                                                                                         200807
               200907                                                                                                                          200807
                                                                                                                                                                         200901
               201001                                                                                                                          200901
                                                                                                                                                                         200907
                                                                                                                                               200907
               201007                                                                                                                                                    201001
                                                                                                                                               201001
               201101                                                                                                                                                    201007
                                                                                                                                               201007
               201107                                                                                                                          201101                    201101




38
               201201                                                                                                                          201107                    201107
                                                                                                                                               201201                    201201
                                                                                                                                                               scope 2




     scope 1
                                                                                                                                     scope 3
               201207
                                                                                                                                               201207                    201207
               201301                                                                                                                                                    201301
                                                                                                                                               201301
               201307                                                                                                                                                    201307
                                                                                                                                               201307
               201401                                                                                                                          201401                    201401
               201407                                                                                                                          201407                    201407
               201501                                                                                                                          201501                    201501
                                                                                                                                               201507                    201507
               201507
                                                                                                                                               201601                    201601
               201601
                                                                                                                                               201607                    201607
               201607                                                                                                                          201701                    201701


                                                                           Panel C: Excluding Salient Industries and New Companies
               201701                                                                                                                          201707                    201707
               201707
                                                                                            -4
                                                                                                 -3
                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                                           -1
                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                            3




                                                 0.2
                                                       0.4
                                                             0.6
                                                                   0.8




                                             0




                        -0.6
                               -0.4
                                      -0.2
                                                                                   200601
               200601
                                                                                   200607
               200607
                                                                                   200701
               200701
                                                                                   200707
               200707
                                                                                   200801
               200801
                                                                                   200807
               200807
                                                                                   200901
               200901
                                                                                   200907
               200907
               201001                                                              201001

               201007                                                              201007
               201101                                                              201101
               201107                                                              201107




39
               201201                                                              201201
                                                                                   201207




     scope 3
                                                                         scope 2




               201207
               201301                                                              201301
               201307                                                              201307
               201401                                                              201401
               201407                                                              201407
               201501                                                              201501
               201507                                                              201507
               201601                                                              201601
               201607                                                              201607
               201701                                                              201701
               201707                                                              201707
                                                       Table 1: Summary Statistics
This tables reports summary statistics (averages, medians, and standard deviations) for the variables used for the six sets of regressions. The sample
period is 2005-2017. Panel A reports the emission variables. Panel B reports the cross-sectional return variables. RET is the monthly stock return;
LOGSIZE is the natural logarithm of market capitalization (in $ million); B/M is the book value of equity divided by market value of equity; ROE is the
return on equity; LEVERAGE is the book value of leverage defined as the book value of debt divided by the book value of assets; MOM is the
cumulative stock return over the one-year period; INVEST/A is the CAPEX divided by book value of assets; HHI is the Herfindahl index of the
business segments of a company with weights proportional to revenues; LOGPPE is the natural logarithm of plant, property & equipment (in $ million);
BETA is the CAPM beta calculated over the one year period; VOLAT is the monthly stock return volatility calculated over the one year period. Panel
C reports the time-series variables. MKTRF is the monthly return on the value-weighted stock market net of the risk free rate; HML is the monthly
return on the portfolio long value stocks and short growth stocks; SMB is the monthly return on the portfolio long small-cap stocks and short large-cap
stocks; MOM is the monthly return on the portfolio long 12-month stock winners and short 12-month past losers; CMA is the monthly return of a
portfolio that is long on conservative investment stocks and short on aggressive investment stocks; BAB is the monthly return of a portfolio that is long
on low-beta stocks and short on high-beta stocks; LIQ is the liquidity factor of Pastor and Stambaugh; NET ISSUANCE is the monthly return of a
portfolio that is long on high-net-issuance stocks and short on low-net-issuance stocks. Net issuance for year t is the change in the natural log of split-
adjusted shares outstanding from the fiscal yearend in t-2 to the fiscal yearend in t-1; IDIO VOL is the monthly return of a portfolio that is long on low
idiosyncratic volatility stocks and short on high idiosyncratic volatility stocks. Panel D reports the ownership variables. IOi,t is the fraction of the shares
of company i held by institutions in the FactSet Database at the end of year t. IO is calculated by aggregating the shares held by all types of institutions
at the end of the year, and then dividing this amount by shares outstanding at the end of the year. IO_BANKS is the ownership by banks;
IO_INSURANCE is the ownership by insurance companies; IO_INVESTCOS is the ownership by investment companies (e.g., mutual funds);
IO_ADVISERS is the ownership by independent investment advisers; IO_PENSIONS is the ownership by pension funds; IO_HFS is the ownership
by hedge funds. PRINVi,t is the inverse of firm i's share price at the end of year t; TOT VOLATi,t is the standard deviation of daily stock returns for
company i over the one-year period; VOLUMEi,t is the average daily trading volume (in $million) of stock i over the calendar year t; NASDAQi,t is an
indicator variable equal to one if a stock i is listed on NASDAQ in year t, and zero otherwise; SP500i,t is an indicator variable equal to one if a stock i is
part of the S&P 500 index in year t, and zero otherwise.
 Variable                                                                                                 Mean                Median                St. Dev.
                                                                Panel A: Emission variables
 Log (Carbon Emissions Scope 1 (tons CO2e))                                                                10.55                 10.47                  2.95
 Log (Carbon Emissions Scope 2 (tons CO2e))                                                                10.52                 10.66                  2.36
 Log (Carbon Emissions Scope 3 (tons CO2e))                                                                12.31                 12.46                  2.25
 Growth Rate in Carbon Emissions Scope 1 (winsorized at 2.5%)                                               0.08                  0.03                  0.36
 Growth Rate in Carbon Emissions Scope 2 (winsorized at 2.5%)                                               0.14                  0.05                  0.45
 Growth Rate in Carbon Emissions Scope 3 (winsorized at 2.5%)                                               0.09                  0.06                  0.24
 Carbon Intensity Scope 1 (tons CO2e/USD m.)/100 (winsorized at 2.5%)                                       1.92                  0.15                  5.88
 Carbon Intensity Scope 2 (tons CO2e/USD m.)/100 (winsorized at 2.5%)                                       0.34                  0.18                  0.46
 Carbon Intensity Scope 3 (tons CO2e/USD m.) /100 (winsorized at 2.5%)                                      1.58                  0.98                  1.59
 Carbon Intensity Direct (winsorized at 2.5%)/100                                                           2.12                  0.16                  6.45
 Carbon Intensity Indirect (winsorized at 2.5%)/100                                                         1.04                  0.58                  1.31
 GHG Direct Impact Ratio (winsorized at 2.5%)                                                               0.75                  0.06                  2.29
 GHG Indirect Impact Ratio (winsorized at 2.5%)                                                             0.71                  0.47                  0.68
                                                           Panel B: Cross-sectional return variables
 RET (%)                                                                                                    1.14                  1.07                 10.86
 LOGSIZE                                                                                                    8.25                  8.24                  1.58
 B/M (winsorized at 2.5%)                                                                                   0.50                  0.39                  0.41
 LEVERAGE (winsorized at 2.5%)                                                                              0.24                  0.22                  0.18
 MOM (winsorized at 0.5%)                                                                                   0.15                  0.11                  0.45
 INVEST/A (winsorized at 2.5%)                                                                              0.05                  0.03                  0.05
 ROE (winsorized at 2.5%, in %)                                                                             9.72                 11.28                 21.26
 HHI                                                                                                        0.82                  1.00                  0.24
 LOGPPE                                                                                                     6.22                  6.34                  2.27
 BETA                                                                                                       1.10                  1.05                  0.44
 VOLAT (winsorized at 0.5%)                                                                                 0.10                  0.08                  0.06



                                                                             40
                                            Panel C: Time-series variables

MKTRF (in %)                                                                  0.70    1.06    4.08
HML (in %)                                                                    0.00   -0.22    2.57
SMB (in %)                                                                    0.07    0.04    2.26
MOM (in %)                                                                    0.07    0.36    4.53
CMA (in %)                                                                    0.02   -0.06    1.39
BAB (in %)                                                                    0.49    0.74    2.66
LIQ (in %)                                                                    0.15    0.38    3.59
NET ISSUANCE (in %)                                                           0.51    0.55    1.65
IDIO VOL (in %)                                                              -0.18    0.03    5.27
                                            Panel D: Ownership variables
IO (in %)                                                                    76.59   82.83   22.55
IO_BANKS (in %)                                                               0.10    0.07    0.16
IO_INSURANCE (in %)                                                           0.34    0.13    3.10
IO_INVESTCOS. (in %)                                                         18.12   18.32    8.68
IO_ADVISERS (in %)                                                           43.80   46.04   15.53
IO_PENSIONS (in %)                                                            3.39    3.50    2.32
IO_HFS (in %)                                                                10.85    7.71   10.06
PRINV (winsorized at 0.5%)                                                    0.05    0.03    0.12
VOLAT (winsorized at 0.5%)                                                    0.10    0.08    0.06
VOLUME (in $million) (winsorized at 2.5%)                                     0.44    0.21    0.56
NASDAQ                                                                        0.30    0.00    0.46
SP500                                                                         0.37    0.00    0.48




                                                         41
                                Table 2: Stock Characteristics by Emission Calculation
  The table reports the sample means of the main variables over the period 2005-2017. All variables are defined in Table 1. Imputed includes all firms for
  which Trucost estimates the levels of emissions. Direct includes all firms for which data is directly available.
                                  Calculation Method                                      Imputed                 Direct
                                  SCOPE 1 TOT                                             1358376               5953933
                                  SCOPE 2 TOT                                               262875               955842
                                  SCOPE 3 TOT                                              1428234              4067344
                                  SCOPE 1 INT                                                211.87               588.14
                                  SCOPE 2 INT                                                 35.97                68.06
                                  SCOPE 3 INT                                                158.29               197.83
                                  RET (%)                                                      1.00                 1.09
                                  LOGSIZE                                                      8.22                 9.64
                                  B/M                                                          0.50                 0.48
                                  LEVERAGE                                                     0.24                 0.27
                                  MOM                                                          0.16                 0.13
                                  INVEST/A                                                     0.05                 0.05
                                  ROE                                                          9.83                14.89
                                  HHI                                                          0.84                 0.72
                                  LOGPPE                                                       6.19                 8.04
                                  BETA                                                         1.13                 1.04
                                  VOLAT                                                        0.10                 0.08


                                            Table 3: Carbon Emissions: Correlations
  The sample period is 2005-2017. Panel A presents the cross-correlations among emission variables. Panel B presents the coefficients from estimating
  the AR(1) model for various measures of emissions. All regressions include year-month fixed effects. We cluster standard errors at firm and year
  dimensions. The emission variables are defined in Table 1. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.


                                                            Panel A: Cross-correlations
                      SCOPE 1 TOT            SCOPE 2 TOT             SCOPE 3 TOT            SCOPE 1 INT             SCOPE 2 INT            SCOPE 3 INT
SCOPE 1 TOT                 1
SCOPE 2 TOT               0.39                        1
SCOPE 3 TOT               0.51                      0.75                     1
SCOPE 1 INT               0.60                      0.03                   0.03                      1
SCOPE 2 INT               0.05                      0.24                   0.02                    0.10                      1
SCOPE 3 INT               0.21                      0.09                   0.27                    0.25                    0.10                    1




                                                                            42
                                                 Panel B: Auto-correlations
                           (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)            (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)
VARIABLES                 LOG         LOG         LOG       DSCOPE 1      DSCOPE 2       DSCOPE 3   SCOPE      SCOPE      SCOPE
                       (SCOPE 1)   (SCOPE 2)   (SCOPE 3)                                             1 INT      2 INT      3 INT
LOG (SCOPE 1 TOT)t-1    0.977***
                        (0.003)
LOG (SCOPE 2 TOT)t-1                0.955***
                                    (0.005)
LOG (SCOPE 3 TOT)t-1                            0.967***
                                                (0.004)
DSCOPE 1t-1
                                                              0.042*
                                                              (0.020)
DSCOPE 2t-1                                                                    0.024
                                                                              (0.015)
DSCOPE 3t-1
                                                                                         0.191***
                                                                                          (0.046)
SCOPE 1 INTt-1                                                                                      0.945***
                                                                                                    (0.005)
SCOPE 2 INTt-1                                                                                                 0.946***
                                                                                                               (0.011)
SCOPE 3 INTt-1                                                                                                            0.969***
                                                                                                                          (0.021)
Constant                0.279***    0.569***    0.471***     0.057***         0.106***   0.052***   0.066***   0.027***    0.032
                        (0.035)     (0.052)     (0.049)       (0.001)         (0.002)     (0.003)   (0.013)    (0.004)    (0.034)
Year/month F.E.           Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes            Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
Observations            157,506     157,434     157,638       123,189         123,105     123,297   157,638    157,638    157,638
R-squared                0.972       0.945       0.975         0.013           0.021       0.085     0.961      0.849      0.964




                                                            43
                                              Table 4: Carbon Emissions over Time
 The table reports the cross-sectional averages of scope 1, scope 2, and scope 3 levels and intensity variables over the period 2005-2017. Panel A considers
 a full sample of firms. Panel B is restricted to a sample of firms that existed prior to 2016. The emissions variables are defined in Table 1.

                                                                Panel A: Full sample
Year        SCOPE 1 TOT              SCOPE 2 TOT              SCOPE 3 TOT         SCOPE 1 INT                    SCOPE 2 INT              SCOPE 3 INT
2005            2687469                   334382                  2407547                    409.67                   37.44                    229.12
2006            2764306                   380081                  2255914                    372.17                   39.28                    205.97
2007            2888843                   412218                  2298919                    341.93                   38.46                    193.19
2008            3137175                   681157                  2741752                    307.71                   39.66                    164.05
2009            2480332                   385336                  1905879                    334.01                   41.40                    184.04
2010            2658658                   399239                  1982459                    341.62                   40.44                    174.03
2011            2638840                   438821                  2210635                    304.74                   40.13                    169.46
2012            2420325                   430610                  2217144                    308.09                   39.52                    160.72
2013            2223697                   397607                  2061563                    334.81                   39.10                    159.90
2014            2250782                   424290                  1977412                    281.28                   54.29                    152.30
2015            2154128                   418333                  1778103                    272.45                   56.72                    150.80
2016             880192                   183432                   854978                    154.57                   33.56                    138.85
2017             797256                   174132                   921867                    141.01                   33.88                    145.93

                                                               Panel B: Legacy sample
Year        SCOPE 1 TOT              SCOPE 2 TOT              SCOPE 3 TOT         SCOPE 1 INT                    SCOPE 2 INT              SCOPE 3 INT
2005            2687469                   334382                  2407547                    409.67                   37.44                    229.12
2006            2764306                   380081                  2255914                    372.17                   39.28                    205.97
2007            2888843                   412218                  2298919                    341.93                   38.46                    193.19
2008            3137175                   681157                  2741752                    307.71                   39.66                    164.05
2009            2480332                   385336                  1905879                    334.01                   41.40                    184.04
2010            2658658                   399239                  1982459                    341.62                   40.44                    174.03
2011            2638840                   438821                  2210635                    304.74                   40.13                    169.46
2012            2420325                   430610                  2217144                    308.09                   39.52                    160.72
2013            2223697                   397607                  2061563                    334.81                   39.10                    159.90
2014            2250782                   424290                  1977412                    281.28                   54.29                    152.30
2015            2154128                   418333                  1778103                    272.45                   56.72                    150.80
2016            1985843                   402841                  1865512                    270.29                   45.60                    167.21
2017            1913945                   403267                  2142744                    242.34                   44.83                    175.98




                                                                            44
                               Table 5: Industry Representation by Number of Firms
The table reports the distribution of unique firms in our sample with regard to GIC 6 industry classification. Total represents the total number of firms
in our sample. The sample period is 2005-2017.
          GIC 6                Industry Name                                                                                      # of Firms
          1                    Energy Equipment & Services                                                                                75
          2                    Oil, Gas & Consumable Fuels                                                                               164
          3                    Chemicals                                                                                                  81
          4                    Construction Materials                                                                                     17
          5                    Containers & Packaging                                                                                     21
          6                    Metals & Mining                                                                                            47
          7                    Paper & Forest Products                                                                                    12
          8                    Aerospace & Defense                                                                                        46
          9                    Building Products                                                                                          32
          10                   Construction & Engineering                                                                                 36
          11                   Electrical Equipment                                                                                       54
          12                   Industrial Conglomerates                                                                                   16
          13                   Machinery                                                                                                 118
          14                   Trading Companies & Distributors                                                                           40
          15                   Commercial Services & Supplies                                                                             69
          16                   Professional Services                                                                                      42
          17                   Air Freight & Logistics                                                                                    15
          18                   Airlines                                                                                                   13
          19                   Marine                                                                                                     27
          20                   Road & Rail                                                                                                31
          21                   Transportation Infrastructure                                                                               5
          22                   Auto Components                                                                                            43
          23                   Automobiles                                                                                                 8
          24                   Household Durables                                                                                         64
          25                   Leisure Products                                                                                           21
          26                   Textiles, Apparel & Luxury Goods                                                                           41
          27                   Hotels, Restaurants & Leisure                                                                              95
          28                   Diversified Consumer Services                                                                              38
          29                   Media                                                                                                      83
          30                   Distributors                                                                                                8
          31                   Internet & Direct Marketing Retail                                                                         45
          32                   Multiline Retail                                                                                           17
          33                   Specialty Retail                                                                                          110
          34                   Food & Staples Retailing                                                                                   27
          35                   Beverages                                                                                                  17
          36                   Food Products                                                                                              57
          37                   Tobacco                                                                                                     9
          38                   Household Products                                                                                         12
          39                   Personal Products                                                                                          15
          40                   Health Care Equipment & Supplies                                                                          109
          41                   Health Care Providers & Services                                                                           77
          42                   Health Care Technology                                                                                     20
          43                   Biotechnology                                                                                             203
          44                   Pharmaceuticals                                                                                            87
          45                   Life Sciences Tools & Services                                                                             34
          46                   Banks                                                                                                     260
          47                   Thrifts & Mortgage Finance                                                                                 61
          48                   Diversified Financial Services                                                                             28
          49                   Consumer Finance                                                                                           37
          50                   Capital Markets                                                                                            92
          51                   Mortgage Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs)                                                             22
          52                   Insurance                                                                                                 111
          53                   Internet Software & Services                                                                              100
          54                   IT Services                                                                                               102
          55                   Software                                                                                                  150
          56                   Communications Equipment                                                                                   47
          57                   Technology Hardware, Storage & Peripherals                                                                 34
          58                   Electronic Equipment, Instruments & Components                                                             82
          59                   Semiconductors & Semiconductor Equipment                                                                  103


                                                                          45
          60                   Diversified Telecommunication Services                                                                   34
          61                   Wireless Telecommunication Services                                                                      15
          62                   Media                                                                                                    49
          63                   Entertainment                                                                                            22
          64                   Interactive Media & Services                                                                             29
          65                   Electric Utilities                                                                                       42
          66                   Gas Utilities                                                                                            17
          67                   Multi-Utilities                                                                                          30
          68                   Water Utilities                                                                                          13
          69                   Independent Power and Renewable Electricity Producers                                                    17
          70                   Equity Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs)                                                            184
          71                   Real Estate Management & Development                                                                     35
          Total                                                                                                                       3917


                                  Table 6: Carbon Emission Production by Industry
Top panel reports the top 10 of GIC 6 industries in terms of average emission production (scope 1, scope 2, scope 3). Bottom panel reports the bottom
10 of GIC 6 industries in terms of average emission production (scope 1, scope 2, scope 3). The sample period is 2005-2017. The emission variables are
expressed in tons of CO2e.
                                                         Largest Emissions (Avg.)
              GIC 6                   Scope 1               GIC 6               Scope 2               GIC 6              Scope 3
              69                      33300000                 34               2163081                 23               18700000
              65                      30700000                 23               2094174                 36               11800000
              18                      17600000                 6                1749360                 37                6847386
              67                      17200000                 3                1475783                 12                6575213
              6                        6343545                 7                1375637                 35                6106099
              2                        6302663                 60               1219956                  2                6049237
              17                       4316221                 12               1014037                 34                5882429
              4                        3827648                 38                994783                 38                4313762
              7                        3286922                 32                825501                  6                3580245
              3                        3280770                 2                 820777                 22                3285134


                                                         Smallest Emissions (Avg.)
              GIC 6                Scope 1                  GIC 6           Scope 2                   GIC 6           Scope 3
              47                         601                   47                 1756                  47                 15193
              50                         6767                  42                 11824                 51                 27069
              46                         6965                  19                 21798                 68                 41182
              49                         7469                  16                 22653                 42                 64097
              64                         7649                  43                 24606                 71                 84764
              51                         8770                  50                 35404                 70                 102300
              53                         8898                  51                 36013                 16                 114132
              55                         9132                  66                 39177                 46                 116073
              42                        11657                  45                 44082                 28                 145311
              16                        17895                  46                 45627                 43                 151772




                                                                         46
                                            Table 7: Determinants of Carbon Emissions
The sample period is 2005-2017. The dependent variables are natural logarithm of total emissions, percentage change in total emissions, and carbon intensity. All
variables are defined in Table 1. We report the results of the pooled regression with standard errors clustered at the firm level and year. All regressions include
year-month fixed effects and industry-fixed effects. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.
                               (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)              (7)            (8)             (9)
 VARIABLES                    LOG            LOG             LOG         DSCOPE 1 DSCOPE 2 DSCOPE 3                     SCOPE     1    SCOPE     2      SCOPE    3
                           (SCOPE 1) (SCOPE 2) (SCOPE 3)                                                                    INT           INT              INT
 LOGSIZE                    0.421***       0.551***        0.553***       0.034***       0.034***        0.035***         -0.119*         0.002          -0.020**
                             (0.032)         (0.031)        (0.023)        (0.005)         (0.005)         (0.005)       (0.063)         (0.006)         (0.009)
B/M                         0.382***        0.479***       0.480***       -0.077***      -0.083***       -0.086***         0.008          0.004           0.000
                             (0.058)         (0.056)        (0.053)        (0.016)         (0.020)         (0.016)       (0.105)         (0.009)         (0.013)
ROE                         0.006***        0.006***       0.007***       -0.002***      -0.002***       -0.001***        -0.002         -0.000           0.000
                             (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.000)         (0.001)         (0.000)       (0.002)         (0.000)         (0.000)
LEVERAGE                    0.531**         0.623***       0.572***         0.017          -0.007           0.005          0.377          0.002          -0.056*
                             (0.205)         (0.197)        (0.173)        (0.020)         (0.032)         (0.023)       (0.229)         (0.030)         (0.031)
INVEST/A                   -2.101***       -2.044***      -2.549***       0.713***        0.725***        0.559***        -0.586         -0.073         -0.450**
                             (0.474)         (0.442)        (0.415)        (0.155)         (0.132)         (0.121)       (1.151)         (0.153)         (0.205)
HHI                        -1.078***       -0.613***      -0.539***         0.019          -0.020         0.026**       -2.161***         0.007        -0.260***
                             (0.116)         (0.094)        (0.067)        (0.023)         (0.026)         (0.010)       (0.496)         (0.030)         (0.063)
LOGPPE                      0.377***        0.373***       0.319***       -0.038***      -0.039***       -0.035***      0.127***        0.026***       0.026***
                             (0.036)         (0.037)        (0.023)        (0.005)         (0.005)         (0.007)       (0.041)         (0.007)         (0.007)
Year/month F.E.                Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
Industry F.E.                  Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
Observations                190,407         190,335        190,503         157,566        157,470         157,638        190,503        190,503         190,503
R-squared                     0.895           0.842          0.897          0.092           0.090           0.182          0.787          0.650           0.935




                                                                               47
                                      Table 8: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns
The sample period is 2005-2017. The dependent variable is RET. All variables are defined in Table 1. We report the results of the pooled regression with
standard errors clustered at the firm and year level. All regressions include year-month fixed effects. In columns (4) through (6), we additionally include
industry-fixed effects. Panel A reports the results for the natural logarithm of total firm-level emissions; Panel B reports the results for the percentage
change in carbon total emissions; Panel C reports the results for carbon emission intensity. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.

                                                             Panel A: Total emissions
   VARIABLES                                          (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)                (5)               (6)
   LOG (SCOPE 1 TOT)                               0.051**                                              0.181***
                                                   (0.022)                                               (0.044)
   LOG (SCOPE 2 TOT)                                                 0.103**                                              0.179***
                                                                     (0.039)                                               (0.052)
   LOG (SCOPE 3 TOT)                                                                  0.148***                                              0.327***
                                                                                       (0.040)                                               (0.082)
   LOGSIZE                                          -0.141            -0.188            -0.198           -0.304*           -0.329*           -0.411**
                                                   (0.161)           (0.166)           (0.164)           (0.152)           (0.161)           (0.177)
   B/M                                              0.303             0.312             0.291             0.444             0.430             0.361
                                                   (0.277)           (0.285)           (0.276)           (0.269)           (0.264)           (0.265)
   LEVERAGE                                       -0.558**          -0.579**           -0.491*          -0.686***         -0.697***         -0.778***
                                                   (0.254)           (0.261)           (0.256)           (0.180)           (0.177)           (0.171)
   MOM                                              0.389             0.417             0.407             0.339             0.351             0.355
                                                   (0.280)           (0.277)           (0.279)           (0.293)           (0.293)           (0.292)
   INVEST/A                                         -2.319            -1.971            -1.608            0.342             0.324             0.782
                                                   (1.708)           (1.760)           (1.795)           (2.039)           (2.063)           (1.970)
   ROE                                              0.007             0.006             0.006             0.005             0.005             0.004
                                                   (0.005)           (0.004)           (0.004)           (0.003)           (0.003)           (0.003)
   HHI                                              0.080             0.007            0.185*            0.189**            0.102             0.167*
                                                   (0.107)           (0.112)           (0.103)           (0.082)           (0.088)           (0.082)
   LOGPPE                                           -0.009            -0.016            -0.037            0.027             0.029             -0.008
                                                   (0.097)           (0.083)           (0.086)           (0.050)           (0.049)           (0.044)
   BETA                                             0.079             0.041             0.066             0.066             0.060             0.082
                                                   (0.132)           (0.133)           (0.132)           (0.157)           (0.156)           (0.155)
   VOLAT                                            0.906             0.611             0.680             0.752             0.620             0.697
                                                   (3.637)           (3.488)           (3.571)           (3.274)           (3.276)           (3.256)
   Year/month F.E.                                   Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
   Industry F.E.                                     No                No                No                Yes               Yes               Yes
   Observations                                    185,392           185,320           185,488           185,392           185,320           185,488
   R-squared                                        0.200             0.201             0.201             0.203             0.203             0.203




                                                                              48
                   Panel B: Growth rate in total emissions
VARIABLES            (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)         (5)         (6)
DSCOPE 1          0.718***                                   0.706***
                  (0.181)                                     (0.164)
DSCOPE 2                        0.400**                                  0.379**
                                (0.150)                                   (0.143)
DSCOPE 3                                     1.311***                                1.303***
                                              (0.388)                                 (0.383)
LOGSIZE            -0.025       -0.013        -0.041          -0.104      -0.094      -0.122
                  (0.105)       (0.107)       (0.107)         (0.109)     (0.110)     (0.113)
B/M                0.256         0.242         0.297          0.590*      0.571*      0.633*
                  (0.268)       (0.271)       (0.254)         (0.307)     (0.307)     (0.290)
LEVERAGE          -0.454*       -0.434*       -0.454*        -0.788***   -0.778***   -0.785***
                  (0.214)       (0.213)       (0.211)         (0.230)     (0.233)     (0.230)
MOM                0.251         0.271         0.197          0.196       0.216       0.146
                  (0.266)       (0.270)       (0.259)         (0.262)     (0.265)     (0.255)
INVEST/A           -2.668       -2.366        -2.808          -0.565      -0.377      -0.775
                  (1.858)       (1.884)       (1.933)         (2.302)     (2.250)     (2.344)
ROE               0.006**       0.006*        0.007**         0.005       0.004       0.005
                  (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)         (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
HHI                -0.122       -0.083        -0.146          -0.028      -0.008      -0.048
                  (0.152)       (0.151)       (0.150)         (0.111)     (0.112)     (0.115)
LOGPPE             0.011         0.001         0.025          0.072*      0.062       0.088*
                  (0.054)       (0.052)       (0.056)         (0.038)     (0.038)     (0.042)
BETA               0.132         0.147         0.126          0.185       0.200       0.170
                  (0.167)       (0.168)       (0.168)         (0.167)     (0.167)     (0.169)
VOLAT              1.858         1.956         1.923          1.511       1.593       1.578
                  (4.426)       (4.407)       (4.478)         (4.175)     (4.171)     (4.221)
Year/month F.E.     Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes
Industry F.E.       No            No            No             Yes         Yes         Yes
Observations      154,001       153,905       154,073        154,001     153,905     154,073
R-squared          0.215         0.215         0.215          0.218       0.218       0.218




                                        49
                            Panel C: Emission intensity
VARIABLES            (1)             (2)           (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)
SCOPE 1 INT        -0.010                                   0.004
                  (0.012)                                  (0.006)
SCOPE 2 INT                         0.126                              0.058
                                   (0.125)                            (0.068)
SCOPE 3 INT                                       0.053                           0.043
                                                 (0.034)                         (0.075)
LOGSIZE            -0.156          -0.138        -0.127     -0.228     -0.229     -0.228
                  (0.166)          (0.156)       (0.162)   (0.138)    (0.138)    (0.138)
B/M                0.293            0.304         0.315    0.515*     0.515*     0.515*
                  (0.282)          (0.289)       (0.276)   (0.276)    (0.275)    (0.276)
LEVERAGE          -0.543**        -0.556**       -0.531*   -0.585**   -0.583**   -0.581**
                  (0.248)          (0.252)       (0.247)   (0.203)    (0.203)    (0.203)
MOM                0.402            0.392         0.388     0.340      0.340      0.339
                  (0.280)          (0.284)       (0.283)   (0.294)    (0.294)    (0.293)
INVEST/A           -2.018          -2.102        -1.979     -0.019     -0.016     -0.002
                  (1.795)          (1.804)       (1.853)   (2.077)    (2.080)    (2.082)
ROE                0.008            0.008         0.008    0.006*     0.006*     0.006*
                  (0.005)          (0.005)       (0.005)   (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.004)
HHI                -0.108          -0.042         0.051     0.002      -0.008     0.004
                  (0.136)          (0.112)       (0.095)   (0.091)    (0.088)    (0.087)
LOGPPE             0.047            0.025         0.021     0.095      0.094      0.094
                  (0.096)          (0.084)       (0.091)   (0.062)    (0.061)    (0.063)
BETA               0.068            0.067         0.071     0.057      0.056      0.058
                  (0.134)          (0.134)       (0.132)   (0.157)    (0.157)    (0.157)
VOLAT              0.965            0.925         0.959     0.671      0.657      0.667
                  (3.568)          (3.578)       (3.617)   (3.287)    (3.285)    (3.289)
Year/month F.E.     Yes              Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Industry F.E.       No               No           No         Yes        Yes        Yes
Observations      185,488          185,488      185,488    185,488    185,488    185,488
R-squared          0.200            0.200        0.200      0.203      0.203      0.203




                                           50
                 Table 9: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns Net of Earnings Returns
The sample period is 2005-2017. The dependent variable is RET net of daily return realized on the earnings announcement day. All variables are defined
in Table 1. We report the results of the pooled regression with standard errors clustered at the firm and year level. All regressions include year-month
fixed effects. In columns (4) through (6), we additionally include industry-fixed effects. Panel A reports the results for the natural logarithm of total
emissions; Panel B reports the results for the percentage change in carbon total emissions; Panel C reports the results for carbon emission intensity.
***1% significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.

                                                             Panel A: Total emissions
   VARIABLES                                         (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)               (6)
   LOG (SCOPE 1 TOT)                              0.050**                                              0.163***
                                                  (0.023)                                               (0.039)
   LOG (SCOPE 2 TOT)                                                0.091**                                              0.157***
                                                                    (0.038)                                               (0.048)
   LOG (SCOPE 3 TOT)                                                                 0.130***                                              0.286***
                                                                                      (0.042)                                               (0.077)
   Controls                                         Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
   Year/month F.E.                                  Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
   Industry F.E.                                    No                No                No               Yes               Yes               Yes
   Observations                                   185,392           185,320           185,488          185,392           185,320           185,488
   R-squared                                       0.217             0.217             0.217            0.220             0.220             0.220

                                                   Panel B: Growth rate in total emissions
   VARIABLES                                        (1)                (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)               (6)
   DSCOPE 1                                      0.595***                                              0.576***
                                                  (0.169)                                               (0.154)
   DSCOPE 2                                                         0.318**                                              0.297**
                                                                    (0.134)                                               (0.128)
   DSCOPE 3                                                                           0.954**                                              0.943**
                                                                                      (0.375)                                               (0.374)
   Controls                                         Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
   Year/month F.E.                                  Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
   Industry F.E.                                    No                No                No               Yes               Yes               Yes
   Observations                                   154,001           153,905           154,073          154,001           153,905           154,073
   R-squared                                       0.232             0.232             0.232            0.235             0.235             0.235

                                                            Panel C: Emission intensity
   VARIABLES                                         (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)               (6)
   SCOPE 1 INT                                     -0.008                                                0.003
                                                  (0.011)                                               (0.007)
   SCOPE 2 INT                                                       0.140                                                 0.061
                                                                    (0.128)                                               (0.064)
   SCOPE 3 INT                                                                         0.048                                                0.025
                                                                                      (0.032)                                               (0.071)
   Controls                                         Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
   Year/month F.E.                                  Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
   Industry F.E.                                    No                No                No               Yes               Yes               Yes
   Observations                                   185,488           185,488           185,488          185,488           185,488           185,488
   R-squared                                       0.217             0.217             0.217            0.220             0.220             0.220



                                                                             51
                     Table 10: Can the Carbon Premium Be Explained by Risk Factors?
The sample period is 2005-2017. The dependent variable is the monthly carbon premium estimated each period using a cross-sectional return regression.
All variables are defined in Table 1. We report the results of the time-series regression with standard errors adjusted for autocorrelation with 12 lags
using Newey-West test. Panel A reports the results for the natural logarithm of contemporaneous total emissions; Panel B reports the results for the
percentage change in carbon emissions; Panel C reports the results for carbon emission intensity. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10%
significance.

                                                            Panel A: Total emissions
                                      LOG (SCOPE 1 TOT)                   LOG (SCOPE 2 TOT)                     LOG (SCOPE 3 TOT)
         VARIABLES                     (1)         (2)                     (3)          (4)                      (5)          (6)
         MKTRF                                         -1.176                               3.298***                              3.429**
                                                       (0.714)                               (1.084)                              (1.357)
         HML                                          -6.020***                             -4.284**                              -6.444**
                                                       (1.598)                               (1.759)                              (2.537)
         SMB                                           -0.331                                 1.184                                1.539
                                                       (0.887)                               (2.858)                              (1.840)
         MOM                                            0.399                               -3.853**                             -3.580***
                                                       (0.559)                               (1.721)                              (1.281)
         CMA                                          0.086***                                0.053                              0.116***
                                                       (0.028)                               (0.036)                              (0.036)
         BAB                                            0.772                                 0.303                                1.581
                                                       (0.824)                               (1.749)                              (1.681)
         LIQ                                          2.658***                                0.816                              3.094***
                                                       (0.768)                               (1.135)                              (1.016)
         NET ISSUANCE                                   1.250                                -1.603                                0.376
                                                       (1.015)                               (2.207)                              (2.352)
         IDIO VOL                                      1.566**                                0.986                                0.414
                                                       (0.723)                               (1.332)                              (1.319)
         Constant                    0.058**           0.053**           0.085**            0.070***          0.103***            0.065**
                                      (0.026)          (0.023)            (0.037)            (0.027)            (0.035)           (0.027)
         Industry adj.                  No               No                 No                 No                 No                No
         Adj. R2                       0.001            0.331              0.001              0.335              0.001             0.247
         Observations                   156              156                156                156                156               156




                                                                          52
                           Panel B: Growth rate in total emissions
                      DSCOPE 1                       DSCOPE 2                  DSCOPE 3
VARIABLES         (1)         (2)              (3)              (4)      (5)              (6)
MKTRF                          4.847                        -2.463                    8.303
                              (5.605)                       (2.516)                   (8.965)
HML                          -8.427**                       -5.897*                  -17.483**
                              (3.853)                       (3.362)                   (7.113)
SMB                          -15.284**                      -9.960*                  -23.109*
                              (6.419)                       (5.667)                  (13.738)
MOM                            3.223                        3.703                     9.171
                              (4.704)                       (2.727)                   (8.912)
CMA                           -0.159*                      -0.153***                 -0.468***
                              (0.087)                       (0.058)                   (0.168)
BAB                          -8.919***                      2.396                     11.861
                              (3.255)                       (2.036)                   (8.199)
LIQ                            0.808                        -1.343                    9.512*
                              (2.495)                       (2.342)                   (4.847)
NET ISSUANCE                   4.702                        1.724                     15.976
                              (5.262)                       (4.821)                  (13.211)
IDIO VOL                       3.851                        6.477*                    16.111
                              (6.820)                       (3.474)                  (11.811)
Constant        0.640***     0.643***       0.435***       0.463***    1.559***      1.424***
                (0.089)       (0.120)        (0.065)        (0.063)    (0.237)        (0.250)
Industry adj.     No            No             No             No         No             No
Adj. R2          0.001         0.107          0.001          0.178      0.001          0.290
Observations      144           144            144            144        144            144




                                             53
                               Panel C: Emission intensity
                    SCOPE 1 INT                SCOPE 2 INT                SCOPE 3 INT
VARIABLES         (1)         (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)
MKTRF                      -0.793***                         1.790                  0.820
                            (0.177)                      (2.810)                    (0.880)
HML                        -0.927***                         -6.181                -4.063**
                            (0.315)                      (4.340)                    (1.635)
SMB                         -1.027**                         -9.486                 -0.722
                            (0.519)                      (6.371)                    (1.214)
MOM                         0.855***                         -1.195                 -0.449
                            (0.214)                      (2.970)                    (0.597)
CMA                          0.001                           0.008                  0.039
                            (0.007)                      (0.101)                    (0.031)
BAB                          0.302                           -4.055                 -0.645
                            (0.391)                      (3.961)                    (0.915)
LIQ                          0.229                           0.372                 2.608***
                            (0.297)                      (2.942)                    (0.800)
NET ISSUANCE                 0.445                           -6.006                 -0.139
                            (0.304)                      (5.742)                    (1.159)
IDIO VOL                     0.333                       8.908***                   0.424
                            (0.293)                      (3.069)                    (0.723)
Constant        -0.006       -0.004        0.121             0.181*   0.018         0.012
                (0.008)     (0.007)        (0.102)       (0.097)      (0.027)       (0.028)
Industry adj.     No          No             No            No           No            No
Adj. R2          0.001       0.413          0.001         0.135        0.001         0.104
Observations      156         156            156           156          156           156




                                           54
                                Table 11: Carbon Emissions and Institutional Ownership
   The sample period is 2005-2017. The dependent variable in Panel A is IO. The dependent variables in Panel B, Panel C, and Panel D are IO_BANK,
   IO_INSURANCE, IO_INVESTCOS, IO_ADVISERS, IO_PENSIONS, and IO_HFS. Panels A-D present the result for contemporaneous measures
   of emission intensity. Panel B presents the results for SCOPE 1, Panel C presents the results for SCOPE 2, and Panel D presents the results for SCOPE
   3. All variables are defined in Table 1. We report the results of the pooled regression with standard errors clustered at the industry and year level. All
   regressions include year-month fixed effects. In Panel A, columns (2), (4), and (6) additionally include state-fixed effects. All regressions in Panels B-D
   include state fixed effects. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.

                                                  Panel A: Aggregate ownership (Emission intensity)
      Variables                             (1)                 (2)                  (3)                 (4)                 (5)                  (6)
      SCOPE 1 INT                        -0.194**            -0.218**
                                          (0.085)             (0.083)
      SCOPE 2 INT                                                                  -0.383              -0.381
                                                                                   (1.621)             (1.610)
      SCOPE 3 INT                                                                                                           0.094               -0.130
                                                                                                                           (0.550)             (0.581)
      LOGSIZE                             2.078                1.847               2.096               1.859                2.104               1.850
                                          (1.510)             (1.702)              (1.484)             (1.678)             (1.499)             (1.706)
      PRINV                            -29.353***           -37.098***          -29.333***          -37.161***           -29.308***          -37.200***
                                          (5.614)             (6.448)              (5.611)             (6.392)             (5.640)             (6.476)
      MOM                                 -1.453              -1.792*              -1.542             -1.871**             -1.544              -1.858*
                                          (0.937)             (0.876)              (0.895)             (0.823)             (0.920)             (0.856)
      B/M                                 -1.165              -0.890               -1.533              -1.205              -1.498               -1.216
                                          (1.423)             (1.602)              (1.366)             (1.541)             (1.339)             (1.549)
      BETA                               9.123***            9.470***            9.332***             9.705***            9.300***            9.695***
                                          (1.508)             (1.459)              (1.421)             (1.375)             (1.430)             (1.388)
      VOLAT                               -7.617               4.118               -6.867              4.770               -7.095               4.532
                                         (14.257)            (12.827)             (13.550)            (11.939)            (14.024)             (12.565)
      VOLUME                            -4.427***            -4.612**            -4.379***            -4.568**           -4.389***            -4.582**
                                          (1.400)             (1.636)              (1.422)             (1.650)             (1.378)             (1.626)
      NASDAQ                              -1.159              -1.529               -0.875              -1.255              -0.751               -1.292
                                          (1.467)             (1.700)              (1.431)             (1.638)             (1.303)             (1.505)
      SP500                               2.559                1.711               2.418               1.508                2.394               1.510
                                         (2.120)             (2.093)              (2.122)             (2.088)             (2.129)              (2.095)
      Year/month F.E.                      Yes                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes
      State fixed effect                   No                  Yes                  No                  Yes                 No                   Yes
      Observations                       170,701             160,406              170,701             160,406             170,701              160,406
      R-squared                           0.121               0.166                0.118               0.162               0.118                0.162

                                                           Panel B: Disaggregate ownership
                                        (1)                   (2)                  (3)                   (4)                   (5)                  (6)
VARIABLES                              Banks               Insurance           Invest. Cos.            Advisers              Pensions           Hedge Funds
SCOPE 1 INT                           0.001**               -0.011*                0.026               -0.258***              -0.009*                0.033
                                       (0.000)               (0.005)               (0.022)              (0.056)               (0.004)               (0.028)
SCOPE 2 INT                             0.009                -0.253                -0.139                -0.156                0.049                 0.108
                                       (0.006)               (0.144)               (0.406)              (0.992)               (0.097)               (0.441)
SCOPE 3 INT                            0.004*                -0.021                0.038                 0.052                 0.028                -0.230
                                      (0.002)               (0.071)               (0.115)               (0.409)               (0.030)              (0.151)
Controls                                Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Year/month F.E.                         Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes
State fixed effect                      Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Observations                          160,406               160,406               160,406               160,406               160,406              160,406

                                                                              55
             Table 12: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns: Excluding Salient Industries
The sample period is 2005-2017. The dependent variable is RET. All variables are defined in Table 1. We report the results of the pooled regression with
standard errors clustered at the industry level. The sample excludes companies in the oil & gas (gic=2), utilities (gic=65-69), and motor (gic=18, 19, 23)
industries All regressions include year-month fixed effects. In columns (4)-(6), we additionally include industry-fixed effects. Panel A reports the results
for the natural logarithm of total emissions; Panel B reports the results for the percentage change in carbon emissions; Panel C reports the results for
carbon emission intensity. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.

                                                               Panel A: Total emissions
   VARIABLES                                         (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)                (5)               (6)
   LOG (SCOPE 1 TOT)                              0.081***                                               0.197***
                                                    (0.022)                                               (0.050)
   LOG (SCOPE 2 TOT)                                                 0.108***                                              0.243***
                                                                      (0.032)                                               (0.061)
   LOG (SCOPE 3 TOT)                                                                   0.132***                                              0.340***
                                                                                        (0.043)                                               (0.081)
   Controls                                          Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes
   Year/month F.E.                                   Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes
   Industry F.E.                                     No                No                No                 Yes               Yes               Yes
   Observations                                    165,156           165,228           165,252            165,156           165,228           165,252
   R-squared                                        0.210             0.210             0.210              0.212             0.213             0.213

                                                    Panel B: Growth rate in total emissions
   VARIABLES                                         (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)                (5)               (6)
   DSCOPE 1                                       0.748***                                               0.730***
                                                    (0.203)                                               (0.189)
   DSCOPE 2                                                          0.527***                                              0.510***
                                                                      (0.144)                                               (0.137)
   DSCOPE 3                                                                            1.580***                                              1.586***
                                                                                        (0.383)                                               (0.380)
   Controls                                          Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes
   Year/month F.E.                                   Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes
   Industry F.E.                                     No                No                No                 Yes               Yes               Yes
   Observations                                    136,430           136,478           136,502            136,430           136,478           136,502
   R-squared                                        0.226             0.226             0.226              0.229             0.229             0.230

                                                              Panel C: Emission intensity
   VARIABLES                                         (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)                (5)               (6)
   SCOPE 1 INT                                      0.004                                                 -0.014
                                                    (0.017)                                               (0.014)
   SCOPE 2 INT                                                         0.138                                                 0.110
                                                                      (0.105)                                               (0.106)
   SCOPE 3 INT                                                                           0.051                                                 0.148*
                                                                                        (0.035)                                               (0.073)
   Controls                                          Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes
   Year/month F.E.                                   Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes
   Industry F.E.                                     No                No                No                 Yes               Yes               Yes
   Observations                                    165,252           165,252           165,252            165,252           165,252           165,252
   R-squared                                        0.210             0.210             0.210              0.212             0.212             0.212



                                                                              56
    Table 13: Carbon Emissions and Institutional Ownership: Excluding Salient Industries
The sample excludes companies in the oil & gas (gic=2), utilities (gic=65-69), and motor (gic=18, 19, 23) industries. The sample period is 2005-2017.
Panel A presents the results for aggregate ownership for contemporaneous carbon intensity measures, Panel B for disaggregated ownership. All variables
are defined in Table 1. We report the results of the pooled regression with standard errors clustered at the industry and year level. All regressions include
year-month fixed effects. In Panel A, columns (2), (4), and (6) additionally include state-fixed effects. All regressions in Panel B include state fixed effects.
***1%; **5%; *10% significance.
                                                            Panel A: Aggregate ownership
 Variables                                 (1)                   (2)                 (3)                  (4)                  (5)                  (6)
 SCOPE 1 INT                              -0.015              -0.007
                                         (0.094)             (0.104)
 SCOPE 2 INT                                                                       -0.565               -0.525
                                                                                   (1.968)             (2.024)
 SCOPE 3 INT                                                                                                                  0.421                0.246
                                                                                                                            (0.538)              (0.568)
 Controls                                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
 Year/month F.E.                          Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
 State fixed effect                       No                   Yes                  No                   Yes                  No                   Yes
 Observations                           152,799              143,337              152,799              143,337              152,799              143,337
 R-squared                               0.126                0.169                0.126                0.169                0.127                0.170

                                                          Panel B: Disaggregate ownership
                                  (1)                   (2)                    (3)                   (4)                    (5)                   (6)
 VARIABLES                       Banks               Insurance             Invest. Cos.            Advisers               Pensions            Hedge Funds
 SCOPE 1 INT                    0.001*                 -0.013                 -0.059                 -0.060                 0.009                  0.114
                                (0.000)                (0.012)                (0.041)               (0.078)                (0.010)                (0.068)
 SCOPE 2 INT                     0.006                 -0.298*                -0.320                 -0.224                 0.051                  0.261
                                (0.006)                (0.164)                (0.487)               (1.252)                (0.124)                (0.523)
 SCOPE 3 INT                    0.004*                 -0.015                 0.063                  0.436                  0.041                 -0.282
                                (0.002)               (0.077)                (0.125)                (0.376)               (0.031)                (0.170)
 Controls                         Yes                   Yes                    Yes                    Yes                   Yes                    Yes
 Year/month F.E.                  Yes                   Yes                    Yes                    Yes                   Yes                    Yes
 State fixed effect               Yes                   Yes                    Yes                    Yes                   Yes                    Yes
 Observations                   143,337               143,337                143,337                143,337               143,337                143,337




                                                                              57
                          Table 14: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns: Sub-Periods
The sample period is 2005-2017. The dependent variable is RET. All variables are defined in Table 1. We report the results of the pooled regression with
standard errors clustered at the firm and year/month level. All regressions include year-month fixed effects and industry-fixed effects. We report the
results for the natural logarithm of contemporaneous total emissions in Panel A; the results for the growth rate in firm emissions in Panel B; and the
results for emission intensity in Panel C. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.

                                                             Panel A: Total emissions
                                                                  2005-2015                                            2016-2017
   VARIABLES                                        (1)              (2)                (3)              (4)              (5)                (6)
   LOG (SCOPE 1 TOT)                             0.151***                                             0.221***
                                                  (0.039)                                              (0.070)
   LOG (SCOPE 2 TOT)                                               0.148***                                             0.236***
                                                                    (0.042)                                              (0.077)
   LOG (SCOPE 3 TOT)                                                                 0.320***                                             0.337***
                                                                                      (0.087)                                              (0.097)
   Controls                                         Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
   Year/month F.E.                                  Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
   Industry F.E.                                    Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
   Observations                                   122,118          122,046           122,202           63,274            63,274            63,286
   R-squared                                       0.266            0.266             0.266            0.112             0.112             0.112

                                                   Panel B: Growth rate in total emissions
                                                                  2005-2015                                            2016-2017
   VARIABLES                                        (1)              (2)                (3)               (4)             (5)                (6)
   DSCOPE 1                                      0.671***                                              0.712**
                                                  (0.154)                                              (0.258)
   DSCOPE 2                                                        0.319***                                              0.512**
                                                                    (0.111)                                              (0.216)
   DSCOPE 3                                                                          1.323***                                             1.149**
                                                                                      (0.406)                                              (0.470)
   Controls                                         Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
   Year/month F.E.                                  Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
   Industry F.E.                                    Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
   Observations                                   109,266          109,182           109,326           44,735            44,723            44,747
   R-squared                                       0.276            0.276             0.276            0.086             0.086             0.086

                                                            Panel C: Emission intensity
                                                                  2005-2015                                            2016-2017
   VARIABLES                                        (1)              (2)                (3)              (4)              (5)                (6)
   SCOPE 1 INT                                     0.006                                                0.005
                                                  (0.007)                                              (0.019)
   SCOPE 2 INT                                                       0.076                                                0.080
                                                                    (0.095)                                              (0.126)
   SCOPE 3 INT                                                                        0.037                                                 0.026
                                                                                      (0.091)                                              (0.096)
   Controls                                         Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
   Year/month F.E.                                  Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
   Industry F.E.                                    Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
   Observations                                   122,202          122,202           122,202           63,286            63,286            63,286
   R-squared                                       0.266            0.266             0.266            0.111             0.111             0.111


                                                                          58
                   Table 15: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns (Imputed Emissions)
The sample period is 1990-1999. The dependent variable is RET. All variables are defined in Table 1. We report the results of the pooled regression with
standard errors clustered at the firm and year level. All regressions include year-month fixed effects. In columns (4) through (6), we additionally include
industry-fixed effects. The total level of emissions is imputed using the earliest observed level of emission intensity for each firm for the period 2005-
2017 (in Panel A) and for 1990-1999 (in Panel B) and scaling it by respective revenue values. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.


                                                               Panel A: (2005-2017)
   VARIABLES                                          (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)
   LOG (SCOPE 1 TOT)                              0.101***                                              0.290***
                                                   (0.022)                                               (0.055)
   LOG (SCOPE 2 TOT)                                                0.187***                                              0.328***
                                                                     (0.042)                                               (0.079)
   LOG (SCOPE 3 TOT)                                                                  0.250***                                              0.562***
                                                                                       (0.041)                                               (0.149)
   Controls                                          Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
   Year/month F.E.                                   Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
   Industry F.E.                                     No                No                No                Yes               Yes               Yes
   Observations                                    162,087           162,027           162,278           162,087           162,027           162,278
   R-squared                                        0.196             0.197             0.197             0.200             0.200             0.201


                                                                Panel B: (1990-1999)
   VARIABLES                                          (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)
   LOG (SCOPE 1 TOT)                                -0.037                                                0.082
                                                   (0.034)                                               (0.078)
   LOG (SCOPE 2 TOT)                                                  0.033                                                 0.236
                                                                     (0.045)                                               (0.134)
   LOG (SCOPE 3 TOT)                                                                    0.005                                                 0.318*
                                                                                       (0.059)                                               (0.162)
   Controls                                         Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
   Year/month F.E.                                  Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
   Industry F.E.                                    No                No                 No                Yes               Yes               Yes
   Observations                                    59,878            59,878            59,878             59,878            59,878           59,878
   R-squared                                       0.149             0.149              0.149             0.156             0.156             0.156




                                                                              59
                                                             Online Appendix

                                     Table A.1: Carbon Emissions: Sample Selection
                                         Providing carbon data?                      No                     Yes
                                         RET                                       1.222                  1.152
                                         SIZE                                    2645.00               12685.03
                                         B/M                                       0.598                  0.497
                                         LEVERAGE                                  0.202                  0.252
                                         MOM                                       0.198                  0.147
                                         INVEST/A                                  0.041                  0.046
                                         LOGPPE                                    4.124                  6.200
                                         BETA                                      0.958                  1.101
                                         VOLAT                                     0.131                  0.096

                   Table A.2: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns (Reduced Controls)
The sample period is 2005-2017. The dependent variable is RET. All variables are defined in Table 1. We report the results of the pooled regression with
standard errors clustered at the firm and year level. All regressions include year-month fixed effects. Panel A (D) reports the results for the natural
logarithm of firm-level total emissions; Panel B (E) reports the results for the percentage change in carbon emissions; Panel C (F) reports the results for
the emission intensity. In Panels D-F, we additionally include industry-fixed effects. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.

                                                             Panel A: Total emissions
   VARIABLES                                          (1)              (2)                (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)
   LOG (SCOPE 1 TOT)                                -0.005            0.024
                                                   (0.021)           (0.043)
   LOG (SCOPE 2 TOT)                                                                    0.007             0.079
                                                                                       (0.018)           (0.071)
   LOG (SCOPE 3 TOT)                                                                                                        0.022             0.116
                                                                                                                           (0.024)           (0.078)
   LOGSIZE                                                            -0.132                              -0.184                              -0.215
                                                                     (0.123)                             (0.155)                             (0.157)
   Year/month F.E.                                   Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
   Industry F.E.                                     No                No                No                No                No                No
   Observations                                    190,407           190,407           190,335           190,335           190,503           190,503
   R-squared                                        0.198             0.198             0.198             0.199             0.198             0.199

                                                    Panel B: Growth rate in total emissions
   VARIABLES                                         (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)
   DSCOPE 1                                       0.722***          0.721***
                                                   (0.215)           (0.216)
   DSCOPE 2                                                                            0.433**           0.433**
                                                                                       (0.177)           (0.175)
   DSCOPE 3                                                                                                                1.268**           1.276**
                                                                                                                           (0.499)           (0.481)
   LOGSIZE                                                            -0.032                              -0.034                              -0.040
                                                                     (0.106)                             (0.108)                             (0.106)
   Year/month F.E.                                   Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
   Industry F.E.                                     No                No                No                No                No                No
   Observations                                    157,566           157,566           157,470           157,470           157,638           157,638
   R-squared                                        0.213             0.213             0.213             0.213             0.213             0.213

                                                                           60
                              Panel C: Emission intensity
VARIABLES              (1)             (2)           (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)
SCOPE 1 INT          -0.009          -0.008
                    (0.009)          (0.010)
SCOPE 2 INT                                         0.067       0.089
                                                   (0.170)     (0.188)
SCOPE 3 INT                                                               0.045     0.048
                                                                         (0.040)   (0.043)
LOGSIZE                              -0.111                    -0.114              -0.113
                                     (0.093)                   (0.096)             (0.093)
Year/month F.E.       Yes              Yes          Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes
Industry F.E.         No               No           No           No        No        No
Observations        190,503          190,503      190,503      190,503   190,503   190,503
R-squared            0.198            0.198        0.198        0.198     0.198     0.198

                               Panel D: Total emissions
VARIABLES             (1)               (2)          (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)
LOG (SCOPE 1 TOT)    0.005           0.194**
                    (0.033)          (0.083)
LOG (SCOPE 2 TOT)                                  -0.009      0.200*
                                                   (0.033)     (0.098)
LOG (SCOPE 3 TOT)                                                        -0.002    0.317**
                                                                         (0.043)   (0.133)
LOGSIZE                              -0.320*                   -0.346*             -0.437*
                                     (0.156)                   (0.178)             (0.203)
Year/month F.E.       Yes              Yes          Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes
Industry F.E.         Yes              Yes          Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes
Observations        190,407          190,407      190,335      190,335   190,503   190,503
R-squared            0.201            0.201        0.201        0.202     0.201     0.202

                     Panel E: Growth rate in total emissions
VARIABLES              (1)             (2)           (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)
DSCOPE 1            0.683***        0.680***
                    (0.184)          (0.186)
DSCOPE 2                                           0.386**     0.384**
                                                   (0.157)     (0.155)
DSCOPE 3                                                                 1.142**   1.156**
                                                                         (0.476)   (0.459)
LOGSIZE                              -0.098                    -0.098              -0.105
                                     (0.119)                   (0.120)             (0.118)
Year/month F.E.       Yes              Yes          Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes
Industry F.E.         Yes              Yes          Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes
Observations        157,566          157,566      157,470      157,470   157,638   157,638
R-squared            0.216            0.216        0.216        0.216     0.216     0.216




                                          61
                                                                                Panel F: Emission intensity
                     VARIABLES                                          (1)                 (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)                 (6)
                     SCOPE 1 INT                                       0.005               0.006
                                                                      (0.006)             (0.005)
                     SCOPE 2 INT                                                                             0.014           0.103
                                                                                                            (0.047)         (0.098)
                     SCOPE 3 INT                                                                                                               0.061               0.080
                                                                                                                                              (0.069)            (0.066)
                     LOGSIZE                                                               -0.168                            -0.170                              -0.168
                                                                                          (0.098)                           (0.100)                              (0.098)
                     Year/month F.E.                                   Yes                  Yes               Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes
                     Industry F.E.                                     Yes                  Yes               Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes
                     Observations                                    190,503              190,503           190,503         190,503           190,503           190,503
                     R-squared                                        0.201                0.201             0.201           0.201             0.201             0.201

                                                Table A.3: Lagged Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns
    The sample period is 2005-2017. The dependent variable is RET. The emission variables are lagged between 0 (LAG0) and 12 months (LAG12). All variables are defined in Table 1. We
    report the results of the pooled regression with standard errors clustered at the firm and year level. All regressions include year-month fixed effects. In columns (7)-(12), we additionally
    include industry-fixed effects. Panels A1-A3 report the results for the natural logarithm of total firm-level emissions; Panels B1-B3 report the results for the percentage change in carbon
    total emissions; Panels C1-C3 report the results for carbon emission intensity. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.

                                                               Panel A1: Total emissions (LOG SCOPE 1 TOT)
VARIABLES              (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)               (6)            (7)        (8)            (9)           (10)            (11)          (12)
LAG0                0.051**                                                                                   0.181***
                    (0.022)                                                                                    (0.044)
LAG1                                0.041*                                                                                  0.142***
                                   (0.023)                                                                                   (0.036)
LAG3                                               0.029                                                                                   0.138***
                                                  (0.026)                                                                                   (0.043)
LAG6                                                              0.023                                                                                   0.106**
                                                                 (0.028)                                                                                   (0.043)
LAG9                                                                              0.010                                                                                     0.070
                                                                                 (0.030)                                                                                   (0.049)
LAG12                                                                                               0.027                                                                                0.033
                                                                                                (0.025)                                                                                 (0.039)
Controls              Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes          Yes
Year/mo. F.E.         Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes          Yes
Industry F.E.         No             No             No             No              No             No             Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes          Yes
Observations        185,392        182,668        177,200        168,941         160,565        152,099        185,392      182,668        177,200        168,941          160,565      152,099
R-squared            0.200          0.196          0.200          0.207           0.214          0.214          0.203        0.199          0.203          0.210            0.217        0.218




                                                                                               62
                                                Panel A2: Total emissions (LOG SCOPE 2 TOT)
VARIABLES         (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)        (8)        (9)      (10)      (11)      (12)
LAG0            0.103**                                                        0.179***
                (0.039)                                                        (0.052)
LAG1                       0.081**                                                        0.132***
                           (0.037)                                                        (0.042)
LAG3                                   0.058                                                         0.127**
                                      (0.037)                                                        (0.047)
LAG6                                             0.051                                                          0.086
                                                 (0.042)                                                       (0.050)
LAG9                                                        0.044                                                         0.055
                                                           (0.045)                                                       (0.059)
LAG12                                                                 0.053                                                         0.032
                                                                     (0.047)                                                       (0.052)
Controls          Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Year/mo. F.E.     Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Industry F.E.     No         No         No        No         No        No        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Observations    185,320    182,594    177,122   168,857    160,475   152,003   185,320    182,594    177,122   168,857   160,475   152,003
R-squared        0.201      0.196      0.200     0.208      0.214     0.215     0.203      0.199      0.203     0.210     0.217     0.218

                                                Panel A3: Total emissions (LOG SCOPE 3 TOT)
VARIABLES         (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)        (8)        (9)      (10)      (11)      (12)
LAG0            0.148***                                                       0.327***
                (0.040)                                                        (0.082)
LAG1                       0.120***                                                       0.251***
                           (0.037)                                                        (0.068)
LAG3                                  0.095**                                                        0.231**
                                      (0.038)                                                        (0.078)
LAG6                                             0.082*                                                        0.157*
                                                 (0.042)                                                       (0.079)
LAG9                                                       0.080*                                                         0.121
                                                           (0.041)                                                       (0.094)
LAG12                                                                0.079*                                                         0.064
                                                                     (0.041)                                                       (0.067)
Controls          Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Year/mo. F.E.     Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Industry F.E.     No         No         No        No         No        No        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Observations    185,488    182,762    177,290   169,025    160,643   152,171   185,488    182,762    177,290   169,025   160,643   152,171
R-squared        0.201      0.196      0.200     0.207      0.214     0.215     0.203      0.199      0.203     0.210     0.217     0.218




                                                                     63
                                                 Panel B1: Growth in total emissions (DSCOPE 1)
VARIABLES         (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)        (9)       (10)      (11)      (12)
LAG0            0.718***                                                         0.706***
                (0.181)                                                           (0.164)
LAG1                       0.647***                                                         0.642***
                           (0.157)                                                          (0.141)
LAG3                                  0.538***                                                         0.533***
                                      (0.167)                                                          (0.155)
LAG6                                             0.468**                                                          0.463**
                                                  (0.183)                                                         (0.175)
LAG9                                                         0.149                                                           0.130
                                                            (0.185)                                                         (0.171)
LAG12                                                                   0.020                                                         -0.019
                                                                       (0.186)                                                        (0.180)
Controls          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
Year/mo. F.E.     Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
Industry F.E.     No         No         No         No         No         No        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
Observations    154,001    151,262    145,762    137,446    128,987    120,370   154,001    151,262    145,762    137,446   128,987   120,370
R-squared        0.215      0.217      0.224      0.234      0.243      0.255     0.218      0.221      0.227      0.237     0.246     0.259

                                                 Panel B2: Growth in total emissions (DSCOPE 2)
VARIABLES         (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)        (9)       (10)      (11)      (12)
LAG0            0.400**                                                          0.379**
                (0.150)                                                           (0.143)
LAG1                       0.323**                                                          0.304**
                           (0.135)                                                          (0.131)
LAG3                                   0.279*                                                           0.262*
                                      (0.143)                                                          (0.140)
LAG6                                              0.269*                                                           0.255
                                                  (0.148)                                                         (0.151)
LAG9                                                         0.031                                                           0.006
                                                            (0.122)                                                         (0.124)
LAG12                                                                  -0.076                                                         -0.124
                                                                       (0.159)                                                        (0.158)
Controls          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
Year/mo. F.E.     Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
Industry F.E.     No         No         No         No         No         No        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
Observations    153,905    151,166    145,666    137,350    128,891    120,274   153,905    151,166    145,666    137,350   128,891   120,274
R-squared        0.215      0.217      0.224      0.234      0.243      0.256     0.218      0.221      0.227      0.237     0.247     0.259




                                                                      64
                                               Panel B3: Growth in total emissions (DSCOPE 3)
VARIABLES         (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)      (9)      (10)      (11)      (12)
LAG0            1.311***                                                       1.303***
                (0.388)                                                         (0.383)
LAG1                       1.160**                                                        1.157**
                           (0.406)                                                        (0.405)
LAG3                                 0.896*                                                          0.885*
                                     (0.448)                                                         (0.448)
LAG6                                            0.823                                                           0.811
                                                (0.485)                                                        (0.489)
LAG9                                                       0.213                                                          0.161
                                                          (0.419)                                                        (0.417)
LAG12                                                                -0.110                                                        -0.233
                                                                     (0.463)                                                       (0.462)
Controls          Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Year/mo. F.E.     Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Industry F.E.     No         No        No        No         No         No        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Observations    154,073    151,333   145,831   137,512    129,050    120,430   154,073    151,333    145,831   137,512   129,050   120,430
R-squared        0.215      0.217     0.224     0.234      0.243      0.255     0.218      0.221      0.227     0.237     0.246     0.259

                                                Panel C1: Emission intensity (SCOPE 1 INT)
VARIABLES         (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)      (9)      (10)      (11)      (12)
LAG0             -0.010                                                         0.004
                (0.012)                                                         (0.006)
LAG1                       -0.008                                                            0.007
                           (0.011)                                                        (0.006)
LAG3                                 -0.006                                                          0.011*
                                     (0.011)                                                         (0.005)
LAG6                                            -0.004                                                         0.017**
                                                (0.012)                                                        (0.007)
LAG9                                                       -0.008                                                         0.009
                                                          (0.013)                                                        (0.007)
LAG12                                                                -0.003                                                         0.007
                                                                     (0.012)                                                       (0.008)
Controls          Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Year/mo. F.E.     Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Industry F.E.     No         No        No        No         No         No        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Observations    185,488    182,762   177,290   169,025    160,643    152,171   185,488    182,762    177,290   169,025   160,643   152,171
R-squared        0.200      0.196     0.200     0.207      0.214      0.215     0.203      0.199      0.203     0.210     0.217     0.218




                                                                    65
                                               Panel C2: Emission intensity (SCOPE 2 INT)
VARIABLES         (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)          (8)      (9)      (10)      (11)      (12)
LAG0             0.126                                                        0.058
                (0.125)                                                       (0.068)
LAG1                       0.129                                                            0.065
                          (0.127)                                                       (0.070)
LAG3                                 0.090                                                           0.088
                                    (0.108)                                                         (0.077)
LAG6                                           0.093                                                           0.096
                                              (0.104)                                                         (0.082)
LAG9                                                     0.066                                                           0.046
                                                        (0.106)                                                         (0.080)
LAG12                                                               0.113                                                          0.076
                                                                   (0.122)                                                        (0.104)
Controls          Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Year/mo. F.E.     Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Industry F.E.     No        No        No        No        No         No        Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Observations    185,488   182,762   177,290   169,025   160,643    152,171   185,488    182,762     177,290   169,025   160,643   152,171
R-squared        0.200     0.196     0.200     0.207     0.214      0.215     0.203      0.199       0.203     0.210     0.217     0.218

                                               Panel C3: Emission intensity (SCOPE 3 INT)
VARIABLES         (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)          (8)      (9)      (10)      (11)      (12)
LAG0             0.053                                                        0.043
                (0.034)                                                       (0.075)
LAG1                       0.050                                                            0.019
                          (0.037)                                                       (0.090)
LAG3                                 0.039                                                           0.030
                                    (0.036)                                                         (0.083)
LAG6                                           0.047                                                           0.082
                                              (0.038)                                                         (0.082)
LAG9                                                     0.045                                                           0.074
                                                        (0.040)                                                         (0.097)
LAG12                                                              0.069*                                                         0.146*
                                                                   (0.037)                                                        (0.073)
Controls          Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Year/mo. F.E.     Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Industry F.E.     No        No        No        No        No         No        Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Observations    185,488   182,762   177,290   169,025   160,643    152,171   185,488    182,762     177,290   169,025   160,643   152,171
R-squared        0.200     0.196     0.200     0.207     0.214      0.215     0.203      0.199       0.203     0.210     0.217     0.218




                                                                  66
                              Table A.4: Carbon Emissions and Institutional Ownership
  The sample period is 2005-2017. The dependent variable in Panel A is IO. The dependent variables in Panel B and Panel C are IO_BANK,
  IO_INSURANCE, IO_INVESTCOS, IO_ADVISERS, IO_PENSIONS, and IO_HFS. Panel B presents the results for SCOPE 3, and Panel C presents
  the results for SCOPE 12. All variables are defined in Table 1. We report the results of the pooled regression with standard errors clustered at the industry
  level. All regressions include year-month fixed effects. In columns (2) and (4), we additionally include state-fixed effects. ***1% significance; **5%
  significance; *10% significance.
                                                 Panel A: Aggregate ownership (Total emissions)
     Variables                                 (1)                (2)                 (3)                 (4)                  (5)                 (6)
     LOG (SCOPE 1 TOT)                      0.580               0.627
                                           (0.488)             (0.522)
     LOG (SCOPE 2 TOT)                                                             1.621**             1.805***
                                                                                    (0.564)             (0.567)
     LOG (SCOPE 3 TOT)                                                                                                      1.532**             1.564**
                                                                                                                            (0.639)             (0.678)
     Controls                                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes
     Year/month F.E.                         Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes
     State fixed effect                      No                  Yes                 No                  Yes                  No                  Yes
     Observations                          170,481             160,322             170,409             160,250              170,553             160,394
     R-squared                              0.123               0.167               0.137               0.184                0.131               0.174

                                                     Panel B: Disaggregate ownership (SCOPE 1)
                                         (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)                  (5)                  (6)
  VARIABLES                             Banks              Insurance           Invest. Cos.           Advisers             Pensions           Hedge Funds
  LOG (SCOPE 1 TOT)                    0.003**               -0.052                0.146*               0.290               0.050**               0.191*
                                       (0.001)              (0.043)              (0.067)               (0.382)              (0.022)              (0.106)
  Controls                               Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes
  Year/month F.E.                        Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes
  State fixed effect                     Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes
  Observations                         160,322              160,322              160,322               160,322              160,322              160,322
  R-squared                             0.166                0.026                0.212                 0.147                0.233                0.179

                                                     Panel C: Disaggregate ownership (SCOPE 2)
                                        (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)                   (5)                  (6)
 VARIABLES                             Banks              Insurance            Invest. Cos.           Advisers              Pensions           Hedge Funds
 LOG (SCOPE 2 TOT)                   0.004***                -0.081                0.102              1.291***              0.125***              0.363**
                                      (0.001)               (0.060)              (0.114)               (0.349)               (0.023)              (0.151)
 Controls                               Yes                   Yes                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes
 Year/month F.E.                        Yes                   Yes                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes
 State fixed effect                     Yes                   Yes                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes
 Observations                         160,250               160,250              160,250               160,250               160,250              160,250
 R-squared                             0.166                 0.026                0.210                 0.166                 0.239                0.180

                                                     Panel D: Disaggregate ownership (SCOPE 3)
                                      (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)                   (5)                   (6)
VARIABLES                            Banks               Insurance            Invest. Cos.            Advisers              Pensions            Hedge Funds
LOG (SCOPE 3 TOT)                    0.006**               -0.054                  0.116               1.178**              0.137***                 0.181
                                    (0.002)                (0.063)               (0.112)               (0.458)               (0.029)               (0.188)
Controls                              Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Year/month F.E.                       Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
State fixed effect                    Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Observations                        160,394                160,394               160,394               160,394               160,394               160,394
R-squared                            0.166                  0.025                 0.210                 0.158                 0.238                 0.177




                                                                              67
                     Panel A.2: Aggregate ownership (Growth rate in total emissions)
Variables                (1)              (2)              (3)         (4)               (5)          (6)
DSCOPE 1               -0.669            -0.356
                       (0.594)          (0.612)
DSCOPE 2                                              -1.375**       -1.270*
                                                         (0.605)     (0.601)
DSCOPE 3                                                                               -1.238       -0.866
                                                                                       (1.669)      (1.789)
Controls                 Yes              Yes           Yes            Yes               Yes          Yes
Year/month F.E.          Yes              Yes           Yes            Yes               Yes          Yes
State fixed effect       No               Yes           No             Yes               No           Yes
Observations           141,599          133,219       141,503        133,123           141,647      133,267
R-squared               0.090            0.139         0.090          0.139             0.089        0.139

                               Panel B.2: Disaggregate ownership (DSCOPE 1)
                      (1)                (2)             (3)            (4)               (5)            (6)
VARIABLES            Banks            Insurance      Invest. Cos.     Advisers          Pensions     Hedge Funds
DSCOPE 1              0.000             -0.073           0.241        -0.974*             -0.171       0.621**
                     (0.003)           (0.051)         (0.301)        (0.535)            (0.102)       (0.263)
Controls               Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes           Yes
Year/month F.E.        Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes           Yes
State fixed effect     Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes           Yes
Observations         133,219           133,219         133,219        133,219            133,219       133,219
R-squared             0.190             0.026           0.180          0.122              0.192         0.174

                               Panel C.2: Disaggregate ownership (DSCOPE 2)
                      (1)                (2)             (3)            (4)               (5)            (6)
VARIABLES            Banks            Insurance      Invest. Cos.     Advisers          Pensions     Hedge Funds
DSCOPE 2             -0.006             -0.053           -0.011       -1.383**           -0.223**       0.407*
                     (0.004)           (0.035)         (0.261)        (0.448)            (0.072)       (0.225)
Controls               Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes           Yes
Year/month F.E.        Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes           Yes
State fixed effect     Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes           Yes
Observations         133,123           133,123         133,123        133,123            133,123       133,123
R-squared             0.191             0.026           0.180          0.124              0.193         0.173

                                Panel D2: Disaggregate ownership (DSCOPE 3)
                      (1)                (2)             (3)            (4)               (5)            (6)
VARIABLES            Banks            Insurance      Invest. Cos.     Advisers          Pensions     Hedge Funds
DSCOPE 3             -0.006             -0.088           0.440         -1.733           -0.455***      0.977**
                     (0.008)           (0.064)         (0.556)        (1.297)            (0.143)       (0.402)
Controls               Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes           Yes
Year/month F.E.        Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes           Yes
State fixed effect     Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes           Yes
Observations         133,267           133,267         133,267        133,267            133,267       133,267
R-squared             0.190             0.026           0.180          0.122              0.193         0.174




                                                    68
      Table A.5: Carbon Emissions and Institutional Ownership: Excluding Salient Industries
   The sample excludes companies in the oil & gas (gic=2), utilities (gic=65-69), and motor (gic=18, 19, 23) industries. The sample period is 2005-2017.
   Panel A presents the results for aggregate ownership for total carbon emissions, Panel B for disaggregated ownership for Scope 1, Panel C for
   disaggregated ownership for Scope 2, Panel D for disaggregated ownership for Scope 3. All variables are defined in Table 1. We report the results of the
   pooled regression with standard errors clustered at the industry and year level. All regressions include year-month fixed effects. In columns (2), (4), and
   (6), we include state-fixed effects. ***1%; **5%; *10% significance.

                                                  Panel A: Aggregate ownership (Total emissions)
  Variables                                 (1)                 (2)                  (3)                 (4)                 (5)                  (6)
  LOG (SCOPE 1 TOT)                      1.299**             1.416**
                                          (0.496)             (0.515)
  LOG (SCOPE 2 TOT)                                                               1.759**             2.006***
                                                                                   (0.659)             (0.646)
  LOG (SCOPE 3 TOT)                                                                                                        1.922**            2.029***
                                                                                                                          (0.633)              (0.661)
  Controls                                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes
  Year/month F.E.                          Yes                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes
  State fixed effect                       No                  Yes                  No                  Yes                 No                   Yes
  Observations                           152,591             143,253              152,663             143,325             152,663              143,325
  R-squared                               0.145               0.190                0.147               0.195               0.146                0.190

                                                    Panel B: Disaggregate ownership (SCOPE 1)
                                        (1)                   (2)                  (3)                   (4)                   (5)                  (6)
VARIABLES                              Banks               Insurance           Invest. Cos.            Advisers              Pensions           Hedge Funds
LOG (SCOPE 1 TOT)                     0.004**                -0.046                0.138                0.974**              0.099***               0.248*
                                      (0.002)               (0.054)               (0.088)               (0.342)               (0.023)              (0.137)
Controls                                Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Year/month F.E.                         Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes
State fixed effect                      Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Observations                          143,253               143,253               143,253               143,253               143,253              143,253
R-squared                              0.156                 0.028                 0.213                 0.174                 0.239                0.167

                                                    Panel C: Disaggregate ownership (SCOPE 2)
                                        (1)                   (2)                  (3)                   (4)                   (5)                  (6)
VARIABLES                              Banks               Insurance           Invest. Cos.            Advisers              Pensions           Hedge Funds
LOG (SCOPE 2 TOT)                     0.004***               -0.099                0.134               1.375***              0.143***               0.449**
                                      (0.001)               (0.073)               (0.124)               (0.412)               (0.024)              (0.162)
Controls                                Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Year/month F.E.                         Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes
State fixed effect                      Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Observations                          143,325               143,325               143,325               143,325               143,325              143,325
R-squared                              0.156                 0.029                 0.212                 0.179                 0.241                0.170

                                                    Panel D: Disaggregate ownership (SCOPE 3)
                                        (1)                   (2)                  (3)                   (4)                   (5)                  (6)
VARIABLES                              Banks               Insurance           Invest. Cos.            Advisers              Pensions           Hedge Funds
LOG (SCOPE 3 TOT)                     0.006**                -0.058                0.159               1.554***              0.155***                0.214
                                      (0.002)               (0.065)               (0.108)               (0.421)               (0.029)              (0.209)
Controls                                Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Year/month F.E.                         Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes
State fixed effect                      Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Observations                          143,325               143,325               143,325               143,325               143,325              143,325
R-squared                              0.156                 0.027                 0.212                 0.179                 0.240                0.165




                                                                              69
                           Panel A.2: Aggregate ownership (Growth rate in total emissions)
      Variables                (1)               (2)              (3)         (4)              (5)          (6)
      DSCOPE 1               -0.927            -0.679
                             (0.768)           (0.734)
      DSCOPE 2                                                  -1.176      -1.032
                                                                (0.742)     (0.664)
      DSCOPE 3                                                                               -1.498       -1.212
                                                                                             (2.028)      (2.006)
      Controls                 Yes               Yes           Yes            Yes              Yes          Yes
      Year/month F.E.          Yes               Yes           Yes            Yes              Yes          Yes
      State fixed effect       No                Yes           No             Yes              No           Yes
      Observations           125,888           118,117       125,936        118,165          125,936      118,165
      R-squared               0.094             0.140         0.095          0.140            0.094        0.140

                                       Panel B.2: Disaggregate ownership (SCOPE 1)
                            (1)                 (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)
VARIABLES                  Banks             Insurance      Invest. Cos.     Advisers         Pensions     Hedge Funds
DSCOPE 1                    0.001             -0.066            0.162         -0.994            -0.177       0.395**
                           (0.003)            (0.058)         (0.339)        (0.557)           (0.102)       (0.174)
Controls                     Yes                Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes
Year/month F.E.              Yes                Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes
State fixed effect           Yes                Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes
Observations               118,117            118,117         118,117        118,117           118,117       118,117
R-squared                   0.179              0.029           0.180          0.128             0.195         0.160

                                       Panel C.2: Disaggregate ownership (SCOPE 2)
                            (1)                 (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)
VARIABLES                  Banks             Insurance      Invest. Cos.     Advisers         Pensions     Hedge Funds
DSCOPE 2                   -0.009*            -0.032            -0.031       -1.106**         -0.248***       0.394*
                           (0.005)            (0.036)         (0.304)        (0.478)           (0.079)       (0.201)
Controls                     Yes                Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes
Year/month F.E.              Yes                Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes
State fixed effect           Yes                Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes
Observations               118,165            118,165         118,165        118,165           118,165       118,165
R-squared                   0.179              0.029           0.180          0.128             0.196         0.160

                                       Panel D.2: Disaggregate ownership (SCOPE 3)
                            (1)                 (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)
VARIABLES                  Banks             Insurance      Invest. Cos.     Advisers         Pensions     Hedge Funds
DSCOPE 3                   -0.009             -0.079            0.547         -1.678           -0.442**       0.449
                           (0.010)            (0.071)         (0.659)        (1.272)           (0.155)       (0.489)
Controls                     Yes                Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes
Year/month F.E.              Yes                Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes
State fixed effect           Yes                Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes
Observations               118,165            118,165         118,165        118,165           118,165       118,165
R-squared                   0.179              0.029           0.180          0.128             0.196         0.160




                                                           70
                   Table A.6: Carbon Emissions and Legacy Stock Returns: Sub-Periods
The sample is restricted to firms that show up in the data prior to 2016. The sample periods are 2005-2015 and 2016-2017. The dependent variable is
RET. All variables are defined in Table 1. We report the results of the pooled regression with standard errors clustered at the firm and year-month level.
All regressions include year-month fixed effects and industry-fixed effects. Panel A reports the results for the natural logarithm of total emissions; Panel
B reports the results for the percentage change in carbon emissions; Panel C reports the results for carbon emission intensity. ***1% significance; **5%
significance; *10% significance.
                                                              Panel A: Total emissions
                                                                    2005-2015                                             2016-2017
   VARIABLES                                         (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)                 (6)
   LOG (SCOPE 1 TOT)                              0.151***                                                 0.019
                                                   (0.039)                                                (0.057)
   LOG (SCOPE 2 TOT)                                                 0.148***                                                -0.002
                                                                      (0.042)                                               (0.044)
   LOG (SCOPE 3 TOT)                                                                   0.320***                                                -0.026
                                                                                        (0.087)                                               (0.113)
   Controls                                          Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Year/month F.E.                                   Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Industry F.E.                                     Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Observations                                    122,118           122,046           122,202            25,867            25,867             25,879
   R-squared                                        0.266             0.266             0.266             0.133             0.133              0.133

                                                    Panel B: Growth rate in total emissions
                                                                    2005-2015                                             2016-2017
           VARIABLES                                 (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)                 (6)
   DSCOPE 1                                       0.671***                                                 0.273
                                                   (0.154)                                                (0.239)
   DSCOPE 2                                                          0.319***                                                0.049
                                                                      (0.111)                                               (0.197)
   DSCOPE 3                                                                            1.323***                                                0.365
                                                                                        (0.406)                                               (0.626)
   Controls                                          Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Year/month F.E.                                   Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Industry F.E.                                     Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Observations                                    109,266           109,182           109,326            25,867            25,855             25,879
   R-squared                                        0.276             0.276             0.276             0.133             0.133              0.133

                                                             Panel C: Emission intensity
                                                                    2005-2015                                             2016-2017
   VARIABLES                                         (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)                 (6)
   SCOPE 1 INT                                      0.006                                                  0.017
                                                   (0.007)                                                (0.020)
   SCOPE 2 INT                                                         0.076                                                 0.085
                                                                      (0.095)                                               (0.095)
   SCOPE 3 INT                                                                           0.037                                                 -0.076
                                                                                        (0.091)                                               (0.101)
   Controls                                          Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Year/month F.E.                                   Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Industry F.E.                                     Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Observations                                    122,202           122,202           122,202            25,879            25,879             25,879
   R-squared                                        0.266             0.266             0.266             0.133             0.133              0.133

                                                                            71
            Table A.7: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns (Excluding Financial Crisis)
The sample period is 2005-2017 excluding the financial crisis of Aug 2007-July 2009. The dependent variable is RET. All variables are defined in Table
1. We report the results of the pooled regression with standard errors clustered at the firm and year level. All regressions include year-month fixed effects.
In columns (4) through (6), we additionally include industry-fixed effects. Panel A reports the results for the natural logarithm of total firm-level emissions;
Panel B reports the results for the percentage change in carbon total emissions; Panel C reports the results for carbon emission intensity. ***1%
significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.
                                                                Panel A: Total emissions
   VARIABLES                                           (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)
   LOG (SCOPE 1 TOT)                                  0.038                                                 0.185***
                                                     (0.023)                                                 (0.047)
   LOG (SCOPE 2 TOT)                                                  0.098***                                                0.192***
                                                                       (0.027)                                                 (0.053)
   LOG (SCOPE 3 TOT)                                                                     0.146***                                                0.345***
                                                                                          (0.037)                                                 (0.085)
   Controls                                           Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
   Year/month F.E.                                    Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
   Industry F.E.                                      No                 No                 No                Yes                Yes               Yes
   Observations                                     163,991            163,938            164,070           163,991            163,938           164,070
   R-squared                                         0.158              0.159              0.159             0.162              0.162             0.162

                                                     Panel B: Growth rate in total emissions
   VARIABLES                                           (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)
   DSCOPE 1                                         0.756***                                                0.752***
                                                     (0.183)                                                 (0.169)
   DSCOPE 2                                                            0.466**                                                 0.443**
                                                                       (0.156)                                                 (0.150)
   DSCOPE 3                                                                              1.495***                                                1.497***
                                                                                          (0.353)                                                 (0.344)
   Controls                                           Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
   Year/month F.E.                                    Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
   Industry F.E.                                      No                 No                 No                Yes                Yes               Yes
   Observations                                     132,942            132,863            132,995           132,942            132,863           132,995
   R-squared                                         0.164              0.164              0.164             0.169              0.168             0.169

                                                               Panel C: Emission intensity
   VARIABLES                                           (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)
   SCOPE 1 INT                                       -0.013                                                   0.006
                                                     (0.011)                                                 (0.008)
   SCOPE 2 INT                                                          0.085                                                   0.019
                                                                       (0.131)                                                 (0.061)
   SCOPE 3 INT                                                                             0.049                                                   0.070
                                                                                          (0.037)                                                 (0.071)
   Controls                                           Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
   Year/month F.E.                                    Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
   Industry F.E.                                      No                 Yes                No                Yes                Yes               Yes
   Observations                                     164,070            164,070            164,070           164,070            164,070           164,070
   R-squared                                         0.158              0.158              0.158             0.162              0.162             0.162




                                                                                72
      Table A.8: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns (Alternative Industry Specification)
The sample period is 2005-2017. The dependent variable is RET. All variables are defined in Table 1. We report the results of the pooled regression with
standard errors clustered at the firm and year level. All regressions include year-month fixed effects and industry-fixed effects at the GIC 6 level. ***1%
significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.
VARIABLES                           (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)               (9)
LOG (SCOPE 1 TOT)                0.085**
                                 (0.028)
LOG (SCOPE 2 TOT)                               0.118**
                                                (0.051)
LOG (SCOPE 3 TOT)                                             0.240***
                                                               (0.058)
DSCOPE 1                                                                     0.715***
                                                                              (0.165)
DSCOPE 2                                                                                     0.404**
                                                                                             (0.150)
DSCOPE 3                                                                                                   1.346***
                                                                                                            (0.397)
SCOPE 1 INT                                                                                                                -0.006
                                                                                                                           (0.006)
SCOPE 2 INT                                                                                                                               0.034
                                                                                                                                          (0.088)
SCOPE 3 INT                                                                                                                                              0.024
                                                                                                                                                        (0.041)
Controls                        Yes               Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Year/month F.E.                 Yes               Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
GIC Industry F.E.               Yes               Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Observations                    185,392         185,320        185,488       154,001        153,905        154,073        185,488        185,488        185,488
R-squared                       0.202            0.202          0.202         0.217          0.217          0.217          0.202          0.202          0.202




                                                                           73
Table A.9: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns: Sub-Periods (Excluding Salient Industries)
The sample excludes companies in the oil & gas (gic=2), utilities (gic=65-69), and motor (gic=18, 19, 23) industries. The sample periods are 2005-2015
and 2016-2017. The dependent variable is RET. All variables are defined in Table 1. We report the results of the pooled regression with standard errors
clustered at the firm and year-month level. All regressions include year-month fixed effects and industry-fixed effects. Panel A reports the results for the
natural logarithm of total emissions; Panel B reports the results for the percentage growth of total emissions; Panel C reports the results for emission
intensity. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.

                                                               Panel A: Total emissions
                                                                    2005-2015                                             2016-2017
   VARIABLES                                         (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)                 (6)
   LOG (SCOPE 1 TOT)                              0.155***                                               0.248***
                                                    (0.047)                                               (0.079)
   LOG (SCOPE 2 TOT)                                                 0.223***                                              0.290***
                                                                      (0.058)                                               (0.089)
   LOG (SCOPE 3 TOT)                                                                   0.313***                                              0.365***
                                                                                        (0.095)                                               (0.100)
   Controls                                          Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Year/month F.E.                                   Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Industry F.E.                                     Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Observations                                    107,088           107,160           107,172            58,068            58,068             58,080
   R-squared                                        0.280             0.280             0.280             0.115             0.115              0.115

                                                    Panel B: Growth rate in total emissions
                                                                    2005-2015                                             2016-2017
   VARIABLES                                         (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)                 (6)
   DSCOPE 1                                       0.670***                                               0.749***
                                                    (0.147)                                               (0.230)
   DSCOPE 2                                                          0.438***                                              0.654***
                                                                      (0.116)                                               (0.193)
   DSCOPE 3                                                                            1.593***                                              1.406***
                                                                                        (0.392)                                               (0.387)
   Controls                                          Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Year/month F.E.                                   Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Industry F.E.                                     Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Observations                                     95,923            95,983            95,983            40,507            40,495             40,519
   R-squared                                        0.291             0.291             0.291             0.088             0.088              0.089

                                                              Panel C: Emission intensity
                                                                    2005-2015                                             2016-2017
   VARIABLES                                         (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)                 (6)
   SCOPE 1 INT                                      0.002                                                 -0.044
                                                    (0.023)                                               (0.054)
   SCOPE 2 INT                                                        0.246*                                                 -0.128
                                                                      (0.144)                                               (0.258)
   SCOPE 3 INT                                                                           0.165                                                 0.039
                                                                                        (0.110)                                               (0.148)
   Controls                                          Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Year/month F.E.                                   Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Industry F.E.                                     Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Observations                                    107,172           107,172           107,172            58,080            58,080             58,080
   R-squared                                        0.280             0.280             0.280             0.114             0.114              0.114

                                                                            74
   Table A.10: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns: Disclosed versus Estimated Emissions
Imputed includes all firms for which Trucost estimates the levels of emissions. Direct includes all firms for which data is directly available. The sample
period is 2005-2017. The dependent variable is RET. All variables are defined in Table 1. We report the results of the pooled regression with standard
errors clustered at the firm and year level. All regressions include year-month fixed effects and industry-fixed effects. Panel A reports the results for the
natural logarithm of total emissions; Panel B reports the results for the percentage growth of total emissions; Panel C reports the results for emission
intensity. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.

                                                               Panel A: Total emissions
                                                                    Disclosed                                              Estimated
   VARIABLES                                          (1)              (2)                 (3)               (4)               (5)                (6)
   LOG (SCOPE 1 TOT)                               0.121**                                                0.170***
                                                    (0.042)                                                (0.043)
   LOG (SCOPE 2 TOT)                                                   -0.002                                               0.169***
                                                                      (0.046)                                                (0.050)
   LOG (SCOPE 3 TOT)                                                                    0.367**                                                0.230**
                                                                                        (0.126)                                                (0.075)
   Controls                                          Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Year/month F.E.                                   Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Industry F.E.                                     Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Observations                                     28,484            28,412             28,532           123,591           123,603            123,639
   R-squared                                        0.264             0.265              0.265             0.215             0.215              0.215

                                                    Panel B: Growth rate in total emissions
                                                                    Disclosed                                              Estimated
   VARIABLES                                          (1)              (2)                 (3)               (4)               (5)                (6)
   DSCOPE 1                                          0.057                                                0.862***
                                                    (0.224)                                                (0.155)
   DSCOPE 2                                                            -0.060                                                0.518**
                                                                      (0.148)                                                (0.168)
   DSCOPE 3                                                                              0.921*                                               1.493***
                                                                                        (0.420)                                                (0.371)
   Controls                                          Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Year/month F.E.                                   Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Industry F.E.                                     Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Observations                                     28,472            28,400             28,532           123,627           123,603            123,639
   R-squared                                        0.264             0.266              0.265             0.216             0.216              0.216

                                                              Panel C: Emission intensity
                                                                    Disclosed                                              Estimated
   VARIABLES                                          (1)              (2)                 (3)               (4)               (5)                (6)
   SCOPE 1 INT                                       0.003                                                  0.010
                                                    (0.005)                                                (0.008)
   SCOPE 2 INT                                                         -0.131                                                 0.116
                                                                      (0.116)                                                (0.130)
   SCOPE 3 INT                                                                           -0.147                                                 0.096
                                                                                        (0.103)                                                (0.101)
   Controls                                          Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Year/month F.E.                                   Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Industry F.E.                                     Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
   Observations                                     28,532            28,532             28,532           123,639           123,639            123,639
   R-squared                                        0.264             0.264              0.265             0.215             0.215              0.215

                                                                            75
                              Table A.11: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns: All Scopes
   The sample period is 2005-2017. The dependent variable is RET. SCOPE TOT is a sum of SCOPE 1 TOT, SCOPE 2 TOT, and SCOPE 3 TOT. TOT
   SCOPE INT is a sum of SCOPE 1 INT, SCOPE 2 INT, and SCOPE 3 INT. All variables are defined in Table 1. We report the results of the pooled
   regression with standard errors clustered at the firm and year level. All regressions include year-month fixed effects and industry-fixed effects. ***1%
   significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.
                        VARIABLES                           (1)                    (2)                 (3)                   (4)
                        LOG (SCOPE TOT)                  0.120***             0.302***
                                                          (0.030)               (0.074)
                        TOT SCOPE INT                                                                -0.004                0.004
                                                                                                     (0.010)              (0.005)
                        Controls                            Yes                  Yes                   Yes                  Yes
                        Year/month F.E.                     Yes                  Yes                   Yes                  Yes
                        Industry F.E.                       No                   Yes                   No                   Yes
                        Observations                      185,488              185,488               185,488              185,488
                        R-squared                          0.201                0.203                 0.200                0.203

               Table A.12: Carbon Emissions and Institutional Ownership: Salient Industries
   The sample excludes companies in the oil & gas (gic=2), utilities (gic=65-69), and motor (gic=18, 19, 23) industries. The sample period is 2005-2017.
   Panel A presents the results for aggregate ownership for total carbon emissions, Panel B for disaggregated ownership for Scope 1, Panel C for
   disaggregated ownership for Scope 2, Panel D for disaggregated ownership for Scope 3. All variables are defined in Table 1. We report the results of the
   pooled regression with standard errors clustered at the industry and year level. All regressions include year-month fixed effects. In columns (2), (4), and
   (6), we include state-fixed effects. ***1%; **5%; *10% significance.

                                                  Panel A: Aggregate ownership (Total emissions)
  Variables                                (1)                  (2)                  (3)                 (4)                 (5)                  (6)
  LOG (SCOPE 1 TOT)                       0.340                0.014
                                          (1.286)             (0.948)
  LOG (SCOPE 2 TOT)                                                                -0.231              -0.686
                                                                                   (0.432)             (0.387)
  LOG (SCOPE 3 TOT)                                                                                                        -1.690             -2.173**
                                                                                                                           (1.722)             (0.723)
  Controls                                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
  Year/month F.E.                          Yes                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
  State fixed effect                       No                  Yes                  No                  Yes                 No                  Yes
  Observations                            17,892              17,070               17,748              16,926              17,892              17,070
  R-squared                               0.137               0.340                0.137               0.341               0.146               0.354

                                                    Panel B: Disaggregate ownership (SCOPE 1)
                                        (1)                   (2)                  (3)                   (4)                   (5)                  (6)
VARIABLES                              Banks               Insurance           Invest. Cos.            Advisers              Pensions           Hedge Funds
LOG (SCOPE 1 TOT)                       0.003               -0.013*                 0.336               -0.895*                0.021                 0.563
                                       (0.003)               (0.007)               (0.371)              (0.482)               (0.036)               (0.427)
Controls                                 Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Year/month F.E.                          Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes
State fixed effect                       Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Observations                           17,070                17,070                17,070               17,070                17,070                17,070
R-squared                               0.377                 0.215                 0.318                0.316                 0.414                 0.351




                                                                              76
                                       Panel C: Disaggregate ownership (SCOPE 2)
                            (1)                 (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)          (6)
VARIABLES                  Banks             Insurance      Invest. Cos.     Advisers         Pensions   Hedge Funds
LOG (SCOPE 2 TOT)          0.006**             0.013            -0.171        -0.043            0.048        -0.540
                           (0.002)            (0.008)           (0.194)      (0.319)           (0.042)       (0.352)
Controls                     Yes                Yes               Yes          Yes               Yes           Yes
Year/month F.E.              Yes                Yes               Yes          Yes               Yes           Yes
State fixed effect           Yes                Yes               Yes          Yes               Yes           Yes
Observations               16,926             16,926            16,926       16,926            16,926        16,926
R-squared                   0.381              0.215             0.316        0.303             0.415         0.350

                                       Panel D: Disaggregate ownership (SCOPE 3)
                            (1)                 (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)          (6)
VARIABLES                  Banks             Insurance      Invest. Cos.     Advisers         Pensions   Hedge Funds
LOG (SCOPE 3 TOT)          -0.002             -0.003         -0.695**       -1.476***           -0.006       0.009
                           (0.004)            (0.004)           (0.313)      (0.415)           (0.068)       (0.515)
Controls                     Yes                Yes               Yes          Yes               Yes           Yes
Year/month F.E.              Yes                Yes               Yes          Yes               Yes           Yes
State fixed effect           Yes                Yes               Yes          Yes               Yes           Yes
Observations               17,070             17,070            17,070       17,070            17,070        17,070
R-squared                   0.377              0.211             0.322        0.320             0.413         0.345

                           Panel A.2: Aggregate ownership (Growth rate in total emissions)
      Variables                (1)               (2)              (3)         (4)              (5)         (6)
      DSCOPE 1                2.386             2.280
                             (1.515)           (1.442)
      DSCOPE 2                                                  -0.191       0.572
                                                                (1.162)     (1.068)
      DSCOPE 3                                                                               2.435       3.055
                                                                                             (2.318)     (2.100)
      Controls                Yes               Yes              Yes         Yes               Yes         Yes
      Year/month F.E.         Yes               Yes              Yes         Yes               Yes         Yes
      State fixed effect      No                Yes              No          Yes               No          Yes
      Observations           15,713            15,103           15,569      14,959           15,713      15,103
      R-squared              0.136             0.369            0.134       0.362             0.134       0.368

                                       Panel B.2: Disaggregate ownership (SCOPE 1)
                            (1)                 (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)          (6)
VARIABLES                  Banks             Insurance      Invest. Cos.     Advisers         Pensions   Hedge Funds
DSCOPE 1                    0.000             -0.019            0.519         -0.054            0.078        1.756
                           (0.006)            (0.019)           (0.553)      (1.050)           (0.119)       (1.006)
Controls                     Yes                Yes               Yes          Yes               Yes           Yes
Year/month F.E.              Yes                Yes               Yes          Yes               Yes           Yes
State fixed effect           Yes                Yes               Yes          Yes               Yes           Yes
Observations               15,103             15,103            15,103       15,103            15,103        15,103
R-squared                   0.414              0.212             0.316        0.315             0.389         0.355




                                                           77
                                                    Panel C.2: Disaggregate ownership (SCOPE 2)
                                         (1)                   (2)                  (3)                    (4)                  (5)                   (6)
VARIABLES                               Banks               Insurance           Invest. Cos.             Advisers             Pensions            Hedge Funds
DSCOPE 2                                0.004               -0.019**                0.203                 -0.265                 0.000                 0.650
                                       (0.006)               (0.008)                (0.524)               (0.646)               (0.039)               (0.467)
Controls                                 Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Year/month F.E.                          Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
State fixed effect                       Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Observations                           14,959                14,959                 14,959                14,959                14,959                14,959
R-squared                               0.413                 0.212                  0.315                 0.310                 0.388                 0.350

                                                    Panel D.2: Disaggregate ownership (SCOPE 3)
                                         (1)                   (2)                  (3)                    (4)                  (5)                   (6)
VARIABLES                               Banks               Insurance           Invest. Cos.             Advisers             Pensions            Hedge Funds
DSCOPE 3                                0.011               -0.056**                0.067                 -0.191               -0.176*               3.400***
                                       (0.010)               (0.021)                (1.516)               (1.697)               (0.091)               (0.807)
Controls                                 Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Year/month F.E.                          Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
State fixed effect                       Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Observations                           15,103                15,103                 15,103                15,103                15,103                15,103
R-squared                               0.414                 0.213                  0.315                 0.315                 0.389                 0.358


                        Table A.13: Carbon Emissions and Institutional Ownership (Logs)
   The sample period is 2005-2017. The dependent variable in Panel A is IO. The dependent variables in Panel B, Panel C, and Panel D are IO_BANK,
   IO_INSURANCE, IO_INVESTCOS, IO_ADVISERS, IO_PENSIONS, and IO_HFS. All ownership variables are rescaled using the natural logarithm
   transformation. Panels A-D present the result for emission intensity. Panel B presents the results for SCOPE 1, Panel C presents the results for SCOPE
   2, and Panel D presents the results for SCOPE 3. All variables are defined in Table 1. We report the results of the pooled regression with standard errors
   clustered at the industry and year level. All regressions include year-month fixed effects. In Panel A, columns (2), (4), and (6) additionally include state-
   fixed effects. All regressions in Panels B-D include state fixed effects. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.

                                                   Panel A: Aggregate ownership (Emission intensity)
      Variables                              (1)                 (2)                  (3)                 (4)                  (5)                  (6)
      SCOPE 1 INT                         -0.002*             -0.003**
                                          (0.001)              (0.001)
      SCOPE 2 INT                                                                   -0.028              -0.033
                                                                                    (0.042)             (0.044)
      SCOPE 3 INT                                                                                                            0.006                0.001
                                                                                                                            (0.009)              (0.010)
      Controls                              Yes                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes
      Year/month F.E.                       Yes                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes
      State fixed effect                    No                  Yes                  No                  Yes                  No                   Yes
      Observations                        170,665             160,493              170,665             160,493              170,665              160,493
      R-squared                            0.161               0.171                0.160               0.171                0.160                0.170

                                                     Panel B: Disaggregate ownership (SCOPE 1)
                                         (1)                   (2)                  (3)                    (4)                  (5)                   (6)
VARIABLES                               Banks               Insurance           Invest. Cos.             Advisers             Pensions            Hedge Funds
SCOPE 1 INT                            0.001**              -0.001**                0.002*              -0.006***               -0.001                -0.001
                                       (0.000)               (0.001)               (0.001)               (0.001)               (0.001)               (0.002)
Controls                                 Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Year/month F.E.                          Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
State fixed effect                       Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Observations                           160,493               160,493               160,493               160,493               160,493               160,493
R-squared                               0.283                 0.079                 0.263                 0.198                 0.423                 0.184


                                                                               78
                                                   Panel C: Disaggregate ownership (SCOPE 2)
                                        (1)                  (2)                     (3)                  (4)                 (5)                  (6)
VARIABLES                              Banks              Insurance              Invest. Cos.           Advisers            Pensions           Hedge Funds
SCOPE 2 INT                            0.008*               -0.023*                  -0.018              -0.022               0.010                 0.004
                                      (0.004)               (0.012)                (0.035)              (0.039)              (0.025)              (0.043)
Controls                                Yes                   Yes                    Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Year/month F.E.                         Yes                   Yes                    Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
State fixed effect                      Yes                   Yes                    Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Observations                          160,493               160,493                160,493              160,493              160,493              160,493
R-squared                              0.283                 0.080                  0.263                0.193                0.423                0.184

                                                   Panel D: Disaggregate ownership (SCOPE 3)
                                        (1)                  (2)                     (3)                  (4)                 (5)                  (6)
VARIABLES                              Banks              Insurance              Invest. Cos.           Advisers            Pensions           Hedge Funds
SCOPE 3 INT                            0.003*                  0.004                 0.009               0.005                0.012                -0.016
                                      (0.001)               (0.006)                (0.007)              (0.011)              (0.007)              (0.013)
Controls                                Yes                   Yes                    Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Year/month F.E.                         Yes                   Yes                    Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
State fixed effect                      Yes                   Yes                    Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Observations                          160,493               160,493                160,493              160,493              160,493              160,493
R-squared                              0.284                 0.079                  0.263                0.193                0.424                0.185


                                Table A.14: Carbon Emissions and Legacy Stock Returns
   The sample is restricted to firms that show up in the data prior to 2016. The sample period is 2005-2017. The dependent variable is RET. All variables
   are defined in Table 1. We report the results of the pooled regression with standard errors clustered at the industry level. All regressions include year-
   month fixed effects. In columns (4)-(6), we additionally include industry-fixed effects. Panel A reports the results for the natural logarithm of total
   emissions; Panel B reports the results for the percentage change in carbon emissions; Panel C reports the results for carbon emission intensity. ***1%
   significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.
                                                                 Panel A: Total emissions
      VARIABLES                                         (1)               (2)                   (3)           (4)               (5)               (6)
      LOG (SCOPE 1 TOT)                                0.045                                               0.130**
                                                      (0.026)                                               (0.044)
      LOG (SCOPE 2 TOT)                                                  0.083                                               0.125**
                                                                        (0.051)                                               (0.053)
      LOG (SCOPE 3 TOT)                                                                       0.095*                                           0.261**
                                                                                              (0.048)                                           (0.108)
      Controls                                         Yes               Yes                   Yes           Yes               Yes               Yes
      Year/month F.E.                                  Yes               Yes                   Yes           Yes               Yes               Yes
      Industry F.E.                                    No                No                    No            Yes               Yes               Yes
      Observations                                   147,985           147,913               148,081       147,985           147,913           148,081
      R-squared                                       0.240             0.240                 0.240         0.242             0.243             0.242




                                                                                79
                   Panel B: Growth rate in total emissions
VARIABLES            (1)             (2)           (3)          (4)       (5)       (6)
DSCOPE 1          0.600***                                   0.592***
                  (0.166)                                    (0.144)
DSCOPE 2                           0.283**                              0.261**
                                   (0.115)                              (0.100)
DSCOPE 3                                         1.136**                          1.119**
                                                 (0.424)                          (0.407)
Controls            Yes              Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes       Yes
Year/month F.E.     Yes              Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes       Yes
Industry F.E.       No               No           No           Yes        Yes       Yes
Observations      135,133          135,037      135,205      135,133    135,037   135,205
R-squared          0.246            0.246        0.246        0.249      0.249     0.249

                            Panel C: Emission intensity
VARIABLES            (1)             (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)       (6)
SCOPE 1 INT        -0.003                                     0.009
                  (0.010)                                    (0.007)
SCOPE 2 INT                         0.119                                0.080
                                   (0.118)                              (0.072)
SCOPE 3 INT                                       0.032                            0.041
                                                 (0.029)                          (0.079)
Controls            Yes              Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes       Yes
Year/month F.E.     Yes              Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes       Yes
Industry F.E.       No               No           No           Yes        Yes       Yes
Observations      148,081          148,081      148,081      148,081    148,081   148,081
R-squared          0.240            0.240        0.240        0.242      0.242     0.242




                                           80
