                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND SOCIAL CONNECTEDNESS

                                       Michael Bailey
                                       Abhinav Gupta
                                    Sebastian Hillenbrand
                                       Theresa Kuchler
                                     Robert J. Richmond
                                      Johannes Stroebel

                                     Working Paper 26960
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26960


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2020




This research was facilitated through a research consulting agreement between some of the
academic authors (Kuchler and Stroebel) and Facebook. Bailey is an employee at Facebook. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Michael Bailey, Abhinav Gupta, Sebastian Hillenbrand, Theresa Kuchler, Robert J.
Richmond, and Johannes Stroebel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
International Trade and Social Connectedness
Michael Bailey, Abhinav Gupta, Sebastian Hillenbrand, Theresa Kuchler, Robert J. Richmond,
and Johannes Stroebel
NBER Working Paper No. 26960
April 2020
JEL No. F1,F6,G0

                                          ABSTRACT

We use anonymized data from Facebook to construct a new measure of the pairwise social
connectedness between 180 countries and 332 European regions. We find that two countries trade
more with each other when they are more socially connected and when they share social
connections with a similar set of other countries. The social connections that determine trade in
each product are those between the regions where the product is produced in the exporting
country and those where it is used in the importing country. Once we control for social
connectedness, the estimated effect of geographic distance on trade declines substantially, and the
effect of country borders disappears. Our findings suggest that social connectedness increases
trade by reducing information asymmetries and by providing a substitute for both trust and formal
mechanisms of contract enforcement. We also present evidence against omitted variables and
reverse causality as alternative explanations for the observed relationships between social
connectedness and trade flows.

Michael Bailey                                   Theresa Kuchler
Facebook                                         Stern School of Business
Economist                                        New York University
mcbailey@fb.com                                  44 West 4th Street
                                                 New York, NY 10012
Abhinav Gupta                                    tkuchler@stern.nyu.edu
New York University
agupta4@stern.nyu.edu                            Robert J. Richmond
                                                 Leonard N. Stern School of Business
Sebastian Hillenbrand                            Kaufman Management Center
New York University                              44 West Fourth Street, 9-81
shillenb@stern.nyu.edu                           New York, NY 10012
                                                 rrichmon@stern.nyu.edu

                                                 Johannes Stroebel
                                                 Stern School of Business
                                                 New York University
                                                 44 West 4th Street
                                                 New York, NY 10012
                                                 and NBER
                                                 johannes.stroebel@nyu.edu
The propensity for residents of different countries to be connected to one another varies enormously.
For example, a U.S.-based Facebook user is 65% more likely to be friends with a given Facebook user
living in Germany than with a given Facebook user living in France. Such differences in bilateral social
connectedness play an important role in many narratives of economic and political interactions between
countries. For example, beginning with Tinbergen (1962), researchers have explored the determinants of
international trade using gravity models that relate trade flows between countries to various measures
of the relationship between those countries.1 These models have had substantial empirical success, but
their economic underpinnings -- and especially the mechanisms behind the large estimated negative
effect of distance on trade -- have remained elusive. One prominent explanation is that geographic
closeness proxies for social connections between individuals, which can help facilitate trade. While such
a mechanism is intuitively appealing, the absence of comprehensive data on social connections across
regions and countries has limited researchers' ability to provide evidence in favor of this interpretation.
       In this paper, we introduce a new measure of the pairwise social connectedness between 180 coun-
tries and 332 European regions, and show that much of the variation in global trade flows can indeed be
explained by patterns of direct and indirect social connectedness. Specifically, it is the social connections
between the regions where a product is produced in the exporting country and those where it is used
in the importing country that predict trade in that product. Once we control for social connectedness,
the effect of geographic distance on trade declines substantially, and the effect of country borders essen-
tially disappears. We also find support for mechanisms proposed by theoretical models in which social
connectedness causes trade. In particular, we find evidence consistent with social connections facilitat-
ing trade by reducing information asymmetries and by providing a substitute for formal mechanisms
of contract enforcement. In addition, we can rule out that our results are primarily driven by omitted
country-level variables or by reverse causality from trade to social connectedness. In the end, while the
absence of quasi-random variation in social connectedness prevents us from conclusively establishing a
causal relationship between social connectedness and trade, our combined evidence is highly consistent
with such a relationship, and no alternative explanation can jointly explain our findings.
       Our measure of social connectedness is based on an anonymized snapshot of all friendship links on
Facebook, the world's largest online networking site with more than 2.4 billion active users around the
globe. Our Social Connectedness Index between any pair of regions corresponds to the relative probability
of a friendship link between a Facebook user in the first region and a Facebook user in the second re-
gion.2 We construct this pairwise measure of social connectedness for 180 countries and 332 European
regions (see also Bailey et al., 2019d, for more details on the European Social Connectedness Index). We
1 It is impossible to do full justice to the large literature that has studied the determinants of trade across countries. In addition
  to the papers we reference later, prominent contributions that have explored the role of geographic factors such as distance
  on trade include Leamer and Levinsohn (1995), Trefler (1995), Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000), Eaton and Kortum (2002), and
  Hortaçsu et al. (2009). Allen (2014), Chaney (2014), and Steinwender (2018) have studied the role of information and search
  frictions, while Berkowitz et al. (2006), Nunn (2007), Levchenko (2007), and Ranjan and Lee (2007) have analyzed the role of
  contract enforcement frictions in determining trade flows. Melitz (2003), Bernard et al. (2003), Chaney (2008, 2018), Melitz
  and Ottaviano (2008), Helpman et al. (2008), and Schmidt-Eisenlohr (2013) have explored the role of firms in trade. We also
  contribute to a literature which has proxied for the extent of social connections using measures such as ethnic and business
  networks (see Rauch, 1999, 2001; Rauch and Trindade, 2002; Combes et al., 2005; Badarinza et al., 2019).
2 This new and comprehensive measure of international social connectedness can be shared with other researchers, who are

  invited to submit a 1-page research proposal to sci_data@fb.com. See Bailey et al. (2018b, 2019b) for a description of a related
  data set measuring the social connectedness between U.S. counties, and between zip codes in the New York metro area.


                                                                  1
argue that social networks as measured by Facebook provide a good representation of real-world friend-
ship networks. This is the result of Facebook's scale, the relative representativeness of its user body, and
the fact that people primarily use Facebook to interact with their real-world friends and acquaintances.
       We first describe the rich patterns of social connectedness observed in our data. About half the vari-
ation in social connectedness between countries is explained by geographic distance. Quantitatively, a
10% increase in the distance between two countries is associated with a 10% - 15% decline in their social
connectedness. Migration patterns and colonial history further influence the probability of present-day
friendship links across country pairs. We also find stronger social connections between countries that
share a common language, as well as between countries that are similar in terms of economic develop-
ment, religious beliefs, and the genetic make-up of their populations. Within Europe, common language
and common history shape the social connectedness between regions over and above distance and com-
mon nationality. Beyond these systematic patterns, our measure of social connectedness is also affected
by idiosyncratic factors that are specific to particular country and region pairs.
       We then document that patterns of social connectedness explain a substantial part of the variation
in international trade flows. We begin by exploring trade across countries and then turn to studying
trade and social connectedness between European regions. When we introduce social connectedness
into a standard gravity model of country-level trade, we find that social connectedness and geographic
distance explain similar shares of the cross-sectional variation in trade flows. The elasticity of trade with
respect to social connectedness is 0.33 in specifications that also control for geographic distance. This im-
plies that, all else equal, trade between the U.S. and Germany should be 21% higher than trade between
the U.S. and France, since the U.S. is 65% more connected to Germany than it is to France. Controlling
for social connectedness reduces the distance elasticity of trade from about -1 to roughly -0.66. This is
a substantial decline that does not occur when controlling for other gravity variables such as common
language or common colonial origins.3 The combined evidence suggests that social connectedness is an
important determinant of trade flows, and highlights that the relationship between geographic distance
and trade in the prior literature might partially capture this role of social connectedness.
       We then explore possible explanations for the observed relationship between trade flows and social
connectedness. In particular, we provide evidence consistent with the prominent narrative that social
links can facilitate trade by alleviating a number of informal trade barriers that are regularly discussed
in the literature, namely contract enforcement frictions and search costs due to information asymmetries
(see Chaney, 2016). We first study how the elasticity of trade with respect to social connectedness varies
with measures of the rule of law in the importing and exporting countries. This analysis is motivated
by a literature that shows that weak rule of law reduces trade due to difficulties with the enforcement
of contracts (e.g., Anderson and Marcouiller, 2002). We find that social connectedness tends to increase
exports particularly to those countries with a weak rule of law. This finding suggests that one channel
through which social connections help to facilitate trade is by alleviating contract enforcement frictions.
We also study variation in the effect of social connectedness on trade in different products. In particu-
lar, Rauch (1999) and Rauch and Trindade (2002) suggest that information asymmetries are largest for
3 In
   related work, Portes and Rey (2005) also find a large decrease in the distance effect on equity flows when controlling for
 proxies for informational barriers using phone call volume for 14 countries.



                                                             2
products that are not traded on organized exchanges. Consistent with the idea that social connections
can help to mitigate such information asymmetries, we find that the elasticity of trade to social connect-
edness is particularly large for these non-exchange-traded goods.
     To provide further evidence that social connectedness may increase trade by reducing information
asymmetries, we study how unit prices of exports vary with the social connectedness between coun-
tries. This test builds on evidence that suggests that search costs inhibit trade by constraining traders in
their ability to find the best prices (e.g., Eaton and Kortum, 2002; Jensen, 2007; Aker, 2010; Allen, 2014;
Simonovska and Waugh, 2014; Startz, 2016). Social connections are one potential channel through which
traders can obtain information on prices and thereby overcome these search costs (Chaney, 2014). Con-
sistent with predictions from this literature, we show that higher social connectedness between countries
is associated with lower equilibrium unit prices. We also find that the effect of social connectedness on
lowering prices is largest for goods that are not traded on organized exchanges, whereas there is essen-
tially no effect on equilibrium prices for exchange traded goods for which prices are more transparent.
     While the direct social connectedness between two countries is an important determinant of their
bilateral trade, trade flows might further increase if the countries are also connected to a similar set of
other countries. Indeed, being in the same social cluster can increase bilateral trade through similar
channels as direct social connections. The first such mechanism is reducing information asymmetries
by decreasing search costs, whereby a common friend in a third country can pass information between
potential trading partners.4 The second channel is by improving contract enforcement, which is easier in
a shared social community that can impose sanctions (see Greif, 1989, 1993). To test whether being in the
same social cluster increases trade flows, we exploit the broad coverage of our measure of international
social connectedness. In particular, since we observe the social connectedness between the vast majority
of countries, we can use a clustering algorithm to group countries based on social connectedness. We
find that countries in the same social cluster have substantially higher trade than predicted based on
their bilateral social connectedness alone. For example, Spain is approximately equally well-connected
to the U.K. and Argentina, but it only shares a cluster with Argentina. Our estimates imply that, all else
equal, Spain would thus trade 18% more with Argentina than it would trade with the U.K.
     After documenting how social connectedness relates to trade flows at the country level, we use our
granular measure of social connectedness across European regions to further understand the mechanism
behind the observed relationship. Our results in this section provide new evidence on the interaction
of trade, the spatial distribution of production, and the structure of social networks. Our findings also
help us to rule out country-level omitted variables or reverse causality as alternative interpretations of
the observed aggregate relationship between social connectedness and trade.5
     Our approach builds on a literature that documents that firms (and individuals working at those
firms) are central to facilitating international trade (see Bernard et al., 2007, 2012). Based on this insight,
4 Chaney (2014) develops a model and supporting empirical evidence using French firm-level data that is consistent with social

  clusters influencing trade. Albornoz et al. (2012) and Morales et al. (2015) also present models where exporters sequentially
  choose export destinations that are also consistent with our findings.
5 This section complements an exciting literature that applies research designs built on naturally occurring variation to net-

  works to identify the causal impact of social networks on economic quantities. For example, Burchardi and Hassan (2013) use
  the fall of the Berlin wall as a natural experiment to show how social connections can lead to growth. Burchardi et al. (2016)
  study the causal effect of migration flows on foreign direct investment.


                                                               3
we construct product-specific measures of social connectedness between countries, which overweight
the connectedness between those regions where the products are produced in the exporting country
and those regions where the goods are used in the importing country. This measure contrasts with our
baseline measure of social connectedness between two countries, which corresponds to the population-
weighted average connectedness between all regions in the countries. As an example, more than 80% of
Italian exports of non-metallic mineral products to Greece are used as inputs in the Greek construction
sector. Our proposed measure of social connectedness relevant for exporting non-metallic mineral prod-
ucts from Italy to Greece thus overweights the observed connectedness between the regions that produce
non-metallic mineral products in Italy (primarily the Piedmont region around Torino) and the regions
with significant construction employment in Greece (primarily the Attica region around Athens).
    We then regress product-level trade between countries on both measures of social connectedness.
When controlling for the product-specific measure of social connectedness, the baseline population-
weighted measure has no further predictive power for trade at the product-level. This remains true
after controlling for product-specific measures of distance. This evidence suggests that it really is the
social connectedness between the regions where a product is produced and the regions where it is used
that matters for trade in that product. We also find that the elasticity of trade to the product-specific
measures of social connectedness is unaffected by the inclusion of country pair fixed effects, which
absorb the population-weighted measures of social connectedness in addition to any other country-
level determinants of trade. This finding dramatically reduces the scope for omitted variables such as
common preferences to explain the observed relationships between social connectedness and trade.
    Our analysis of the effects on trade of product-specific social connectedness between countries also
allows us to rule out the presence of a quantitatively large reverse causality from trade to connectedness.
If trade did in fact cause substantial social connections, the various product-specific measures of social
connectedness between two countries should be systematically larger than these countries' measures
of population-weighted social connectedness. For instance, in the example above, we would expect
the Piedmont region in Italy and the Attica region in Greece to be disproportionately more connected
than a random pair of regions in the two countries, as a result of the connections formed from trading
non-metallic mineral products. In contrast with this prediction, we find that the regions that are most
important for the trade in a given product are equally likely to be more or less connected than the
population-weighted average of regions across a country pair.
    In the final part of the paper, we study the relationship between regional social connectedness and
subnational trade flows. We use rail-freight flows between regions in the European Union as our proxy
of trade flows. This analysis allows us to examine the determinants of the border effect -- the empirical
regularity that, conditional on the distance between two regions, trade is much larger between regions
in same country (see McCallum, 1995; Anderson and Van Wincoop, 2003; Chen, 2004). Consistent with
existing estimates, we find that, all else equal, trade within countries is seven times as large as trade
across countries. This is true despite the fact that the European Union is a common market with few for-
mal barriers to trade. When we control for the social connections between regions, the estimated border
effect drops by more than 80% and becomes statistically indistinguishable from zero. This suggests that
much of the effect of borders on trade is related to the fact that social connections fall at borders.


                                                      4
    The region-level data on trade and social connectedness also allow us to understand how social
connectedness and trust interact to influence trade patterns. In particular, Guiso et al. (2009) highlight
an important role of affinity and trust in facilitating the flow of goods and capital. To test whether trust
and social connectedness are substitutes or complements in facilitating trade, we study how the social
connectedness elasticity of trade varies across regions that trust one another differentially, as measured
by Guiso et al. (2009). We find that the elasticity of trade to social connectedness is higher across regions
that have low levels of trust. This suggests that social connectedness and trust are substitutes in their
effects on trade, similar to our findings that social connectedness and a strong rule of law are substitutes.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 presents our new measure of international
social connectedness and explores its determinants. Section 2 describes the relationship between inter-
national trade flows and patterns of social connectedness, focusing on heterogeneities across products
and by countries. In Section 3, we present results using our product-specific measures of social connect-
edness and explore patterns in regional trade within Europe. The final section concludes.

1   Measuring International Social Connectedness
We construct our measure of the social connectedness between countries and European regions using
anonymized administrative data from Facebook, a global online social networking service. Facebook
was created in 2004, and, by the end of the first quarter of 2019, had 2.4 billion monthly active users
globally. Of these users, 243 million were based in the U.S. and Canada, 384 million in Europe, 981
million in the Asia-Pacific region, and 768 million in the rest of the world. With the exception of a few
countries where social media services including Facebook are banned -- most notably China, Iran, and
North Korea -- Facebook has a non-trivial footprint in essentially all countries around the world.
    We work with an anonymized snapshot of all active Facebook users from March 2019. For these
users, we observe their country of location, as well as the set of other Facebook users that they are con-
nected to. For users in Europe, we also observe their region of location at the NUTS2 (Nomenclature of
Territorial Units for Statistics level 2 regions) level, similar to Bailey et al. (2019d). These NUTS2 regions
include between 800,000 and 3,000,000 individuals, and are defined for European Union members, Eu-
ropean Union candidates, and European Free Trade Association members. They are generally based on
existing subnational administrative borders. For example, in Italy the NUTS2 geographies correspond
to the 21 "regions", while in the Netherlands they correspond to the 12 "provinces"; smaller countries
such as Latvia and Malta are represented by a single NUTS2 region. Location in a country or region
is assigned based on users' information and activity on Facebook, including the stated city on their
Facebook profile, and device and connection information.
    To compare the intensity of social connectedness between locations with varying populations and
varying Facebook usage rates, we construct our Social Connectedness Index, SCIi, j , as the total number of
connections between individuals in location i and individuals in location j, divided by the product of
the number of Facebook users in those locations, as in Equation 1:

                                                   FB_Connectionsi, j
                                     SCIi, j =                          .                                  (1)
                                                 FB_Usersi × FB_Users j



                                                        5
For both countries and regions, we rescale this number to have a minimum value of 1, and a maxi-
mum value of 1,000,000. The Social Connectedness Index therefore measures the relative probability of a
Facebook friendship link between a given Facebook user in location i and a given user in location j.
    In our country-level analysis, we exclude countries that have very low populations, that are territo-
ries of other countries, or that ban Facebook. We also exclude countries for which we do not have other
control data available.6 Overall, this provides us with the pairwise social connectedness between 180
countries, for a total of 180 × 179 = 32, 220 country pair combinations. At the NUTS2 level, we observe
the social connectedness between 332 × 331 = 109, 892 pairs of European regions.

Interpreting the Social Connectedness Index. Two important questions arise when interpreting SCIi, j
as a proxy for the social connectedness between countries or regions: whether Facebook friendships
correspond to real-world friendship links of Facebook users, and whether Facebook users are represen-
tative of the countries' or regions' populations.
    On the first issue, we believe that Facebook friendships provide a reasonable proxy for real world
friendship networks. For the United States, Duggan et al. (2015) have shown that Facebook friendship
patterns correspond closely to real-world friendship networks. While similar studies do not exist for
most other countries, we believe that there are a number of reasons to think that we are also capturing
good representations of real-world social networks of Facebook users outside of the United States. For
example, establishing a connection on Facebook requires the consent of both individuals, and there is an
upper limit of 5,000 on the number of connections a person can have. As a result, networks formed on
Facebook will more closely resemble real-world social networks than those on other online platforms,
such as Twitter, where uni-directional links to non-acquaintances, such as celebrities, are common. Con-
sistent with this conclusion, our prior work with micro-data from Facebook has found that many eco-
nomic decisions, such as whether to buy a house or which phone to purchase, were influenced by related
decisions of a person's Facebook friends (Bailey et al., 2018c, 2019a,c).
    On the second issue, it is likely that the representativeness of Facebook users will differ across lo-
cations. While Duggan et al. (2016) have shown that U.S. Facebook users are quite representative of the
U.S. population, this is unlikely to be the case everywhere. For example, in countries with relatively low
internet penetrations, those individuals with access to internet are likely a non-representative subset of
the overall population. To the extent that having internet access and having friends abroad are posi-
tively correlated, our measure would then overstate the international linkages of the average resident
in countries with low internet usage. Differential online access is less of an issue across our European
regions. Indeed, statistics from Eurostat show that in 2019, 90% of households in the European Union
had access to the internet. However, Facebook usage rates conditional on internet access can still vary
in systematic ways across these regions. As a result, one might worry that Facebook users in regions
with lower Facebook penetrations are connected to other regions at rates that are not representative of
6 Dueto a ban of Facebook, data are not available for China, Iran, North Korea, Tajikistan, and Turkmenistan. Due to low
populations, data are also not available for Andorra, Dominica, Kiribati, St. Kitts and Nevis, San Marino and Tuvalu. Due to
a lack of other data (e.g. lack of data on the gravity variables) we exclude Montenegro, Serbia, South Sudan, Kosovo. Finally,
we exlude the following territories: Curacao, Guam, Isle of Man, Jersey, Mayotte, Guadeloupe, French Guiana, Martinique,
Puerto Rico, Reunion, and Western Sahara.



                                                             6
the full populations in those regions. In our analysis, we account for such heterogeneity in the average
connectedness of each country and region by including fixed effects for locations i and j in all specifi-
cations. This approach allows us to explore connectedness between locations i and j, holding fixed the
average propensity in each location of having Facebook friends in different locations.
    In the end, while no measure of social connectedness is perfect, we believe that our Social Connected-
ness Index, which is based on hundreds of billion of Facebook friendship links from 2.4 billion Facebook
users, provides a valuable large-scale measure of people's social connections. Indeed, it is hard to imag-
ine an alternative measure that would allow us to measure social connections at this scale and scope.
We hope that the easy accessibility of our measures of social connectedness will facilitate more research
on the role of social connectedness in economics and across the social sciences.

Determinants of Social Connectedness. We next explore a number of factors that help explain the
observed patterns of social connectedness across locations. We summarize our central findings in the
main body of the paper and present a more extensive analysis in Appendix A.
    We begin by exploring a few case studies that highlight how social connectedness varies across
specific countries and regions. Panel A of Figure 1 shows the social connectedness of Portugal to
other countries around the world. Darker colors correspond to higher connectedness. Portugal has
the strongest links to geographically close countries in Western Europe. Portugal's international con-
nections also highlight the role of colonial history and language in shaping present-day social connect-
edness. The country is strongly connected to its former (Portuguese-speaking) colonies Brazil, Angola,
Guinea-Bissau, and Mozambique. Within Europe, Portugal is most strongly connected to Luxembourg.
These connections, which are stronger than the connection to Portugal's next-door neighbor Spain, are
likely related to the fact that 15% - 20% of Luxembourg's population is of Portuguese origin, following
large-scale migration from Portugal to Luxembourg as part of a guest worker program in the 1960s. This
finding suggests that past migration movements continue to influence social connections today.
    In Appendix A, we explore the determinants of international social connectedness more systemati-
cally. We find that a 10% increase in the distance between two countries is associated with a 10% - 15%
decline in their social connectedness. Geographic distance explains about 50% of the variation in so-
cial connectedness that remains after accounting for country fixed effects. Consistent with our findings
for Portugal, international migration patterns and colonial history strongly influence the probability of
present-day friendship links across all country pairs. We also find more social connections between
countries sharing a common language, as well as between countries that are similar in terms of eco-
nomic development, religious beliefs, and the genetic make-up of their populations. However, while
about 70% of the variation in social connectedness across country pairs can be explained by distance,
language, and other systematic factors, our Social Connectedness Index also captures a wide variety of
idiosyncratic forces that can determine the social connections between two countries. For example, cit-
izens of Denmark and Australia are 75% more connected than would be predicted by the observable
factors described above. These strong social connections between Denmark and Australia are likely the
result of the 2004 marriage of the Danish Crown Prince Frederik to Australian-born Mary Donaldson.
This marriage led to heightened mutual interest between Danish and Australian citizens, and has sub-


                                                    7
                   Figure 1: Social Connectedness of Portugal and Algarve Region

                                    (A) Social Connectedness of Portugal to other countries




                       (B) Social Connectedness of the Algarve Region in Portugal to European regions




Note: Figure shows a heat map of the social connectedness of Portugal to other countries (Panel A) and of the Algarve region
in Portugal to other European regions (Panel B). For each location, the colors highlight connections of the focal location, given
in red. The lightest color corresponds to the 20th percentile of the connectedness across country pairs that include Portugal in
Panel A and region pairs that include Algarve in Panel B; darker colors correspond to closer connections.



                                                               8
stantially increased tourism between the two countries.7 Examples such as this highlight the power of
our approach to measuring social connectedness over and above competing approaches that proxy for
social connectedness using a variety of other gravity variables.
        Panel B of Figure 1 shows the connectedness of the Algarve region in southern Portugal to other
regions within Europe. The strongest social links are to other regions in Portugal. Indeed, the Algarve
region is much more strongly connected to the Norte region in the very north of Portugal than it is to
the Andalusia region, its neighbor just across the border in Spain. The Algarve's connections to other
European regions show some of the same patterns seen for Portugal as a whole, such as the strong
connections to Luxembourg. However, additional nuance is visible at the regional level. At the country
level, Portugal showed strong connections to France. When exploring regional social connectedness,
we find that connections from Algarve are particularly strong to Southern France and Corsica, which
has a substantial number of Portugese immigrants. The Algarve also has strong connections to much of
Western Europe, from where it attracts substantial numbers of tourists each year.
        The forces highlighted in Panel B of Figure 1 also show up in more systematic analyses. Indeed,
Bailey et al. (2019d) show that social connectedness within Europe varies with patterns of migration,
political borders, geographic distance, language, and other demographics. The elasticity of social con-
nectedness with respect to distance across European regions is similar, at -1.3, as it is across countries.
Social connectedness drops off sharply at country borders, even after controlling for distance: depend-
ing on the country, the probability of friendship between two individuals living in the same country is
five to eighteen times as large as the probability across two individuals living in different countries. In
addition, regions that are more similar along demographic measures such as language, religion, educa-
tion, and age are more socially connected. Interestingly, the relationship between political borders and
connectedness can persist many decades after boundaries change. For example, Bailey et al. (2019d)
finds higher social connectedness across regions that were originally part of the Austro-Hungarian em-
pire, even after controlling for a host of other determinants of present-day social connectedness.

Groups of Socially Connected Countries. One advantage of our measure of social connectedness is
that it covers the vast majority of countries, allowing us to understand the structure of global social
connectedness beyond just bilateral connections. In particular, we described above that countries that
share certain characteristics are more socially connected to each other. Such shared characteristics often
lead us to think about groups of countries, such as "Spanish-speaking South America" or "Arab North
Africa," where countries in the group are all similar to one another on some salient dimension. We next
formalize the idea of groups of countries with strong connections amongst each other. In Section 2.2 we
use this grouping to show that trade patterns are influenced not only by direct social connections, but
also by the social clusters that different countries are part of.
        There are a number of possible algorithms to construct clusters of countries that feature a high
average within-cluster pairwise social connectedness. Here, we use hierarchical agglomerative linkage
7 TheAustralian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade notes on its country brief on Denmark that "Australia's profile in
 Denmark, and vice-versa, was boosted by the marriage in May 2004 of Australian-born Mary Donaldson to Denmark's Crown
 Prince Frederik" and the press reported an increase of 30% in tourism from Australia to Denmark in 2004.




                                                            9
clustering to group countries into 30 clusters.8 Figure 2 shows the 30 different clusters and Table A.6
lists the countries in each cluster. The average number of countries per cluster is 6. There are three
clusters that only contain a single country -- Brazil, Turkey, and Poland. By far the largest cluster with
37 countries contains all of Southern and Western Africa. All other clusters have substantially fewer
countries, with the second and third largest clusters each containing 12 countries.

                    Figure 2: Groups of Socially Connected Countries: 30 Clusters




Note: Figure shows countries grouped together when we use hierarchical agglomerative linkage clustering to create 30 distinct
groups of socially connected countries.


Different characteristics shape the different clusters. For instance, all countries in Central America and
Mexico form one cluster, consistent with the importance of geography. Spain, however, forms a cluster
with Argentina, Uruguay, Paraguay, and Bolivia, highlighting that not all clusters are geographically
contiguous and pointing at shared language as another important factor. The non-contiguous cluster
between Chile, Haiti, and the Dominican Republic is likely explained by recent migrant movements
from Haiti and the Dominican Republic to Chile. The cluster comprised of Mongolia and South Korea
reflects both a long common history and common ethnic ancestry, as well as recent migration of Mon-
golians to South Korea. While standard characteristics can explain some of the variation in clustering, it
is important to note that these clusters are constructed from our social connectedness measure that has
substantial variation beyond standard gravity characteristics.
8 Conceptually, the agglomerative clustering algorithm starts by considering each of theN countries as a separate group of size
 one. In the first step, the two "closest" countries are merged into one larger group, producing N - 1 total groups. In each
 subsequent step, the closest two groups are again merged. This process continues until all the countries are merged into a
 given number of clusters. We define the "distance" between two countries as the inverse of SCIi, j : the lower the probability of
 a given Facebook user in country i knowing a given Facebook user in country j, the "farther apart" socially the two countries
 are. We calculate the closeness between clusters with more than one country as the average distance between the countries in
 the cluster.



                                                               10
2        Country-level Trade and Social Connectedness
We now turn to understanding the relationship between social connectedness and trade flows. We first
analyze how trade patterns vary with social connectedness at the country level, before exploring the
channels through which social connectedness can increase trade. In particular, we present evidence that
suggests that social connectedness increases trade through two channels discussed by Chaney (2016):
by reducing informational frictions and by improving contract enforceability. We also show that two
countries that are connected to a similar set of other countries trade more than predicted solely based
on their bilateral connectedness. In Section 3, we exploit our granular region-level measures of social
connectedness within Europe to document new patterns about the interaction of the spatial structure of
social networks, the location of production, and international trade.

2.1      Aggregate Bilateral Trade
We measure country-level trade flows using bilateral goods trade data from CEPII (Gaulier and Zig-
nago, 2010). We analyze data from 2017 to align the trade data most closely with the time at which we
measure social connectedness, though our results are robust to using trade data from earlier years. The
trade data is disaggregated at the 6-digit HS96 code level, and contains information on 4,914 product
categories. For our first analysis, we aggregate the product-level trade data into bilateral trade flows
between country pairs. When merged with social connectedness and gravity data, we have information
on 30,102 country pairs.9 To understand the relationship between social connectedness and trade flows,
we follow the literature to estimate the following gravity regression:

                     Xi, j = exp  1 log(SCIi, j ) +  2 log( Distancei, j ) +  3 Gi, j + i + j ·         i, j ,             (2)

where Xi, j denotes the total value of exports from country i to country j, Gi, j captures country pair
characteristics, i and j are exporter and importer fixed effects, and                  i, j   is an error term. We estimate
regression 2 using Poisson Pseudo Maximum Likelihood (PPML) to account for zero bilateral trade
between some country pairs (see the discussion in Santos Silva and Tenreyro, 2006).10 We follow a
large literature and control for geographic distance between countries by including the log of distance
in the PPML specification. The main variable of interest, SCIi, j , is also included in logs. This choice
of functional form is based on the evidence from the binscatter plots in Figure 3, which show that the
relationship between exports and social connectedness is approximately log-linear. The importer and
exporter fixed effects in regression 2 control for country-level characteristics such as population, GDP,
and average tariffs, all of which affect the overall level of trade. These fixed effects also control for
country-specific differences in the use of Facebook that might affect our measure of social connectedness.
      The results from estimating regression 2 are presented in Table 1. Column 1 shows results from a
specification with only importer and exporter fixed effects. The R2 highlights that 83.3% of the varia-
9 This corresponds to pairwise trade data from 174 countries. Relative to the analysis in Section A, we lose Botswana, Lesotho,
 Luxembourg, Namibia, Sudan, and Swaziland, for which we have data on social connectedness, but no data on trade.
10 Our estimation uses the algorithm in Correia et al. (2019a) and Correia et al. (2019b). In the Appendix, we present esti-

   mates of regression 2 in logs while dropping observations with zero trade flows (i.e., we focus on exploring the effect of
   social connectedness on the intensive margin of trade). All findings are robust to this deviation from the PPML estimation
   approach.


                                                              11
                                  Figure 3: Trade vs. Social Connectedness

                     (A) Country Fixed Effects                     (B) Country Fixed Effects and Distance Controls




Note: Figures show binscatter plots of aggregate bilateral trade and social connectedness. Panel A regresses log(Exports) on
log(SCI) without controlling for distance, while Panel B includes log(Distance) as a control. Both panels control for exporter
and importer fixed effects. Here, we focus on the intensive margin of trade, which reduces our sample to 20,054 observations.


tion in bilateral trade flows is explained by these fixed effects alone. This finding is unsurprising, since
larger and richer countries will trade substantially more on average. Column 2 introduces controls for
the social connectedness between each country pair. The elasticity of trade with respect to social con-
nectedness is an economically significant 0.68, suggesting that a 1% increase in the social connectedness
is associated with a 0.68% increase in bilateral trade. Variation in social connectedness accounts for a
substantial share of the cross-sectional variation in trade flows: over half of the variation in bilateral
trade flows that is not explained by the country fixed effects is explained by social connectedness.
     In column 3, we remove the control for social connectedness, and instead include controls for the
geographic distance between countries. The elasticity of trade with respect to distance is -1.00. This
magnitude is consistent with estimates in prior work (see Head and Mayer, 2014). The increase in
the R2 relative to the specification in column 1 is similar in magnitude to the increase from including
social connectedness. Column 4 adds to the specification from column 1 a number of other gravity
variables that the literature has focused on (see Anderson and Van Wincoop, 2003; Head and Mayer,
2014). Consistent with prior work, we find that sharing a border, a colonizer, a language, and a colonial
relationship all increase bilateral trade. However, these gravity variables jointly explain a smaller share
of the cross-sectional variation in trade flows than social connectedness does by itself.
     In column 5, we control for both social connectedness and geographic distance. Due to the corre-
lation between these two variables documented in Section A.2, the elasticity of trade to social connect-
edness drops from 0.68 to 0.33, and the distance elasticity drops from -1.00 to -0.66. The additional
control for social connectedness increases the R2 by 0.8% relative to that in column 3, which only in-
cluded controls for distance in addition to importer and exporter fixed effects. This increase in the R2
corresponds to about 10% of the variation not already explained by distance and fixed effects, and is
larger than the incremental variation explained by the other gravity variables (see column 6). The de-
cline in the distance elasticity from adding controls for social connectedness between columns 3 and 5


                                                             12
                              Table 1: Gravity Regressions - Aggregate Trade

                                                           Dependent variable: Aggregate Exports
                                    (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)
 log(SCI)                                    0.683                                    0.325                        0.325
                                              (0.040)                                  (0.029)                      (0.030)

 log(Distance)                                             -0.996                     -0.660        -0.863        -0.563
                                                            (0.060)                    (0.071)       (0.054)       (0.066)

 Common Border                                                           1.763                      0.439          0.413
                                                                          (0.220)                    (0.124)        (0.105)

 Common Official Language                                                 0.169                       0.064        -0.131
                                                                         (0.145)                     (0.102)       (0.086)

 Common Colonizer                                                        0.958                        0.233         0.040
                                                                          (0.153)                    (0.142)       (0.137)

 Colonial Relationship                                                   0.445                        0.019         -0.065
                                                                         (0.219)                     (0.377)       (0.276)

 Orig. and Dest. Country FE         Y            Y            Y             Y             Y             Y             Y
 R2                                0.833       0.919         0.929         0.891        0.937         0.932         0.939
 N                                30,102      30,102        30,102        30,102       30,102        30,102        30,102

Note: Table shows results from regression 2. The dependent variable is total exports from country i to country j. Controls
include the logarithm of SCI, the logarithm of distance, a common border dummy, a common official language dummy, a
dummy indicating whether the two countries had a common colonizer post 1945, a dummy indicating whether the pair of
countries was in a colonial relationship post 1945 and 500 quantiles of SCI. All specifications include fixed effects for the
importer and exporter country. Standard errors are clustered by exporter and importer country. The data include 174 countries
and 30,102 (= 174 x 173) observations. Significance levels: *(p<0.10), **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).


is substantial. This finding relates to an important literature that has argued that the estimated effect
of distance on trade is too large and time-invariant to primarily capture trading costs (see Disdier and
Head, 2008; Head and Mayer, 2014). This literature has proposed that geographic distance might in-
stead be proxying for some other frictions such as information asymmetries (e.g., Rauch, 2001; Rauch
and Trindade, 2002). Since social connectedness can help overcome many of these frictions, our evidence
here and in the rest of this paper is highly consistent with this interpretation of the baseline magnitude
of the distance elasticity.
      In column 7, we jointly control for social connectedness, geographic distance, and other gravity vari-
ables. The results highlight that social connectedness explains variation in bilateral trade flows beyond
those other predictors. Interestingly, the estimated elasticity of trade with respect to social connected-
ness remains unchanged relative to the estimates from column 5, even though the newly added gravity
variables are correlated with social connectedness. Quantitatively we find that, even after controlling for
a host of control variables that potentially proxy for various aspects of social connectedness, a doubling
of social connectedness between two countries is associated with a 33% increase in trade flows.




                                                             13
2.2    Mechanisms Through Which Social Connectedness Can Affect Trade Patterns
We now turn to understanding the mechanisms driving the positive relationship between social con-
nectedness and trade. As discussed above, while we cannot conclusively establish that higher social
connectedness causes increases in trade, we find evidence that is highly consistent with a number of
plausible causal channels behind the observed positive relationship.
      A first important channel through which social connectedness might increase trade is by reducing
information asymmetries. For example, social connectedness can mitigate search costs by allowing im-
porters and exporters to share information about prices and products. In an influential paper, Rauch
(1999) argues that these search costs are lower for goods that are traded on organized exchanges, since
those goods are more homogeneous and their prices are more transparent. In contrast, goods that are
not traded on organized exchanges are more heterogeneous and therefore more subject to information
frictions. We would thus expect a larger role for social connections in reducing information frictions and
search costs for goods that are not traded on exchanges. To test this hypothesis, we explore how the
elasticity of trade with respect to social connections varies with whether goods are traded on exchanges.
      Contract enforcement frictions are a second source of trade barriers that might be mitigated through
social connections. Anderson and Marcouiller (2002) show that weak institutions in the importing coun-
try substantially decreases trade (see also Berkowitz et al., 2006; Levchenko, 2007). In the absence of
strong institutional enforcement of contracts, Greif (1989, 1993), Rauch and Trindade (2002), and others
have argued that ethnic networks can provide reputation-based punishment for contract violations and
thereby facilitate trade. Building on these findings, we conjecture that social connections beyond ethnic
networks may also help with contract enforcement by deterring contract violations when individuals
are trading with personal connections. Since such an enforcement mechanism would be a substitute
to contract enforcement through formal institutions, we would expect the elasticity of trade to social
connectedness to be larger in places with a weaker rule of law. We also test this hypothesis below.
      Since different countries trade different products, we jointly study heterogeneity across product
types and measures of the rule of law across countries.11 To do so, we use trade disaggregated data,
where the unit of observation is an export of product k from country i to country j. A product corre-
sponds to one of 96 unique 2-digit HS96 categories. We estimate the following regression specification:

                      Xi, j,k = exp[  1 log(SCIi, j ) +  2 log(SCIi, j ) · ETk +
                                      3 log(SCIi, j ) · RLi +  4 log(SCIi, j ) · RL j +  5 Gi, j,k ] ·   i , j,k .            (3)

In this specification, ETk is the fraction of exchange traded goods for each 2-digit HS96 product category
k.12 RLi and RL j are continuous measures of the rule of law in the exporting and importing countries,
11 For example, if countries with a weak rule of law primarily traded exchange traded products, then studying the heterogeneity

   in aggregate trade flows by rule of law without distinguishing across product types might incorrectly suggest that social
   connectedness matters less for low-rule-of-law countries.
12 To construct this measure, we start from trade data at the 6-digit HS96 level, and use the "conservative" classification scheme

   by Rauch (1999) to classify goods into "exchange traded" and "not exchange traded"; the results are near-identical using the
   "liberal" classification scheme in Rauch (1999). We then calculate the fraction of exchange traded goods at the 2-digit HS96
   level using the total global share of trade in those goods within each 2-digit HS96 category. Across products, ETk ranges
   from 0 to 0.91. It has a mean value of 0.12, and a standard deviation of 0.25. To provide a sense of the variation, within



                                                               14
as measured by the World Governance Indicators (Kaufmann et al., 2011).13 As before, Gi, j,k are a set of
gravity variables and fixed effects. All specifications include origin country × product and destination
country × product fixed effects, in part to control for differences in country-specific factor endowments.
Additionally, product-specific distance controls account for the fact that different products have different
shipping costs per unit of distance (see the discussion in Rauch, 1999).


                                 Table 2: Gravity Regressions - Heterogeneity

                                                                Dependent variable: Product-Specific Exports
                                             (1)          (2)             (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)        (7)
 log(SCI)                                 0.319        0.345           0.349       0.339       0.346       0.371       0.375
                                           (0.016)      (0.016)         (0.013)     (0.022)     (0.016)     (0.020)     (0.016)
 log(SCI) × Share Exchange Traded                      -0.188          -0.193                              -0.206      -0.209
                                                        (0.075)         (0.063)                             (0.073)     (0.063)
 log(SCI) × Rule of Law Destination                                                -0.032      -0.035      -0.033      -0.035
                                                                                    (0.013)     (0.008)     (0.013)     (0.008)
 log(SCI) × Rule of Law Origin                                                       -0.013      -0.015     -0.018       -0.019
                                                                                    (0.017)     (0.014)     (0.016)     (0.013)
 Origin Country × Product FE                 Y            Y               Y           Y           Y            Y          Y
 Destination Country × Product FE            Y            Y               Y           Y           Y            Y          Y
 Other Gravity Controls                      Y            Y               Y           Y           Y            Y          Y
 log(Distance) × Product FE                  Y            Y                           Y                        Y
 Distance Group × Product FE                                              Y                       Y                       Y
 R2                                        0.929        0.929            0.958       0.928       0.957       0.929       0.957
 N                                       2,889,792    2,889,792        2,889,792   2,758,080   2,758,080   2,758,080   2,758,080
 N - Explained by FE                      381,798      381,798          409,125     345,078     371,692     345,078     371,692

Note: Table shows results from regression 3. The dependent variable is exports of product category k from country i to country
j. Product-level trade data are aggregated up to the first 2 digits of the HS96 product classification. Other gravity controls
include a common border dummy, a common official language dummy, a dummy indicating whether the two countries had a
common colonizer post 1945, and a dummy indicating whether the pair of countries was in a colonial relationship post 1945.
We also separately control for the logarithm of distance interacted with product categories in columns 1, 2, 4 and 6 and for
distance groups (dividing distance into 500 quantiles) interacted with product categories in columns 3, 5 and 7. Share Exchange
Traded refers to the proportion of exchange traded products (based on the Rauch classification) within a product category. Rule
of law is obtained from the World Governance Indicators published by World Bank. All specifications include fixed effects for
the importer and exporter country interacted with product categories. Standard errors are clustered by exporter and importer
country interacted with product categories. The data include 174 countries and 96 product categories, which amounts to
2,889,792 observations. In columns 4 to 7, the number of observations reduces to 2,758,080 observations, because we lack the
rule of law measure for 4 countries. Observations that are fully explained by the fixed effects are dropped before the PPML
estimation. Significance levels: *(p<0.10), **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).

   the category HS-19 (preparations of cereals, flour, starch or milk such as pastry products) 0% of goods are exchange traded,
   within the category HS-27 (mineral fuels, oils, and products of their distillation) 44% of value-weighted goods are exchange
   traded, and within category HS-80 (tin and articles thereof) 90% are exchange traded.
13 This measure captures "perceptions of the extent to which agents have confidence in and abide by the rules of society, and in

   particular the quality of contract enforcement, property rights, the police, and the courts, as well as the likelihood of crime
   and violence." In our analysis, we use values as of 2017. The measure ranges between -2.5 and 2.5. Across countries, it has
   a mean value of -0.06, and a standard deviation of 0.99. For example, Venezuela has a score of -2.3, Mexico has a score of
   -0.57, the United States has a score of 1.64, and Finland has a score of 2.0.



                                                                  15
    We present the results from estimating regression 3 in Table 2. Column 1 shows our baseline spec-
ification from column 7 of Table 1 for product-level trade data. The estimated elasticity of trade with
respect to social connectedness (as well as the unreported coefficients on the other gravity variables) are
very similar to our baseline specification presented in Table 1. In column 2, we interact log(SCIi, j ) with
the fraction of exchange traded products in each product category. The coefficient on this interaction is
-0.188, suggesting that social connectedness matters substantially less for trade in product categories
that have more exchange traded goods. Quantitatively, the elasticity is more than twice as large in a
category with no exchange traded goods than it is in a category with primarily exchange traded goods.
This finding provides suggestive evidence that one of the channels through which social connectedness
increases trade is by decreasing information asymmetries, which are smaller for exchange traded goods.
In column 3, rather than using product-specific interactions with log( Distancei, j ), we interact 500 dum-
mies for quantiles of distance with product dummies to allow for a separate non-linear effect of distance
on each product's trade. The results are essentially unchanged in this specification.
     Columns 4 and 5 interact our measures of the rule of law in the destination and origin countries
with the social connectedness across country pairs. Column 4 controls for product-specific effects of
log( Distancei, j ), and column 5 includes non-linear product-specific distance controls. The elasticity of
exports to social connectedness is smaller across country pairs in which the destination country has a
higher rule of law. The economic magnitude of the estimated effect is sizable: a one-standard-deviation
increase in the rule of law in the destination country reduces the elasticity of trade to social connect-
edness by about 10% of its baseline effect in column 1. This magnitude implies that, all else equal, the
elasticity of exporting to Mexico with respect to social connectedness is about 22% larger than the cor-
responding elasticity of exporting to the United States.14 This finding suggests that social connections
mitigate some of the contract enforcement frictions that have been shown to reduce trade in countries
with weak institutions. Stronger rule of law in the origin country also reduces the elasticity of trade
to social connectedness, though the estimates are not statistically significant. The relatively stronger
response of the elasticity to the rule of law in the destination country (compared to the origin country)
could be due to social connectedness mitigating importers' incentive to delay or default on payments,
which would generally be enforced by institutions in the importer's country.
In columns 6 and 7, we jointly explore the variation in the trade elasticity to social connectedness across
the rule of law of the trading partners and the types of products. The coefficients are very similar to
the prior specifications. Overall, this evidence suggests that social connectedness increases global trade
through at least two channels. First, by helping to alleviate information asymmetries and search costs,
especially for non-exchange-traded products where information asymmetries are the highest. Second,
by improving contract enforcement when the quality of institutions in importing countries is low.

Social Connectedness and Prices. To further understand the mechanisms through which social con-
nectedness influences trade patterns, we next study the relationship between social connectedness and
the unit prices of traded goods. This test is motivated by empirical evidence that search costs intro-
14 Mexico has a RL coefficient of -0.57, the U.S. has a RL coefficient of 1.64, so the RL difference between the two countries is
 1.64 + 0.57 = 2.21. This difference corresponds to a (0.032 × 2.21)/0.319 = 22% difference in the elasticity.



                                                              16
duce trade frictions by reducing traders' ability to find the best import prices (Jensen, 2007; Aker, 2010;
Allen, 2014; Startz, 2016). These frictions should be larger for products where prices are more obscure,
such as those that are not traded on formal exchanges. In the presence of these search frictions, social
connections are one potential channel through which traders can obtain information on products and
prices (Chaney, 2014). By exploring how equilibrium prices vary with the social connectedness between
countries, and how this differs across goods with different levels of price transparency, we can provide
evidence consistent with this mechanism.
    We analyze unit prices at the 6-digit HS96 level as provided by Berthou and Emlinger (2011) --
to our knowledge, the data set provides the most disaggregated publicly available information on unit
prices in international trade. Following a large literature that works to disentangle quality from price (for
example, Schott, 2004; Hallak, 2006; Hallak and Schott, 2011; Khandelwal, 2010; Feenstra and Romalis,
2014), the data construction starts from product-level trade data at a high level of disaggregation to
control for differences in quality. The data are then converted into common-weight units and outliers
are removed in the cross-section and time-series, before prices are aggregated to the 6-digit HS96 level.
With these price data, we estimate the following regression:

                     log( Pi, j,k ) =  1 log(SCIi, j ) +  2 log(SCIi, j ) · 1k
                                                                             ET
                                                                                +  3 Gi, j,k +   i , j,k .   (4)

In this regression, Pi, j,k is the the per-unit value of exports of product category k from country i to country
j. Prices are exclusive of transport costs and tariffs. The variable 1k
                                                                      ET is an indicator if the products in

category k are traded on an exchange, and Gi, j,k are a set of gravity variables and fixed effects. We include
importer × product fixed effects and exporter × product fixed effects to control for differences in the
average price of products in each category that are imported or exported by different countries; this
adjusts for heterogeneity across countries in which precise products within each product category they
are trading. We also control for the same other gravity variables as in Tables 1 and 2.
    The results are presented in Table 3. Column 1 shows that trade unit prices are lower when countries
are more socially connected: a doubling of social connectedness lowers prices of traded goods by about
11%. In column 2, we interact the control for social connectedness with an indicator for exchange traded
goods. We see that social connectedness is mostly associated with lower prices for goods not traded on
organized exchanges. This finding provides additional evidence that trade prices are affected by infor-
mational frictions such as search costs, and that social connectedness can help alleviate these frictions.
In columns 3 and 4, we add flexible product-specific controls for the geographic distance between the
countries, to account for the fact that prices often increase in the geographic distance between locations
(see Hummels and Skiba, 2004; Baldwin and Harrigan, 2011). When we control non-linearly for dis-
tance, we still find that a doubling of social connectedness leads to an approximately 6% decrease in
unit prices. Additionally, in column 4 we find that the effect of social connectedness on prices is entirely
driven by goods which are not traded on organized exchanges.

Groups of Socially Connected Countries. We next explore the effect on trade of two countries sharing
connections to a similar set of other countries, over and above the direct effect of the bilateral connections
between those two countries. There are several mechanisms through which being in the same social

                                                          17
                                               Table 3: Price Regressions

                                                                Dependent variable: log(Bilateral Trade Unit Price)
                                                     (1)                   (2)                   (3)                      (4)
 log(SCI)                                         -0.114                -0.115                -0.069                  -0.070
                                                   (0.001)               (0.001)               (0.001)                 (0.001)
 log(SCI) × Exchange Traded                                             0.062                                          0.060
                                                                         (0.004)                                        (0.007)
 Origin Country × Product FE                          Y                     Y                     Y                       Y
 Destination Country × Product FE                     Y                     Y                     Y                       Y
 Other Gravity Controls                               Y                     Y                     Y                       Y
 Distance Group × Product FE                                                                      Y                       Y
 R2                                                 0.839                 0.839                 0.851                   0.851
 N                                                3,715,782             3,715,782             3,697,160               3,697,160
 N - Explained by FE                               169,387               169,387               188,009                 188,009

Note: Table shows results from regression 4. The dependent variable is the log per-unit value of exports (exclusive of transport
costs and tariffs) of product category k from country i to country j. Other gravity controls include a common border dummy, a
common official language dummy, a dummy indicating whether the two countries had a common colonizer post 1945, and a
dummy indicating whether the pair of countries was in a colonial relationship post 1945. We also separately control for distance
groups (dividing distance into 500 quantiles) interacted with product classifications in columns 3 and 4. Exchange Traded is an
indicator that is one if the product is classified as exchange traded (based on the Rauch classification) for a product category. All
specifications include fixed effects for the importer and exporter country interacted with product categories. Standard errors
are clustered by exporter and importer country interacted with product categories. The data include 111 origin countries,
174 destination countries and 4,830 product categories, with 3,885,169 non-missing observations. Observations that are fully
explained by the fixed effects are dropped before the estimation. Significance levels: *(p<0.10), **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).


cluster of countries could increase trade. First, being in the same social cluster as other countries may
reduce contracting frictions due to community sanctions or other similar mechanisms (see Greif, 1989,
1993; Jackson et al., 2017). A second mechanism through which being in the same social cluster can
increase trade is by alleviating search frictions. If country A and B are both connected to country C,
traders in country A can can use existing links to country C in order to establish connections with
potential trading partners in country B. This channel is closely related to the existing evidence that
firms make exporting decisions in a sequential manner by searching for new export destinations that
are close to their current ones (see Albornoz et al., 2012; Chaney, 2014; Morales et al., 2015). We use the
hierarchical clustering described in Section 1 to build two measures of whether countries share social
connections with a similar set of other countries. Our first measure is simply a dummy variable for
whether countries are in the same one of the 30 clusters from Section 1, though our results are robust to
variations in the cluster size. Our second measure captures whether countries are placed into the same
cluster at an early, middle, or late stage of the agglomerative clustering process.15 The advantage of this
measure is that it does not require us to take a stand on the number of clusters we put countries into.
15 Agglomerative clustering is a sequential procedure where at each stage countries are merged into clusters where the merging

  tends to occur earlier in the process if countries are closer socially. Due to the nature of the hierarchical clustering algorithm,
  most countries do not join the same cluster until the last stage. Because we want to capture whether countries are in a similar
  social cluster, we use cutoffs of 95% and 90% to put country pairs into 3 groups for when they join the same cluster. These
  cutoffs correspond to the 18th and 42nd clustering step.


                                                                 18
                         Table 4: Gravity Regressions - The Role of Social Clusters

                                                                     Dependent variable: Aggregate Exports
                                                  (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)       (7)
 log(SCI)                                      0.325***    0.313***      0.321***   0.310***
                                                (0.030)     (0.030)       (0.029)    (0.031)
 Same Cluster (30 Gr.)                                     0.188**       -0.472**              0.241***      -0.189
                                                           (0.084)        (0.193)               (0.082)      (0.235)
 Join Same Cluster - Middle                                                          0.100                             0.180***
                                                                                    (0.082)                             (0.069)
 Join Same Cluster - Early                                                          0.241**                            0.246***
                                                                                    (0.119)                             (0.095)
 Same Cluster (30 Gr.) × log(Cluster Size)                               0.326***                            0.203*
                                                                          (0.109)                            (0.107)
 Orig. and Dest. Country FE                       Y           Y             Y          Y          Y            Y          Y
 Other Gravity Controls                           Y           Y             Y          Y          Y            Y          Y
 SCI Group FE                                                                                     Y            Y          Y
 Distance Group FE                                                                                Y            Y          Y
 R2                                              0.939       0.939         0.940      0.939      0.959        0.959     0.959
 N                                              30,102      30,102        30,102     30,102     30,102       30,102    30,102

Note: Table shows results from regression 2. The dependent variable is total exports from country i to country j. "Same Cluster
(30 Gr.)" is a dummy variable indicating that the two countries are in the same cluster when we create 30 clusters using the
hierarchical clustering algorithm described in Sectino 1. "Join Same Cluster" indicates whether countries are placed into the
same cluster at an early, middle, or late stage of the agglomerative process. Other gravity controls include the logarithm of
distance, a common border dummy, a common official language dummy, a dummy indicating whether the two countries had
a common colonizer post 1945, and a dummy indicating whether the pair of countries was in a colonial relationship post
1945. We also separately control for distance and SCI groups (dividing distance and SCI into 500 quantiles) in columns 5 to
7. All specifications include fixed effects for the importer and exporter country. Standard errors are clustered by exporter and
importer country. We have data on trade and social connectedness for 174 countries and 30,102 (=174 x 173) observations.
Significance levels: *(p<0.10), **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).


We present the results from this analysis in Table 4. For comparison, in column 1 we present our baseline
specification for aggregate trade, corresponding to column 7 of Table 1. In column 2, we control for
whether countries are in the same cluster when splitting the world into 30 socially connected country
clusters. Conditional on the bilateral social connectedness and other gravity variables, being in the same
cluster increases trade substantially. As an example, Spain is approximately equally well-connected to
the United Kingdom and to Argentina, but it only shares a cluster with Argentina. Our estimates suggest
that, all else equal, Spain would thus trade 19% more with Argentina than with the United Kingdom.
      In column 3, we interact the number of countries (in logs) in the cluster with the same-cluster
dummy variable. We see that the effect on trade of being in the same cluster increases when the cluster
includes a larger number of other countries. In column 4, we add the dummy variables for when coun-
tries join the same cluster. We find that, controlling for the direct effect of bilateral social connectedness
as well as the other gravity variables, countries which join the same cluster early rather than late have
24% higher bilateral trade. To rule out that these effects capture a non-linear relationship of bilateral so-
cial connectedness and distance on trade, columns 5-7 introduce controls for 500 quantiles of both social


                                                              19
connectedness and geographic distance. Our results remain qualitatively unchanged compared to the
estimates in columns 2-4. Overall, we conclude that beyond the effect of direct social connections, being
in the same social cluster substantially increases bilateral trade between countries.

2.3      Alternative Interpretations
In the previous sections, we presented evidence consistent with a causal link between social connect-
edness and trade flows, whereby higher social connectedness facilitates trade through reducing infor-
mation asymmetries and helping with the enforcement of contracts. There are two potential alternative
explanations for the aggregate relationship between social connectedness and trade flows. The first
alternative interpretation is reverse causality, whereby trade may cause social connections rather than
social connections causing trade. The second alternative interpretation is the existence of an omitted
variable that is correlated with both trade and social connectedness. For example, countries that are
strongly connected may share similar tastes. If sharing similar tastes leads countries to trade more, as
argued by Linder (1961), this could also explain the observed aggregate trade patterns, even if it might
struggle to explain some of the heterogeneities across countries and products that we established above.
        Unfortunately, the standard econometric tools to establish causal relationships cannot be credibly
applied in this setting. For example, we believe that none of the determinants of social connectedness
that we discussed in Section 1 could serve as an instrument that only effects trade flows through its effect
on social connectedness. As a result, in the next section, we turn to more disaggregated data on both
social connections and trade to provide evidence against the quantitative importance of both reverse
causality and omitted variables. Before doing so, however, it is worth thinking through the quantitative
plausibility of the reverse causality story.
        Indeed, while it is possible that trade causes some business relations to form, and a subset of these
may lead to Facebook friendship links, such a mechanism is unlikely to be a quantitatively important
driver of our findings. In particular, to the extent that reverse causality explains the observed correla-
tion, this effect would have to come through connections formed by individuals that directly interact
with trading partners in foreign countries. Such individuals are only a small fraction of all Facebook
users. As a result, to explain a substantial increase in all Facebook users' connectedness through reverse
causality, trade has to explain an implausibly large increase in the Facebook links of the subset of the
population that is engaged in trading.16 In addition, only a subset of connections of links formed via
16 As a back-of-the-envelope calculation, we start from the observation that U.S. employment by firms engaged in importing
  and exporting is roughly 40% of total private sector employment (Bernard et al., 2005), or approximately 50 million individ-
  uals. This provides a strong upper bound on the number of people whose international connectedness could possibly be
  affected by trade: for example, we would not expect that General Motors' exports to Japan increase the international social
  connections of its factory workers, even if it might affect these links among its sales force. Again, making strong assump-
  tions, let us assume that 20% of the U.S.-based workforce at these large exporting firms are directly involved in the trading of
  goods such that they would actually meet (and potentially become Facebook friends with) trading partners in the destination
  countries. This leaves about 10 million U.S.-based individuals whose social network might be causally affected by trade, cor-
  responding to about 5% of U.S.-based Facebook users. It is possible that these users contribute a larger share of international
  links of U.S.-based Facebook users. Again, making strong assumptions, let us assume that those Facebook users involved in
  trading hold twice as many foreign links as the average Facebook user. This suggests that the links of people holding 10%
  of total links could be affected by trading. When switching log( Exportsi, j ) and log(SCIi, j ) in a specification corresponding
  to column 7 of Table 1, we estimate a coefficient on log( Exportsi, j ) of about 0.15: doubling exports is associated with a 15%
  increase in aggregate social connectedness. However, a 15% increase in the aggregate social connectedness corresponds to
  an implausibly large 150% increase in the links of those people whose links could in principle be affected.



                                                                20
trading will actually result in a Facebook friendship link, since Facebook is primarily a platform for
personal networks rather than professional networks. In other words, for the observed elasticity to be
the result of reverse causality, changes in trade would have to correspond to a very large increase in the
Facebook friends among the small subset of Facebook users who are actively engaged in trade, and, if
those Facebook links represent only a subset of all social connections formed, an even bigger (and we
believe implausibly large) increase in the total number of connections formed.

3     Trade and Subnational Social Connectedness in Europe
In the previous section, we explored the relationship between social connectedness and trade across
countries. Our preferred interpretation of that evidence is that social connectedness can facilitate trade
both by reducing information frictions and by helping with the enforcement of contracts. In this section,
we further analyze the mechanism through which social connectedness influences trade patterns. To do
so, we exploit the granular nature of our social connectedness measure and study trade and connected-
ness across subnational European regions. By focusing on Europe, we can zoom in on the patterns of
social connections that influence trade in specific products and relate them to the geographic distribu-
tion of production throughout the continent. Our findings also allow us to address a number of potential
alternative interpretations for the observed relationship between social connectedness on trade.
      We conduct two exercises. In Section 3.1, we construct product-specific measures of across-country
social connectedess. These measures weight the connectedness of subnational region pairs by the impor-
tance that these regions should have for predicting exports of each product. These weights are based on
where the product is produced in the exporting country and where it is used as an intermediary input in
the importing country. We show that exports of each product vary primarily with these product-specific
input-output-weighted measures of social connectedness between countries. Our findings allow us to
rule out that the correlation between social connectedness and trade flows at the country level is driven
by either reverse causality or by similar preferences between individuals in more connected countries.
      In Section 3.2, we link regional social connectedness to information about rail freight volumes be-
tween those regions as a proxy for subnational trade flows. We find that social connectedness between
regions matters for the trade between those regions, even after controlling for country pair fixed effects.
This analysis allows us to control for many potential variables that might have been omitted from the
aggregate country-level trade regressions in the previous section. We also find that the border effect
is primarily driven by declines in social connectedness across borders. Finally, we present evidence
suggesting that social connectedness and trust act as substitutes in their effect on trade.

3.1    Input-Output-Weighted vs. Population-Weighted Social Connectedness
In Section 2, we related the volume of exports from country i to country j to the probability that a
representative Facebook user in country i was friends with a representative Facebook user in country
j, given by SCIi, j . This measure of social connectedness is identical to a population-weighted average
of social connectedness across the regions in countries i and j. Formally, let us index the regions in
each country i by ri  R(i ), let Friendshipsri ,r j count the number of Facebook friendship links between
individuals in regions ri and r j , let Popri denote the total (Facebook) population in region ri , and let
PopShareri denote the share of population in region ri in country i: ri  R(i) PopShareri = 1. Then:

                                                    21
                                                                                                      Friendshipsri ,r j
                                   Friendshipsi, j                          ri  R (i ) r j  R ( j )
                       SCIi, j =                   =
                                   Popi × Pop j
                                                                                       Popri          ×                  Popr j
                                                                          ri  R (i )                       r j  R (i )

                                                                Popri                    Popr j           Friendshipsri ,r j
                               =                                 Popri                         Popr j Popri × Popr j
                                   ri  R (i ) r j  R ( j )
                                                             ri  R (i )           r j  R( j)

                               =                             PopShareri × PopSharer j × SCIri ,r j .                              (5)
                                   ri  R (i ) r j  R ( j )


In other words, in exploring the role of SCIi, j as a determinant of trade between two countries, we implic-
itly imposed that the relative importance of the connectedness between different regions in explaining
country-level trade increased with the population shares of those regions. In this section, we argue that,
for each good, the connectedness between the regions in country i where the good is produced and the
regions in country j where the good is used should be particularly important for explaining exports of
that good from country i to country j. Our prediction that the social connections of individuals at the
location of firms should matter disproportionately for predicting trade flows builds on the insights from
a large literature that has documented that the vast majority of international trade is being conducted
by a small set of firms (see Bernard et al., 2012, for a survey of this literature).
    We find that the weights of regions in the production of goods often deviates substantially from
their population weights, in particular for goods that are used as intermediate inputs in geographically
clustered industries. Let us give a concrete example. More than 80% of Italian exports of non-metallic
mineral products (e.g., cement) to Greece are used as inputs in the Greek construction sector. Panel A
of Figure 4 shows the share of Italian employment in the sector that manufactures non-metallic mineral
products in each of the country's NUTS2 regions. The largest share is in the northwestern Piedmont
region, which includes the city of Torino and a number of major industrial sites. Similarly, Panel B of
Figure 4 shows the share of Greek construction employment that is in each of the country's NUTS2
regions. The largest employment shares are in the Attica region covering metropolitan Athens. Based
on this information, we propose that for exporting non-metallic mineral products from Italy to Greece,
the connectedness between the Piedmont region and the Attica region should be particularly important,
since firms located in those regions are most likely to be involved in any trade in this product. The
bottom row of Figure 4 shows that there is substantial variation in which regions in Italy are connected to
the Attica region in Greece (Panel C), and which regions in Greece are connected to the Piedmont region
in Italy (Panel D). These figures highlight that the strongest connections are not necessarily between the
regions with firms that should matter most for the trading of non-metallic mineral products.
    We next test whether it is indeed the connections of those regions with firms most likely involved
in trading a particular product that matter the most for explaining country-level trade in that product.
To conduct this exercise, we construct, for each country i × country j × product p triplet, the input-
output-weighted social connectedness of regions in countries i and j that should be most important for
predicting trade of product p. This construction involves a number of important steps. First, since the


                                                                          22
                Figure 4: Regional Employment Shares And Social Connectedness

     (A) Share Employment Non-Metallic Minerals - Italy                 (B) Share Employment Construction - Greece




     (C) Social Connectedness to Attica Region in Greece          (D) Social Connectedness to Piedmont Region in Italy




Note: Panel A plots the regional shares of employment in the non-metallic minerals industry across NUTS2 regions in Italy.
Panel B plots the regional shares of employment in the construction sector across NUTS2 regions in Greece. Panels C and D,
respectively, show heat maps of social connectedness from the Attica Region in Greece to Italian NUTS2 regions, and from the
Piedmont Region in Italy to Greek NUTS2 regions.


trade data are at the product level, while the employment and input-output data are at the industry
level, we match products in the trade data to industries (see Appendix C.1 for details). Accordingly, for
the description of the methodology that follows, we will interchangeably refer to p as representing a
product or an industry. For each product p produced in country i, we then use the World Input-Output
Tables (WIOT) described in Timmer et al. (2015) to measure the share of that product that is used as an
                                                                 p, p
intermediate input in each industry p in country j, IOi, j . We focus on uses of products as intermediate
                             p, p
inputs, such that  p IOi, j         = 1, and only consider products where at least 50% of the exports across




                                                            23
countries in our sample are used as intermediate inputs (rather than in final consumption).17 This leaves
us with a set P that includes 20 products, which we list in Appendix C.1. For each product p  P, we
                                                                                                                     p
then construct a measure of the social connectedness between countries i and j, SCIi, j , that corresponds
to the input-output-weighted average of the social connectedness between the NUTS2 regions in these
countries that are most relevant for exporting product p from i to j:
                                                                                                                         

                                          EmpShare p,ri ×   IOi, j ×                  
                      p                                         p, p
                 SCIi, j =                                                                     EmpShare p ,r j × SCIri ,r j  .        (6)
                             ri  R (i )                   p P                     r j  R( j)


The variable EmpShare p,ri represents the share of employment in industry p in country i that is in re-
gion ri : ri  R(i) EmpShare p,ri = 1. These regional employment shares are constructed using data from
Eurostat. We limit to 28 countries for which we have trade data, WIOT data, and regional employment
data.18 Similarly, we construct a product-specific measure of the input-output-weighted geographic dis-
tance between each country ­ again, under the maintained hypothesis that the geographic distance that
should matter the most for exports in each country-pair-product is the distance between those regions
where the product would be produced and used:
                                                                                                                                 

                                          EmpShare p,ri ×   IOi, j ×                  
                     p                                          p, p
           Distancei, j =                                                                      EmpShare p ,r j × Distanceri ,r j  .   (7)
                             ri  R (i )                   p P                     r j  R( j)

                                                                                  p                       p
Quantitatively, most of the cross-sectional variation in SCIi, j and Distancei, j comes from a common com-
ponent that drives the social connectedness and geographic distance between all regions in a given
country pair. For example, all regions of Germany are more connected to regions in Austria than they
                                                                       p                              p
are to regions in Finland. Indeed, regressions of SCIi, j and Distancei, j on country i × country j fixed
effects have R2 s above 90%. The remaining variation comes from the fact that, for some products, the
producing or using industries are geographically concentrated in regions that might be differentially
connected than the average region in a country pair. This can be also seen by comparing equations 5
and 6, in which employment shares must be different from population shares to generate any varia-
                p
tion in SCIi, j over SCIi, j . For instance, in the example given above, the input-output-weighted social
connectedness for non-metallic mineral products between Greece and Italy is about 7% higher than the
population-weighted social connectedness between these countries. These differences provide the iden-
tifying variation in the following regressions.
     Next, we explore how trade in different products correlates with the product-specific measures of
17 One                                                                                         p, p
         possible concern with this construction is that the actual measure of IOi, j is based on observed trade flows, which are
                                                                           p, p
 the eventual object of interest. Here it is important to note that IOi, j does not depend on the overall level of exports of good
 p from country i to country j, but only on the relative shares of exports of product p from country i to country j that are used
                                                                                                p
 in each industry p in country j. Nevertheless, we have also constructed a version of SCIi, j that uses a predicted value of
    p, p
   IOi, j , based on the share of product p that is used in each industry p when p is traded between all countries other than i
   and j. The results are unchanged using this procedure.
18 These countries are Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Ger-

   many, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Roma-
   nia, Spain, Sweden, Slovenia, Slovakia and the United Kingdom.


                                                                24
                               p                                             p
social connectedness, SCIi, j , and geographic distance, Distancei, j , by estimating the following regression:

                                                                             p                         p
  Xi, j, p = exp[  1 log(SCIi, j ) +  2 log( Distancei, j ) +  3 log(SCIi, j ) +  4 log( Distancei, j ) + i, j, p ] ·   i , j, p .   (8)

Here, Xi, j, p denotes the total value of exports of product p from country i to country j. We also include
the logarithm of population-weighted measures of social connectedness and distance as controls; these
are the same covariates that we used in Section 2. The vector i, j, p represents various fixed effects. In all
specifications we add country i × product p fixed effects as well as country j × product p fixed effects,
which controls for the average propensity of each country to export and import each good.
    Table 5 shows results from Regression 8. In column 1, we control only for the population-weighted
social connectedness and distance. The estimated elasticities of trade to social connectedness is simi-
lar to that estimated in Section 2. This suggests that the set of countries and products for which we
can construct input-output-weighted social connectedness has similar trade elasticities to the full sam-
ple of countries. In column 2, we instead control for the product-specific input-output-weighted social
connectedness between countries i and j. The magnitudes of the elasticities of trade to social connect-
edness and geographic distance are similar to those estimated in column 1. As discussed above, this
is consistent with the fact that much of the regional variation in social connectedness is explained by a
component that is common for all region pairs in a country pair.
    In column 3, we control for both the population-weighted and input-output-weighted measures of
social connectedness. While these two objects have a correlation of 95%, the regression loads strongly on
the input-output-weighted measure of social connectedness ­ once this is controlled for, the population-
weighted social connectedness has no additional predictive power. In column 4, we include fixed effects
for each country pair. These fully absorb the population-weighted social connectedness and geographic
distance between country pairs. Importantly, the inclusion of country pair fixed effects also controls
for any other observable or unobservable factors that might have been correlated with both social con-
nectedness and trade flows for a given country pair, and which would have thus caused an omitted
variables bias in the previous regressions. For example, including country pair fixed effects controls for
whether country pairs share a common language, a common religion, or a common historical origin, all
of which might be correlated both with trade flows and with social connectedness. The estimated elas-
ticity of trade flows to the product-specific input-output-weighted social connectedness even increases
somewhat in this specification, though the fact that we are now identifying our effect from less than 10%
                           p                  p
of the variation in SCIi, j and Distancei, j has also increased standard errors.
    One specific concern alleviated by the specifications in columns 3 and 4 of Table 5 is that the cor-
relation between country-level social connectedness and trade documented in Section 2 might pick up
an effect of unobserved common preferences in consumption. Under this alternative theory, higher so-
cial connectedness between the populations of two countries coincides with more similar consumption
preferences of the populations, for example because social connectedness is partially driven by migra-
tion, and migrants have similar preferences to individuals in their countries of origin. This similiarity of
preferences might then be the source of trade in both final consumption goods and intermediate goods
used in the production of the final consumption goods (see Linder, 1961). For intuition, we provide a
concrete example: there are lots of Italian migrants in Germany, which increases the social connected-

                                                              25
                   Table 5: Input-Output-Weighted Social Connectedness and Trade

                                                          Dependent variable: Product-Specific Bilateral Trade

                                             (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)            (6)

log(SCI)                                  0.272***                        -0.071
                                           (0.023)                        (0.131)

log(Distance)                             -1.002***                       -0.372*
                                           (0.053)                        (0.207)

log(SCI p )                                               0.248***        0.321**        0.382**        0.297**        0.227*
                                                           (0.022)        (0.132)        (0.152)        (0.123)        (0.132)

log(Distance p )                                          -0.973***      -0.610***       -0.985***
                                                           (0.052)        (0.200)         (0.195)

Origin Country × Product FE                   Y              Y               Y              Y              Y              Y

Destination Country × Product FE              Y              Y               Y              Y              Y              Y

Undir. Country Pair FE                                                                      Y              Y

log(Distance p ) Group FE                                                                                  Y              Y

Undir. Country Pair × Product FE                                                                                          Y

R2                                          0.953           0.955          0.955           0.970         0.976          0.993
N                                          15,120          15,120         15,120          15,120        15,120         15,120
N - Explained by FE                          262             591            591             591           591           2,250

Note: Table shows the results from regression 8. The dependent variable is exports of product category k from country i to
country j. The variable SCIi, j is the population-weighted average of NUTS2 region-level social connectedness. The variable
   p
SCIi, j is an employment share weighted measure that uses information on input-output trade, as defined in equation 6. The
                                   p
measures Distancei, j and Distancei, j are constructed in the same way as the corresponding social connectedness measures.
All specifications include exporter × product and importer × product fixed effects. Column 4 and 5 add country pair fixed
                                                                                                                              p
effects that do not distinguish the direction of trade (undirected). In column 5, we replace the control for log(Distancei, j )
with 500 dummy variables representing distance quantiles. Column 6 includes fixed effects that interact each industry with
the undirected country pair fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by country pairs. The data include 28 countries and 20
products leading to 15,120 (= 28 × 27 × 20) observations. Observations that are fully explained by the fixed effects are dropped
before the PPML estimation. Significance levels: *(p<0.10), **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).


ness between Italy and Germany. Due to Italians' desire for high-quality pizza, they demand substantial
imports of high-quality pizza ovens from Italy, thereby increasing the trade between Italy and Germany,
independent of any direct effect of social connectedness. In this story, the social connectedness between
countries would primarily be a proxy for the similarity in preferences. However, if such an omitted vari-
able explained the patterns in Section 2, the population-weighted social connectedness across regions
would be the most appropriate measure of the similarity of preferences between the populations of two
countries. The fact that it is, instead, the social connectedness between the locations of output and input
industries for each product that determines the amount of trade suggests that similarities in preferences
between more connected countries does not constitute a quantitatively important determinant of trade.
An alternative way of exploring the statistical significance of the estimates in column 4 of Table 5 is



                                                              26
                                                   Figure 5: Randomization Inference
                                                            p                                                                                           p
                   (A) Coefficient on log(SCIi, j )                                                (B) Coefficient on log( Distancei, j )




                                                                                       4
      5
      4




                                                                                       3
         3
   Density




                                                                                    Density
                                                                                      2
      2




                                                                                       1
      1
      0




                                                                                       0
             -.2       -.1       0         .1        .2         .3   .4   .5                  -1   -.8           -.6           -.4       -.2        0       .2   .4
                                  Coefficient on Log(SCI)                                                              Coefficient on Log(Distance)



Note: Figures show the distribution of regression coefficients for randomly selected values of social connectedness and dis-
tance; Panel A shows the coefficients for social connectedness, Panel B the coefficients for distance. The regression specification
is equal to column 4 in Table 5; namely it is a regression of industry-level trade between countries on industry-specific mea-
sures of social connectedness and distance. The coefficients obtained in the original regression are shown as the dashed lines.
We contrast the actual estimates with regression coefficients that are obtained when choosing "random" values for social con-
                                                                                                                                 p
nectedness and distance. To be more precise, for each country i × country j × product p triplet, we assign a value of log(SCIi, j )
                   p
and log( Distancei, j ) from a randomly chosen product in the same country pair. We then estimate a regression based on these
"random" values and repeat this exercise 2,000 times. The distribution of estimated coefficients is then plotted in a histogram.


                                                                                                                                                                      p
the following. For each country i × country j × product p triplet, we assign a value of log(SCIi, j )
                             p
and log( Distancei, j ) from a randomly chosen product in the same country pair, and then re-run the
regression. We repeat this exercise 2,000 times. The histograms in Figure 5 show the distribution of
the coefficients on the re-shuffled values of input-output-weighted social connectedness and distance;
the dashed lines shows the estimated effect corresponding to column 4 of Table 5. The randomized
coefficients are centered around zero: conditional on country pair fixed effects, there is no additional
explanatory power for trade in a given product coming from variation in input-output-weighted social
connectedness of a random product. Said differently, what matters is not the social connectedness of
regions involved in trade generally; instead, what matters for the trade in a specific product is the social
connectedness across regions that produce and use that specific good.
                                                                                                             p
     In column 5 of Table 5, we replace the control for log( Distancei, j ) with 500 quantiles for distance.
                                           p
The coefficient on log(SCIi, j ) remains unaffected, ruling out concerns that the loading on social con-
nectedness may be picking up non-linearities in the relationship between the input-output-weighted
distance and trade flows. Finally, in column 6 we include fixed effects that interact each product type
with undirected country i × country j pair fixed effects: in other words, we are comparing exports of
a specific good from country i to country j to the exports of the same good from country j to country
                                                       p
i. The remaining variation in SCIi, j comes from the fact that the industries that produce the product in
each country are not located in the same regions as the industries that use these products as an input.
                                                                                                         p
The inclusion of these fixed effects decreases the coefficient on SCIi, j only slightly, providing further ev-


                                                                               27
idence that common preferences across countries (which should affect the trade of a given good in both
directions) are not a large driver of the findings in Section 2.

Ruling out Reverse Causality. Another benefit of exploring the input-output-weighted social connect-
edness is that it allows us to further address the concern regarding reverse causality as an explanation
for the observed relationship between trade and social connectedness. While we have argued above that
such reverse causality cannot explain the observed correlation from a quantitative perspective, we next
provide additional evidence against reverse causality as the mechanism behind our findings.
        Our approach starts from the observation that, under the reverse causality story, the social connect-
edness between input-output-weighted regions should be systematically larger in magnitude than the
social connectedness between population-weighted regions, since reverse causality would increase the
connectedness between those regions that are actually engaged in trade relative to the connectedness of
other regions not engaged in trade. To test whether this is indeed the case, we construct for each country
i × country j × product p triplet the difference between the input-output-weighted social connectedness
and the population-weighted social connectedness across countries i and j. To interpret the magnitude
                                                                                                                           p
of the differences, we express them as as a fraction of the cross-sectional standard deviation of SCIi, j :
                                                                          p
                                                          p
                                                                     SCIi, j - SCIi, j
                                          SCI _ Divergencei, j   =               p       .                                     (9)
                                                                      SD (SCIi, j )
                                                           p
Figure 6 shows a histogram of SCI _ Divergencei, j across all country i × country j × product p triplets.
The distribution has a mean of 0.008, and a median of -0.003. In other words, the regions that were
shown to be most important for the trade in a given product are equally likely to be more connected and
less connected than the population-weighted average of regions across a country pair. This provides
strong evidence against a quantitatively large reverse causality story in which the fact that two regions
trade more with each other causes them to be more connected.19

3.2      Subnational Social Connectedness and Rail Freight Flows
The challenge for exploring subnational trade patterns is the absence of trade data at the subnational
level. However, within Europe, we observe data on rail freight tonnage shipped between pairs of NUTS2
regions for a number of countries.20 While this will not capture all trade flows between these regions,
rail freight transport accounted for 12.2% of all intra-EU freight transport in 2015 (Eurostat, 2015). We
explore the relationship between rail freight flows and social connectedness across European NUTS2
19 Itis extremely unlikely that the absence of an average difference between input-output-weighted social connectedness and
   population-weighted social connectedness is driven by two offsetting forces, whereby reverse causality would push trading
   regions to be more connected, which is offset by a second force that would cause them to be less connected. Indeed, most
   plausible additional mechanisms would also lead regions with industries that would trade with each other to be more
   connected. For example, an endogenous location of industries in a given exporting country into regions that are more
                                                                                                                               p
   connected to regions in the importer country that use the products as an intermediary input would bias SCI _ Divergencei, j
   towards being larger than zero.
20 We use data on region-to-region rail goods transport made available by Eurostat in the series tran_rt_rago. The data are built

   from individual country reports to the European Union on national and international rail transport in 2015. For each pair of
   NUTS2 regions ri and r j , the data include the tons of goods that were loaded on a railway vehicle in region ri and unloaded
   in region r j . We take a number of steps to standardize and clean the data, as described in Appendix C.2.



                                                               28
                                      Figure 6: Ruling Out Reverse Causality




                         10
                      Density
                      5  0




                                -.6        -.4        -.2         0           .2         .4                   .6
                                      (IO-Weighted SCI - Pop-Weighted SCI) / SD(IO-Weighted SCI)


Note: Figure shows the distribution of the difference between the input-output-weighted social connectedness and the
population-weighted social connectedness. More specifically, for each country i × country j × product p triplet, we construct
                                                  p                                                                    p
the input-output-weighted social connectedness SCIi, j , then subtract the population-weighted social connectedness SCIi, j and
                                                          p
divide by the cross-sectional standard deviation of SCIi, j , as specified in equation 9.



regions using the following regression:

                    RailFreightri ,r j = exp[  1 log(SCIri ,r j ) +  2 log( Distanceri ,r j ) + ri ,r j ] ·   r i ,r j .   (10)

The dependent variable, RailFreightri ,r j , is the amount of goods (in tons) shipped by rail from region ri to
region r j . The variables log(SCIri ,r j ) and log( Distanceri ,r j ) are the logarithms of the social connectedness
and distance between NUTS2 regions, respectively, and ri ,r j represents various fixed effects.
     Table 6 presents the results from regression 10. Column 1 shows that the elasticity of rail freight
to social connectedness is larger than the elasticity of all trade to social connectedness estimated in
previous sections. This higher elasticity is not a feature of the set of countries included in our analysis,
since running regression 2 only on countries included in the rail freight analysis yields elasticities similar
to those in the baseline regression in Table 1. Instead, the higher elasticity observed here could be the
result of social connectedness being more important for the type of products shipped by rail, or it could
be that the importance of social connectedness varies with the means of transportation.
     In column 2 and all following columns of Table 6, we replace our controls for geographic distance
with dummy variables for 500 quantiles of the distance distribution. This ensures that the estimated
elasticity between social connectedness and trade flows is not in part determined by any non-linearities
in the relationship between log( Distanceri ,r j ) and trade.
     In column 3 of Table 6 we remove our controls for the measure of social connectedness between re-


                                                                 29
                 Table 6: Subnational Social Connectedness and Rail Goods Transport

                                                      Dependent variable: Regional Bilateral Rail Freight
                                  (1)        (2)         (3)            (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)        (9)
 log(SCI)                      0.630***    0.622***               0.548***      0.419***   0.359**   0.504**
                                (0.055)     (0.040)                (0.054)       (0.096)   (0.162)   (0.236)
 log(Distance)                 -0.835***
                                (0.130)
 Same Country                                         1.941***         0.319
                                                       (0.196)        (0.261)
 log(SCI) × Low Trust                                                                                          1.064**    1.298**
                                                                                                               (0.440)    (0.508)
 log(SCI) × High Trust                                                                                         0.486**    0.563**
                                                                                                               (0.239)    (0.241)
 Orig. and Dest. Region FE         Y          Y           Y             Y          Y         Y         Y         Y       Y × Trust
 Distance Group FE                            Y           Y             Y          Y         Y         Y         Y       Y × Trust
 Undir. Country Pair FE                                                            Y
 Orig. Reg. x Dest. Ctry FE                                                                  Y         Y         Y          Y
 Dest. Reg. x Orig. Ctry FE                                                                  Y         Y         Y          Y
 Sample: Has Trust Data                                                                                 Y         Y          Y
 R2                              0.761       0.805      0.794         0.805      0.824      0.859     0.839     0.840      0.861
 N                              74,862      74,862     74,862         74,862    74,862     74,862    34,572    34,572     34,572
 N - Explained by FE            27,442      37,233     37,233         37,233    48,495     59,465    27,200    27,200     27,479

Note: Table shows the results from regression 10. The dependent variable is the rail freight shipped from NUTS2 region ri to
NUTS2 region r j . "Same Country" is a dummy variable indicating whether the rail shipment is between NUTS2 regions within
the same country (domestic shipment). In columns 8 and 9, we divide the sample into "low trust" and "high trust" observations
based on the country-level trust measure of Guiso et al. (2009). In columns 1 to 6, we use the full panel with 332 NUTS2 regions
and 74,862 non-missing trade observations. In columns 7 to 9 the sample is reduced to 34,572 observations, because we have
trust data on only 15 countries. All specifications include origin region and destination region fixed effects. Columns 2 to 9
include dummy variables for 500 quantiles of the distance distribution. Column 5 adds country pair fixed effects that do no
distinguish the direction of trade. Columns 6 to 9 add origin region × destination country and destination region × origin
country fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by NUTS2 origin region and NUTS2 destination region. Observations that
are fully explained by the fixed effects are dropped before the PPML estimation. Significance levels: *(p<0.10), **(p<0.05),
***(p<0.01).


gions, and instead include a "same country" dummy variable. Conditional on the geographic distance
between two regions, trade is about seven times larger between regions in the same country than be-
tween regions in different countries. This estimate is similar in magnitude to that of Chen (2004), who
finds that EU countries trade about six times more with themselves than with other countries. Our esti-
mates are also similar those in Tan (2016), who looks at truck freight shipments in Europe and finds that
trade flows are 5.75 times higher for shipments within the same country (see McCallum, 1995; Anderson
and Van Wincoop, 2003, for other contributions to the literature estimating border effects in trade). These
estimated border effects are large in light of the fact that most of the countries in the sample are part of
the European Common Market, and therefore face no formal barriers to trade such as tariffs; indeed, all
results in this section are the same when we restrict our sample to exclusively focus on NUTS2 regions
from countries within the single market. In column 4, we bring back the control for social connected-

                                                                 30
ness. The estimate of trade declines at the border drop dramatically, from a border effect of 597% to a
statistically insignificant border effect of about 38%. This finding suggests that much of the reason we
see border effects is the fact that social connectedness is much stronger across regions within countries
than it is across equidistant regions in different countries.
     In column 5, we include country pair fixed effects. As before, this controls for any differences across
country pairs that might affect trade between regions of these countries, and that might be correlated
with social connectedness (e.g., common language, common history, or common tastes). The estimated
elasticity of trade flows to social connectedness barely changes, suggesting that country-pair-level omit-
ted variables that might correlate with social connectedness are not a key driver of our results. However,
within Europe, some of these omitted variables do not just vary at the country pair level, but can also
vary at the region-country level. For example, the Alsace region in France has common historical her-
itage with regions in Germany (for example, during the Franco-Prussian war, France ceded Alsace to the
German Empire, while the Treaty of Versailles ceded it back to France). Similarly, the Zentralschweiz
region of Switzerland has a common language with Germany, while the Lake Geneva region shares a
common language with France. To control for such determinants of trade at the region-country level,
column 6 includes origin region × destination country and destination region × origin country fixed
effects. The estimated elasticity between social connectedness and trade is unaffected, though standard
errors increase as our fixed effects remove more and more of the cross-sectional variation in SCIri ,r j .
Again, these estimates suggest that our central findings are not confounded by omitted variables bias.

Trust and Social Connectedness. As discussed above, a central mechanism through which social con-
nections can affect trade flows is through helping with the enforcement of contracts. Guiso et al. (2009)
have shown that, within Europe, trade increases in the amount of trust between countries, in part be-
cause trust can also help alleviate concerns about adherence to contracts. This suggests that trust and
social connectedness might act as substitutes in fostering trade. We next test that prediction in the data,
using the same country-pair-specific trust data studied in Guiso et al. (2009).21 The correlation between
trust and social connectedness across country pairs is 0.35.
     In column 7 of Table 6, we replicate the estimates from column 6, now only for country pairs for
which we observe trust. The estimates are of broadly similar magnitude as those in the full sample. We
then split country pairs into those with above-median and below-median trust, and interact log(SCI )
between regions with this dummy. This specification allows us to obtain separate estimates of the elas-
ticity of trade with respect to social connectedness across regions in country pairs with high and low
levels of trust. Column 8 mirrors the specification in column 7, but with separate SCI coefficients for
21 Guiso et al. (2009) construct data on trust between countries by using a survey that was conducted by Eurobarometer in
 1995. Eurobarometer conducted the survey in 15 European countries and surveyed around 1,000 individuals per country.
 The survey participants were asked how much they trust their fellow citizens and how much they trust citizens from other
 countries. The exact question was "I would like to ask you a question about how much trust you have in people from various countries.
 For each, please tell me whether you have a lot of trust, some trust, not very much trust or no trust at all". The answers are then coded
 into numerical scores that are increasing in the amount of trust; the scoring scheme was 1 ("no trust at all"), 2 ("not very much
 trust"), 3 ("some trust"), and 4 ("a lot of trust"). The trust of a country to another country is then obtained by computing the
 average score across all participants surveyed in a given country. The countries that were surveyed are Austria, Belgium,
 Britain, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and
 the United Kingdom.



                                                                  31
high-trust and low-trust region pairs. We find that trade varies substantially more with social connect-
edness across regions in country pairs where trust is low than it does across regions in country pairs
where trust is high. Column 9 highlights that this result survives interacting all control variables and
fixed effects with the high-trust dummies, allowing, for example, the effect of geographic distance on
trade to differ with the trust across countries. Overall, it appears that trust and social connectedness are
substitutes in their effects on trade.

4     Conclusion
In this paper, we use anonymized data from Facebook to construct a comprehensive measure of the
social connectedness between countries as well as between European regions. We use this measure to
study the relationships between patterns of social connectedness and trade flows.
      We hope that our easily accessible measures of social connectedness will also be used to broaden our
understanding of the economic effects of social networks across a range of settings beyond international
trade. For example, Appendix D provides evidence that international asset holdings also vary with
social connectedness. Our social connectedness data may additionally help overcome measurement
challenges in other subfields of economics. For example, existing theoretical work suggests that the
diversity of social networks is an important determinant of economic development; conversely, tightly
clustered social ties can limit access to a broad range of social and economic opportunities (for example
Granovetter, 1977, 2005). Our data can help researchers test these and other predictions on the relation-
ship between social structure and socio-economic outcomes.
      Beyond economics, researchers in international relations have debated whether the relationships
between citizens of countries or the relationships between political leaders are important for the main-
tenance of peaceful relationships between countries. Our measure of international social connectedness
could be used in tests hoping to distinguish between those theories. In this light, our research empha-
sizes the increasingly important role of data from online services--such as Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter,
eBay, Mint, Trulia, and Zillow--in overcoming important measurement challenges across the social sci-
ences (see, for example, Baker, 2018; Giglio et al., 2015; Einav et al., 2015; Piazzesi et al., 2015).


References
Jenny C Aker. Information from markets near and far: Mobile phones and agricultural markets in niger.
    American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(3):46­59, 2010.

Facundo Albornoz, Héctor F Calvo Pardo, Gregory Corcos, and Emanuel Ornelas. Sequential exporting.
    Journal of International Economics, 88(1):17­31, 2012.

Alberto Alesina, Arnaud Devleeschauwer, William Easterly, Sergio Kurlat, and Romain Wacziarg. Frac-
    tionalization. Journal of Economic Growth, 8(2):155­194, 2003.

Treb Allen. Information frictions in trade. Econometrica, 82(6):2041­2083, 2014.

James E Anderson and Douglas Marcouiller. Insecurity and the pattern of trade: An empirical investi-
    gation. Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(2):342­352, 2002.

                                                       32
James E Anderson and Eric Van Wincoop. Gravity with gravitas: a solution to the border puzzle. Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 93(1):170­192, 2003.

Cristian Badarinza, Tarun Ramadorai, and Chihiro Shimizu. Gravity, counterparties, and foreign invest-
  ment. C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers, 2019.

Michael Bailey, Rachel Cao, Theresa Kuchler, Johannes Stroebel, and Arlene Wong. Social connectedness:
  Measurement, determinants, and effects. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32(3):259­80, 2018a.

Michael Bailey, Rachel Cao, Theresa Kuchler, Johannes Stroebel, and Arlene Wong. Social connectedness:
  Measurement, determinants, and effects. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32(3):259­80, 2018b.

Michael Bailey, Ruiqing Cao, Theresa Kuchler, and Johannes Stroebel. The economic effects of social
  networks: Evidence from the housing market. Journal of Political Economy, 126(6):2224­2276, 2018c.

Michael Bailey, Eduardo Dávila, Theresa Kuchler, and Johannes Stroebel. House price beliefs and mort-
  gage leverage choice. Technical Report 6, 2019a.

Michael Bailey, Patrick Farrell, Theresa Kuchler, and Johannes Stroebel. Social connectedness in urban
  areas. Revision requested at the Journal of Urban Economics, 2019b.

Michael Bailey, Drew M Johnston, Theresa Kuchler, Johannes Stroebel, and Arlene Wong. Peer effects in
  product adoption. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2019c.

Michael Bailey, Theresa Kuchler, Domninic Russel, and Johannes Stroebel. Social connectedness in eu-
  rope. Technical report, Working Paper, 2019d.

Scott R Baker. Debt and the response to household income shocks: Validation and application of linked
  financial account data. Journal of Political Economy, 126(4):1504­1557, 2018.

Richard Baldwin and James Harrigan. Zeros, quality, and space: Trade theory and trade evidence.
  American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 3(2):60­88, 2011.

Daniel Berkowitz, Johannes Moenius, and Katharina Pistor. Trade, law, and product complexity. Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 88(2):363­373, 2006.

Andrew B Bernard, Jonathan Eaton, J Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum. Plants and productivity in
  international trade. American Economic Review, 93(4):1268­1290, 2003.

Andrew B Bernard, J Bradford Jensen, and Peter K Schott. Importers, exporters, and multinationals: A
  portrait of firms in the us that trade goods. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  2005.

Andrew B Bernard, J Bradford Jensen, Stephen J Redding, and Peter K Schott. Firms in international
  trade. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(3):105­130, 2007.

Andrew B Bernard, J Bradford Jensen, Stephen J Redding, and Peter K Schott. The empirics of firm
  heterogeneity and international trade. Annual Review of Economics, 4(1):283­313, 2012.

                                                      33
Antoine Berthou and Charlotte Emlinger. The trade unit values database. Economie Internationale, (4):
  97­117, 2011.

Konrad B Burchardi and Tarek A Hassan. The economic impact of social ties: Evidence from german
  reunification. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(3):1219­1271, 2013.

Konrad B Burchardi, Thomas Chaney, and Tarek A Hassan. Migrants, ancestors, and investments. Tech-
  nical report, 2016.

Thomas Chaney. Distorted gravity: the intensive and extensive margins of international trade. American
  Economic Review, 98(4):1707­21, 2008.

Thomas Chaney. The network structure of international trade. American Economic Review, 104(11):3600­
  3634, 2014.

Thomas Chaney. Networks in international trade. In The Oxford Handbook of The Economics of Networks.
  2016.

Thomas Chaney. The gravity equation in international trade: An explanation. Journal of Political Economy,
  126(1):150­177, 2018.

Natalie Chen. Intra-national versus international trade in the european union: why do national borders
  matter? Journal of International Economics, 63(1):93­118, 2004.

Pierre-Philippe Combes, Miren Lafourcade, and Thierry Mayer. The trade-creating effects of business
  and social networks: evidence from france. Journal of International Economics, 66(1):1­29, 2005.

Sergio Correia, Paulo Guimarães, and Thomas Zylkin. Verifying the existence of maximum likelihood
  estimates for generalized linear models. 2019a.

Sergio Correia, Paulo Guimarães, and Thomas Zylkin. ppmlhdfe: Fast Poisson Estimation with High-
  Dimensional Fixed Effects. 2019b.

Kingsley Davis. The population of india and pakistan. 1951.

Anne-Célia Disdier and Keith Head. The puzzling persistence of the distance effect on bilateral trade.
  The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(1):37­48, 2008.

Maeve Duggan, Nicole B Ellison, Cliff Lampe, Amanda Lenhart, and Mary Madden. Social media
  update 2014. pew research center., January 2015.

Maeve Duggan, Shannon Greenwood, and Andrew Perrin. Social media update 2016. Pew Research
  Center., November 2016.

Jonathan Eaton and Samuel Kortum. Technology, geography, and trade. Econometrica, 70(5):1741­1779,
  2002.



                                                     34
Liran Einav, Theresa Kuchler, Jonathan Levin, and Neel Sundaresan. Assessing sale strategies in online
  markets using matched listings. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 7(2):215­47, 2015.

Eurostat.    Freight transport statistics - model split.       Technical report, 2015.     URL https:
  //ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Freight_transport_
  statistics_-_modal_split.

Robert C Feenstra and John Romalis. International prices and endogenous quality. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 129(2):477­527, 2014.

Guillaume Gaulier and Soledad Zignago. Baci: international trade database at the product-level (the
  1994-2007 version). 2010.

Stefano Giglio, Matteo Maggiori, Johannes Stroebel, and Andreas Weber. Climate change and long-run
  discount rates: Evidence from real estate. Technical report, 2015.

Mark Granovetter. The impact of social structure on economic outcomes. The Journal of Economic Per-
  spectives, 19(1):33­50, 2005.

Mark S Granovetter. The strength of weak ties. In Social networks, pages 347­367. Elsevier, 1977.

Avner Greif. Reputation and coalitions in medieval trade: evidence on the maghribi traders. The Journal
  of Economic History, 49(4):857­882, 1989.

Avner Greif. Contract enforceability and economic institutions in early trade: The maghribi traders'
  coalition. The American Economic Review, pages 525­548, 1993.

Luigi Guiso, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. Cultural biases in economic exchange? The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 124(3):1095­1131, 2009.

Juan Carlos Hallak. Product quality and the direction of trade. Journal of International Economics, 68(1):
  238­265, 2006.

Juan Carlos Hallak and Peter K Schott. Estimating cross-country differences in product quality. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(1):417­474, 2011.

Keith Head and Thierry Mayer. Gravity equations: Workhorse, toolkit, and cookbook. In Handbook of
  International Economics, volume 4, pages 131­195. Elsevier, 2014.

Elhanan Helpman, Marc Melitz, and Yona Rubinstein. Estimating trade flows: Trading partners and
  trading volumes. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2):441­487, 2008.

Ali Hortaçsu, F Martínez-Jerez, and Jason Douglas. The geography of trade in online transactions:
  Evidence from ebay and mercadolibre. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 1(1):53­74, 2009.

David Hummels and Alexandre Skiba. Shipping the good apples out? an empirical confirmation of the
  alchian-allen conjecture. Journal of Political Economy, 112(6):1384­1402, 2004.


                                                    35
Matthew O Jackson, Brian W Rogers, and Yves Zenou. The economic consequences of social-network
  structure. Journal of Economic Literature, 55(1):49­95, 2017.

Robert Jensen. The digital provide: Information (technology), market performance, and welfare in the
  south indian fisheries sector. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3):879­924, 2007.

Daniel Kaufmann, Aart Kraay, and Massimo Mastruzzi. The worldwide governance indicators: method-
  ology and analytical issues. Hague Journal on The Rule of Law, 3(2):220­246, 2011.

Amit Khandelwal. The long and short (of) quality ladders. The Review of Economic Studies, 77(4):1450­
  1476, 2010.

Edward E Leamer and James Levinsohn. International trade theory: the evidence. Handbook of Interna-
  tional Economics, 3:1339­1394, 1995.

Andrei A Levchenko. Institutional quality and international trade. The Review of Economic Studies, 74(3):
  791­819, 2007.

Staffan Burenstam Linder. An essay on trade and transformation. Almqvist & Wiksell Stockholm, 1961.

John McCallum. National borders matter: Canada-us regional trade patterns. American Economic Review,
  85(3):615­623, 1995.

Marc J Melitz. The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry productivity.
  Econometrica, 71(6):1695­1725, 2003.

Marc J Melitz and Gianmarco IP Ottaviano. Market size, trade, and productivity. The Review of Economic
  Studies, 75(1):295­316, 2008.

Eduardo Morales, Gloria Sheu, and Andrés Zahler. Extended gravity. The Review of Economic Studies,
  2015.

Nathan Nunn. Relationship-specificity, incomplete contracts, and the pattern of trade. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 122(2):569­600, 2007.

Maurice Obstfeld and Kenneth Rogoff. The six major puzzles in international macroeconomics: is there
  a common cause? NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 15:339­390, 2000.

Trevor J Pemberton, Michael DeGiorgio, and Noah A Rosenberg. Population structure in a comprehen-
  sive genomic data set on human microsatellite variation. G3: Genes, Genomes, Genetics, 3(5):891­907,
  2013.

Monika Piazzesi, Martin Schneider, and Johannes Stroebel. Segmented housing search. Technical report,
  2015.

Richard Portes and Helene Rey. The determinants of cross-border equity flows. Journal of International
  Economics, 65(2):269­296, 2005.


                                                     36
Priya Ranjan and Jae Young Lee. Contract enforcement and international trade. Economics & Politics, 19
  (2):191­218, 2007.

James E Rauch. Networks versus markets in international trade. Journal of International Economics, 48(1):
  7­35, 1999.

James E Rauch. Business and social networks in international trade. Journal of Economic Literature, 39(4):
  1177­1203, 2001.

James E Rauch and Vitor Trindade. Ethnic chinese networks in international trade. Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 84(1):116­130, 2002.

J. M. C. Santos Silva and Silvana Tenreyro. The log of gravity. Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(4):
  641­658, 2006.

Tim Schmidt-Eisenlohr. Towards a theory of trade finance. Journal of International Economics, 91(1):96­
  112, 2013.

Peter K Schott. Across-product versus within-product specialization in international trade. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 119(2):647­678, 2004.

Ina Simonovska and Michael E Waugh. The elasticity of trade: Estimates and evidence. Journal of
  International Economics, 92(1):34­50, 2014.

Enrico Spolaore and Romain Wacziarg. Ancestry, language and culture. In The Palgrave Handbook of
  Economics and Language, pages 174­211. Springer, 2016.

Enrico Spolaore and Romain Wacziarg. Ancestry and development: New evidence. Journal of Applied
  Econometrics, 33(5):748­762, 2018.

Meredith Startz. The value of face-to-face: Search and contracting problems in nigerian trade. Working
  Paper, 2016.

Claudia Steinwender. Real effects of information frictions: When the states and the kingdom became
  united. American Economic Review, 108(3):657­96, 2018.

Shawn W Tan. The geography of trade in the european single market. 2016.

Marcel P Timmer, Erik Dietzenbacher, Bart Los, Robert Stehrer, and Gaaitzen J De Vries. An illustrated
  user guide to the world input­output database: the case of global automotive production. Review of
  International Economics, 23(3):575­605, 2015.

Jan J Tinbergen. Shaping the world economy; suggestions for an international economic policy. 1962.

Daniel Trefler. The case of the missing trade and other mysteries. The American Economic Review, pages
  1029­1046, 1995.



                                                   37
        A PPENDIX FOR "I NTERNATIONAL T RADE AND S OCIAL
                         C ONNECTEDNESS "
                                            Michael Bailey
                                           Abhinav Gupta
                                        Sebastian Hillenbrand
                                           Theresa Kuchler
                                          Robert Richmond
                                          Johannes Stroebel

A     The Determinants of International Social Connectedness
In Section A.1, we explore a number of case studies of the social connectedness of individual coun-
tries. In Section A.2, we formally analyze the role of geography and other factors such as similarity of
language, history, religion, and economic development in shaping international social connections.

A.1   Case Studies of International Social Connectedness
Figures A.1 to A.5 present heat maps of the social connections of several countries in addition to the heat
map of Portugal's international connections in Panel A of Figure 1. As before, darker colors correspond
to closer connections.

India and Malaysia. Figure A.1 shows the social connectedness of two Asian countries, India (Panel
A) and Malaysia (Panel B). Both countries are strongly connected to the countries on the Arab penin-
sula, likely a result of migrant workers from India and Malaysia moving to work in these countries
in recent years. Similarly, Malaysia is strongly connected to Nepal, likely due to a guest worker pro-
gram allowing Nepalis to work in Malaysia. Social connections also appear to reflect earlier episodes
of migrant and forced labor movements. For instance, India is strongly connected to Guyana in South
America. In the 19th century, there was a lack of plantation workers following the abolition of slavery in
this former European colony. Indians were selected to fill the gap as they were used to working under
tropical condition and willing to accept cheap terms (Davis, 1951), and the resulting social connections
to India appear to remain a century later. Finally, the Muslim-majority Malaysia is more strongly con-
nected to the predominantly Muslim countries on the Indian subcontinent (Pakistan, Bangladesh, and
the Maldives) than it is connected to India itself, suggesting a role of religion in shaping today's social
connections.

Argentina. Figure A.2 shows the social connectedness of Argentina. Argentina is strongly connected
to all Spanish-speaking countries in Latin America. Connections to Portuguese-speaking Brazil are sub-
stantially weaker, even though the two countries are geographically close and share a common border.
Similarly, Argentina's strongest connection in Europe is to Spain. It is much less connected to Italy, de-
spite the fact that Italians were the largest group of post-colonial immigrants (more than from Spain)
and 60% of Argentinians have some Italian ancestry. These findings suggest an important role of shared
language for today's connections.

                                                   A.1
                         Figure A.1: Social Connectedness of India and Malaysia

                                            (A)   Social Connectedness of India                                                       t




                                          (B)   Social Connectedness of Malaysia




Note: Figures show a heat map of the social connectedness of India (Panel A) and Malaysia (Panel B). For each country in our
data, the colors highlight connections of the focal country, given in red. The lightest color corresponds to the 20th percentile of
the connectedness to the focal country; darker colors correspond to closer connections.


                                                               A.2
                               Figure A.2: Social Connectedness of Argentina

                                        (A)   Social Connectedness of Argentina




Note: Figure shows a heat map of the social connectedness of Argentina. For each country in the world, the colors highlight
connections of the focal country, given in red. The lightest color corresponds to the 20th percentile of the connectedness to the
focal country; darker colors correspond to closer connections.


Morocco and Mauritania. Figure A.3 shows the social connectedness of two neighboring countries
in Northwest Africa, Morocco (Panel A) and Mauritania (Panel B). Both Morocco and Mauritania are
former French colonies and, as such, still have strong social ties to France. The populations of both
countries are predominantly Muslim, which helps to explain their strong ties to other Muslim countries
in Northern Africa and the Middle East. On the other hand, Mauritania has much stronger ties to
Sub-Saharan Africa than Morocco does. This is likely related to the fact that Morocco's population is
almost entirely Arab-Berber, while Mauritania has a substantial population of Haratin and West African
ethnicity. These patterns suggest that ethnic ties are important in shaping friendships across countries.

Azerbaijan and Turkey. Figure A.4 shows the social connectedness of Azerbaijan (Panel A) and Turkey
(Panel B), two countries in Northwest Asia that share a short border. Both are strongly connected to
each other, the nearby Caucasus countries of Armenia and Georgia, and Central European countries
which have welcomed migrants from the two nations. However, Azerbaijan, a former Soviet Republic,
is much more connected with countries in Europe and Central Asia that were also part of the Soviet
Union, including Russia, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Ukraine, Belarus, Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia.
Turkey, whose residents are predominately Muslim, is more connected to other predominately Muslim
countries including Afghanistan, Syria, Lebanon, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, and Libya. These patterns
emphasize that historical ties and religion play important roles in shaping today's social connections.



                                                              A.3
                    Figure A.3: Social Connectedness of Morocco and Mauritania

                                        (A)   Social Connectedness of Morocco




                                       (B)   Social Connectedness of Mauritania




Note: Figures show a heat map of the social connectedness of Morocco (Panel A) and Mauritania (Panel B). For each country
in the world, the colors highlight connections of the focal country, given in red. The lightest color corresponds to the 20th
percentile of the connectedness of the focal country; darker colors correspond to closer connections.


                                                            A.4
                     Figure A.4: Social Connectedness of Azerbaijan and Turkey

                                       (A)   Social Connectedness of Azerbaijan




                                         (B)   Social Connectedness of Turkey




Note: Figures show a heat map of the social connectedness of Azerbaijan (Panel A) and Turkey (Panel B). For each country
in the world, the colors highlight connections of the focal country, given in red. The lightest color corresponds to the 20th
percentile of the connectedness of the focal country; darker colors correspond to closer connections.


                                                            A.5
                            Figure A.5: Social Connectedness of Eritrea and Fiji

                                           (A)   Social Connectedness of Eritrea




                                             (B)   Social Connectedness of Fiji




Note: Figures show a heat map of the social connectedness of Eritrea (Panel A) and Fiji (Panel B). For each country in the
world, the colors highlight connections of the focal country, given in red. The lightest color corresponds to the 20th percentile
of the connectedness to the focal country; darker colors correspond to closer connections.


                                                              A.6
Eritrea. Panel A of Figure A.5 shows the social connectedness of Eritrea. Eritrea is strongly connected
to nearby countries in Africa including Ethiopia and Sudan. In addition, it is strongly connected to Israel
and a number of countries in Northern Europe, including Germany, Switzerland, Sweden, Norway, and
the Netherlands. Eritrea had the ninth most exiting refugees in the world in 2018. While more than
half of these refugees went to Ethiopia and Sudan, the other top countries of destination were Germany,
Switzerland, Sweden, Norway, the Netherlands, and Israel.

Fiji. Panel B of Figure A.5 shows the social connectedness of Fiji. Fiji, a former British colony, is
strongly connected to other countries that were part of the British empire in Oceania (Australia, New
Zealand, Papa New Guinea, and the Solomon Islands), as well as other English-speaking nations, in-
cluding Canada, the United States, the United Kingdom, and Guyana. The country's connections to
Guyana and Suriname are particularly strong compared to its connections with countries throughout
the rest of South America. A potential explanation for this lies in the Indian worker program described
previously. Between 1830 and 1930, over a million indentured laborers from India were relocated to
European colonies, including Dutch Suriname and British Fiji and Guyana. These patterns suggest that
ties from migratory movements significantly impact international connectedness.

A.2     Regression Analysis
The case studies above suggest that several factors such as geographic distance, colonial history, and
past migration shape today's social connections between countries. We next estimate the following
regression to analyze the contributions of these factors to social connectedness more systematically:

                                   log(SCIi, j ) =  +  Gi, j + i + j +   i, j .                       (A.1)

The dependent variable is the logarithm of the Social Connectedness Index, log(SCIi, j ), between country
i and country j. The vector Gi, j captures variables that might help us understand the determinants of
international social connectedness. We also include fixed effects for each country, i and j , to absorb any
country-specific factors that may affect our measure of a county's connections to others, such as patterns
of Facebook usage or internet penetration.
A.2.1    Geography and Social Connectedness
We first explore the role of geographic proximity in shaping international social connectedness. We
measure the geographic distance between two countries as the population-weighted distance given by
CEPII; summary statistics are presented in Table A.1. The binscatter plots in Figure A.6 show a broadly
log-linear relationship between distance and social connectedness, both with and without country fixed
effects. For large distances, the relationship becomes slightly convex, indicating that distance matters
somewhat less once countries are already far apart.
      Table A.2 explores the role of distance using regression A.1. Column 1 includes only fixed effects for
country i and country j. The results suggest that about 30% of the pairwise connectedness of countries
is explained by the fact that countries differ in their average degree of global connectedness. In other
words, most of the cross-sectional variation in social connectedness across country pairs is the result of
characteristics that vary at the country pair level, and not characteristics that vary at the country level.

                                                     A.7
                             Table A.1: Summary Statistics and Data Sources

                                     Mean       P10      P25      P50     P75       P90        N        Source
 log(SCI)                             3.30      1.61    2.08      2.94    4.16      5.54     32,220     Facebook
 log(Distance)                        8.75      7.68    8.39      8.92    9.30      9.58     32,220     CEPII
 log(1+Migrant Population)            2.49      0.00    0.00      0.00    4.93      8.13     31,862     United Nations
 Common Colonizer                     0.11      0.00    0.00      0.00    0.00      1.00     32,220     CEPII
 Colonial Relationship                0.01      0.00    0.00      0.00    0.00      0.00     32,220     CEPII
 Genetic Distance                     0.04      0.01    0.02      0.04    0.05      0.06     27,390     Spolaore et al. (2018)
 Common Official Language             0.15      0.00    0.00      0.00    0.00      1.00     32,220     CEPII
 Religious Distance                   0.76      0.54    0.67      0.80    0.85      0.96     28,730     Spolaore et al. (2016)
  GDP per Capita (in '00,000$s)       0.18      0.01    0.03      0.10    0.28      0.49     32,220     CEPII
 Common Border                        0.02      0.00    0.00      0.00    0.00      0.00     32,220     CEPII
 Same Continent                       0.23      0.00    0.00      0.00    0.00      1.00     32,220     UNStats
 Same Subcontinent                    0.13      0.00    0.00      0.00    0.00      1.00     32,220     UNStats

Note: Table presents summary statistics of variables used in Section A. Variables include the logarithm of SCI, the logarithm
of distance, the logarithm of 1 plus the average migrant population, a dummy indicating whether the pair of countries had
a common colonizer post 1945, a dummy indicating whether the pair of countries was in a colonial relationship post 1945,
genetic distance following Spolaore and Wacziarg (2018), a common official language dummy, religious distance following
Spolaore and Wacziarg (2016), differences in GDP per capita (in hundred thousands of dollars), a common border dummy, a
same continent dummy, and a same subcontinent dummy.




                       Figure A.6: Social Connectedness vs. Geographic Distance

                    (A) No Country Fixed Effects                                (B) Country Fixed Effects




Note: Figures show binscatter plots of social connectedness and geographic distance.          Panel A regresses log(SCI) on
log(Distance) without any fixed effects, while Panel B controls for country fixed effects.




                                                            A.8
                  Table A.2: The Geographic Determinants of Social Connectedness

                                                           Dependent variable: log(SCI)
                                  (1)        (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)
 log(Distance)                            -1.507        500           -1.805     -0.846       -1.439      -1.040      -1.152
                                           (0.035)    Quantiles        (0.055)    (0.070)      (0.034)     (0.048)     (0.047)
 Common Border                                                                                0.925       0.986        0.960
                                                                                               (0.098)     (0.100)      (0.092)
 Same Continent                                                                                           0.619
                                                                                                           (0.074)
 Same Subcontinent                                                                                        0.385
                                                                                                           (0.097)
 Both in Africa                                                                                                        1.327
                                                                                                                        (0.133)
 Both in Americas                                                                                                       0.061
                                                                                                                       (0.140)
 Both in Asia                                                                                                          0.262
                                                                                                                       (0.091)
 Both in Europe                                                                                                        0.698
                                                                                                                        (0.159)
 Both in Oceania                                                                                                       2.571
                                                                                                                        (0.323)
 Orig. and Dest. Country FE        Y          Y           Y              Y           Y            Y           Y           Y

 Sample                           All        All         All          < 6000km   > 6000km        All         All         All
 R2                              0.291      0.652        0.672         0.647       0.551       0.657        0.678        0.690
 N                              32,220     32,220       32,220         12,478     19,742       32,220      32,220       32,220

Note: Table shows results of regression A.1. The dependent variable is the logarithm of social connectedness for a country pair.
Explanatory variables include the logarithm of distance, a dummy indicating a common border, a same continent dummy, a
same subcontinent dummy, and dummies indicating whether the pair of countries belongs to Africa, Americas, Asia, Europe
or the Oceania region. In column 3, the logarithm of distance is replaced by indicators based on 500 quantiles of distance.
All specifications include fixed effects for the origin and destination country. Standard errors are clustered by origin and
destination country. We have data on social connectedness for 180 countries, which leads to 32,220 (= 180 x 179) observations.
Significance levels:  (p<0.10),  (p<0.05),  (p<0.01).


Column 2 adds log( Distancei, j ) as a control to the country fixed effects; this specification corresponds to
the binscatter plots in Panel B of Figure A.6. The estimates imply that a 10% increase in the geographic
distance between countries is associated with a 15.1% decline in social connectedness. In terms of mag-
nitude, this elasticity is similar to the elasticity of the connectedness between U.S. counties to geographic
distance found by Bailey et al. (2018b). Moreover, geographic distance explains more than one half of
the variation in social connectedness across countries after accounting for country fixed effects.
      Column 3 explores the importance of any potential non-linearities in the relationship between ge-
ographic distance and social connectedness. Specifically, instead of controlling for log( Distancei, j ) lin-
early, we include dummy variables for 500 quantiles of log( Distancei, j ). The R2 of the regression is only
slightly higher -- 67.2% instead of 65.2% -- when we control for these quantiles. This finding confirms
that the baseline log-linear specification is reasonable. Nevertheless, in columns 4 and 5 of Table A.2, we
split the sample into country pairs that are more or less than 6,000km apart. The estimated elasticitiy is


                                                                A.9
-1.8 for countries less than 6,000km apart, and -0.8 for countries more than 6,000km apart. Strikingly,
distance explains only 6% of the variation not explained by fixed effects in the sample of countries that
are more than 6000km apart, but almost half of the respective variation for countries closer than 6000km.
     Column 6 of Table A.2 explores whether sharing a border increases social connectedness beyond ge-
ographic distance. For instance, a direct border may make it more likely that residents frequently spend
time in the other country, either for work or leisure. It might also induce governments to cooperate and
establish policies fostering cross-country interactions. Consistent with these hypotheses, the estimates
indicate that citizens of two countries that share a border are about twice as likely to be friends with each
other compared with citizens of two countries that are equally far apart but that do not share a border.
However, the incremental R2 of including this additional control over distance alone is relatively small
at 0.6%, since the common border indicator does not allow us to understand the substantial variation in
connectedness between the vast majority of pairs of non-neighboring countries.
     We also examine how continental borders shape friendships between countries. Following UNStats,
we group countries into five continents -- Africa, the Americas, Asia, Europe, and Oceania -- and into
subcontinents such as Northern Africa and Sub-Saharan Africa. The regression results in column 7 of
Table A.2 show that countries on the same subcontinent are 2.2 times as connected as two countries that
are equally far apart but on different continents all else equal. Being on the same continent (but not the
same subcontinent) is associated with an 62% increase in social connectedness relative to two countries
that are equally far apart but on different continents. Column 8 explores whether sharing a continent
affects friendships differently on different continents. Countries in Oceania and Africa are substantially
more likely to be socially connected to other countries on the same continent than predicted purely by
geographic distance. On the other hand, countries in the Americas are not significantly more likely to
be connected to each other than to countries on a different continent that are equally far apart.
A.2.2   Social Connectedness and Country Similarity
The previous results highlight that various measures of geographic proximity can explain a little over
one half of the variation in social connectedness across country pairs that is not explained by country
fixed effects. We next explore the role of other factors in explaining international friendship linkages.
Specifically, we analyze the role of past migration, colonial history, genetic similarity, common language,
religion, and similarity in GDP. Table A.1 shows summary statistics on these variables, as well as the data
sources; not all variables are available for all country pairs. Table A.3 presents the cross-correlation of
these gravity variables with the SCI and with each other. Naturally, many of the variables are somewhat
correlated with one another: for example, countries that share a colonial history are more likely to have a
common official language. Table A.4 contains the results from Regression A.1 when controlling for these
variables. We first explore the relationships between the gravity variables and social connectedness
separately for each variable, before analyzing them jointly in a multivariate analysis.

Migration. It is likely that migrants retain many friends and family ties to their countries of origin. As a
result, we would expect that past migration patterns explain some of the observed cross-sectional vari-
ation in social connectedness. To measure migration between country pairs, we use bilateral migration
data from the Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Na-


                                                    A.10
                Table A.3: Correlation Table: Social Connectedness and Determinants

                                       (1)     (2)     (3)      (4)     (5)     (6)     (7)     (8)     (9)    (10)   (11)   (12)
 (1) log(SCI)                          1.00
 (2) log(Distance)                    -0.59   1.00
 (3) log(1+Migrant Population)         0.37   -0.41   1.00
 (4) Common Colonizer                  0.26   -0.04   -0.07    1.00
 (5) Colonial Relationship             0.10   -0.02   0.17     -0.03   1.00
 (6) Genetic Distance                 -0.40   0.56    -0.44    0.01    -0.01   1.00
 (7) Common Official Language          0.44   -0.12   0.12     0.40    0.13    -0.02   1.00
 (8) Religious Distance               -0.27   0.22    -0.18    0.03    0.01    0.11    -0.24   1.00
 (9)  GDP per Capita (in '00,000$s)    0.02   0.01    0.31     -0.10   0.05    -0.10   -0.02   -0.01   1.00
 (10) Common Border                    0.28   -0.36   0.28     0.05    0.04    -0.17   0.12    -0.12   -0.07   1.00
 (11) Same Continent                   0.54   -0.63   0.23     0.10    -0.03   -0.37   0.19    -0.18   -0.15   0.23   1.00
 (12) Same Subcontinent                0.53   -0.51   0.12     0.12    -0.02   -0.24   0.29    -0.20   -0.22   0.27   0.71   1.00

Note: Table presents correlations between variables used in Section A. Variables include the logarithm of SCI, the logarithm
of distance, the logarithm of 1 plus the average migrant population, a dummy indicating whether the two countries had a
common colonizer post 1945, a dummy indicating whether the pair of countries was in a colonial relationship post 1945,
genetic distance, a common official language dummy, religious distance, differences in GDP per capita (in hundred thousands
of dollars), a common border dummy, a same continent dummy and a same subcontinent dummy.


tions.1 The estimates in column 1 of Table A.4 show a strong relationship between past migration and
current social relationships. Doubling the average migrant population increases social connectedness
between countries by over 20%. Including migration in addition to distance and country fixed effects
increases the R2 of the regression by 6.7 percentage points.

Common Colonial History. The case studies in Section A.1 suggested that countries with a common
colonial history maintain closer present-day social ties. To systematically explore this relationship, we
use two measures of colonial history. Our first measures is an indicator for having a common colonizer
after 1945. The second measure is an indicator for having been in a colonial relationship post 1945.
The estimates in column 2 indicate that colonial history correlates strongly with social connectedness.
Countries with a common colonizer have almost twice as many friendship links on Facebook as other
countries that are similarly far apart. Having been in a colonial relationship increases the connectedness
between countries by a factor close to three. Adding controls for colonial ties to distance and country
fixed effects explains additional 2.8% of the cross-sectional variation in social connectedness.

Genetic Distance. Homophily suggests that there are likely to be more connections among countries
whose populations are more similar to each other, including along genetic lines. We measure genetic
1 Mostof the data are based on population censuses from the year 2015. Population registers and surveys are used to supple-
ment the census data. Whenever the number of migrants from a country to another country is missing, we set the number to
zero. For each country pair, we then compute the average of the number of migrants from country A living in country B and
the number of migrants from country B living in country A. To deal with zero migration between two countries, we add one
before taking the logarithm. Dividing this number by the sum of the populations in countries A and B leaves the coefficient
almost unchanged, because of the log-log specification and the country-level fixed effects.



                                                              A.11
                         Table A.4: The Determinants of Social Connectedness

                                                                     Dependent variable: log(SCI)
                                              (1)         (2)            (3)       (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)
 log(Distance)                            -1.080      -1.467         -1.161     -1.381     -1.415     -1.477     -0.579
                                           (0.037)     (0.032)        (0.033)   (0.038)     (0.038)    (0.034)    (0.044)

 log(1+Migrant Population)                0.207                                                                   0.166
                                           (0.01)                                                                  (0.01)

 Common Colonizer                                     0.900                                                       0.325
                                                       (0.078)                                                     (0.055)

 Colonial Relationship                                1.911                                                       1.012
                                                       (0.196)                                                     (0.115)

 Genetic Distance                                                    -30.82                                      -20.83
                                                                      (2.103)                                     (1.939)

 Common Official Language                                                       1.100                             0.544
                                                                                 (0.071)                           (0.058)

 Religious Distance                                                                        -1.522                -0.577
                                                                                            (0.170)               (0.118)

  GDP per Capita (in '00,000$s)                                                                       -1.278 -0.981
                                                                                                       (0.269) (0.202)

 Common Border                                                                                                     0.193
                                                                                                                   (0.090)

 Same Continent                                                                                                   0.502
                                                                                                                   (0.059)

 Same Subcontinent                                                                                                  -0.100
                                                                                                                   (0.072)

 Orig. and Dest. Country FE                   Y           Y             Y          Y          Y           Y           Y
 Coeff. on distance w/o regressors         -1.506      -1.507         -1.496    -1.507      -1.494     -1.507      -1.490
 R2                                        0.714       0.677          0.699      0.691      0.660      0.656       0.793
 Incremental R2 of regressors               0.067       0.028          0.048    0.042       0.011      0.008       0.142
 N                                         31,862      32,220         27,390    32,220      28,730     32,220      26,082

Note: Table shows results of regression A.1. The dependent variable is the logarithm of the social connectedness for a country
pair. Independent variables include the logarithm of distance, the logarithm of 1 plus the average migrant population, a
dummy indicating whether the pair of countries had a common colonizer post 1945, a dummy indicating whether the pair
of countries was in a colonial relationship post 1945, genetic distance, a common official language dummy, religious distance,
differences in GDP per capita (in hundred thousands of dollars), a common border dummy, a same continent dummy and a
same subcontinent dummy. All specifications include fixed effects for the origin and destination country. Standard errors are
clustered by origin and destination country. We have data on social connectedness for 180 countries, which leads to 32,220 (=
180 x 179) observations. Not all variables are available for all country pairs. Significance levels:  (p<0.10),  (p<0.05), 
(p<0.01).




                                                              A.12
distance following Spolaore and Wacziarg (2018).2 Table A.3 shows that genetic distance has a raw
correlation of -40% with social connectedness; this is reflected in the strong negative relationship in the
regression analysis. Going from the 10th percentile of genetic distance to the 90th percentile is associated
with a decrease in social connectedness of 154%. Including genetic distance leads to an incremental
increase in explanatory power, as measured by the R2 , of just under 5%.

Common Language. Language is a natural determinant of social relationships. After all, it is hard to
form a personal relationship without speaking the same language. To formally explore the relationship
between language and social connectedness, we use an indicator variable for whether two countries
share a common official language. The common language indicator is strongly correlated with social
connections as evidenced by a raw correlation of 44% presented in Table A.3. Column 4 of Table A.4
confirms the strong relationship. Having a common language more than doubles the social connected-
ness between two countries, and increases the R2 by 4.2%.

Similar Religion. People of the same or similar religion may find it easier to connect to others who share
their belief system. In addition, people of the same religion may be more likely to meet each other across
countries, for instance when traveling for pilgrimage. To explore the effect of religion on social connect-
edness, we measure religious distance between countries following Spolaore and Wacziarg (2016).3 The
estimates in column 5 of Table A.4 suggest that social connections decrease by 64% when moving from
the 10th percentile to the 90th percentile of religious distance. The incremental R2 of religion is about
1%, which is less than the variation explained by the other variables explored so far.

Similarity in GDP. Recent research by Bailey, Cao, Kuchler, Stroebel, and Wong (2018a) has documented
that, at the individual level, people are more likely to be friends with others of similar incomes. We next
explore whether this is also true for international social connectedness. For each country pair, we com-
pute the absolute difference in GDP per capita. Column 6 of Table A.4 shows that differences in GDP
correlate with social connectedness. A ten thousand dollar higher absolute difference in GDP per capita
across two countries corresponds to a 12.8% decline in social connectedness. However, differences in
GDP only explain a small fraction of the cross-sectional variation in social connections, with an incre-
mental R2 of only 0.8%.

Multivariate Regression. The first six columns of Table A.4 have shown the relationship between each
regressor and social connectedness separately (in addition to controls for distance and country fixed ef-
fects). However, many of these variables are correlated with each other, as shown in Table A.3, and they
often capture related aspects of across-country similarity. Column 7 explores how much of the variation
2 This  measure of genetic distance is based on variation in the human DNA for ethnic groups from Pemberton, DeGiorgio,
  and Rosenberg (2013) and converted to a country-to-country measure using the shares of each ethnic group in each country's
  populations from Alesina, Devleeschauwer, Easterly, Kurlat, and Wacziarg (2003). It is therefore the expected genetic distance
  between two individuals randomly selected from the two countries.
3 This measure of religious distance between any two countries is based on two components: the distance between different

  religions and the share of the population in a country that follow a religion. The proximity of two religions is based on how
  many nodes the two religions share in a tree describing the relationship between different religions. For instance, Roman
  Catholics are more closely related to Orthodox Christians than to Muslims, but the latter two are more closely related to each
  other than to religions originating in Asia such as Hinduism. The religious distance between two countries is then obtained
  by summing across the distances of all religions while weighting each religion by the fractions of people in the two countries
  that follow the religion.


                                                             A.13
in social connectedness can be jointly explained by these variables. As expected, the estimated coeffi-
cients for most variables decrease somewhat, though all variables retain their economic and statistical
significance. The estimated effect of distance drops to about one third of the coefficient in the univariate
regressions, suggesting that distance captures some aspects of the other cultural and social similarity in
explaining social connectedness. Taken together, the incremental R2 of all additional regressors (beyond
distance and fixed effects) is 14%.
      As shown in Table A.3, a number of the control variables in Table A.4 are highly correlated. For
example, the correlation between genetic distance and our measure of migration is -0.44. Therefore,
another interesting metric is how much explanatory power each variable contributes when controlling
for all other variables. For each variable, we run two regressions with the specification equal to column
7 of Table A.4; one where we exclude the variable of interest and one where we include it. We then
compare the R2 of the two regressions, giving us an estimate of the incremental explanatory power of the
variable beyond all other explanatory variables. The results of this exercise are reported in Table A.5. We
find that migration has the largest incremental R2 with 3.74% followed by distance with 1.97%. Genetic
distance (1.93%) and the common official language dummy (0.80%) also add sizable explanatory power.
Colonial heritage, religious distance, a common border, and the same subcontinent dummies have very
little explanatory power once we control for other factors.

                   Table A.5: Incremental Explanatory Power of Regressors for SCI

Incremental R2                                                    Dependent variable: log(SCI)

log(Distance)                                                                  1.95
log(1+Migrant Population)                                                      3.72
Common Colonizer                                                               0.22
Colonial Relationship                                                          0.23
Genetic Distance                                                               1.93
Common Official Language                                                       0.84
Religious Distance                                                             0.15
 GDP per Capita (in '00,000$s)                                                 0.41
Common Border                                                                  0.02
Same Continent                                                                 0.61
Same Subcontinent                                                              0.01

Note: Table reports the incremental R2 of each regressor when included/excluded in a regression of the logarithm of SCI on
the full panel of regressors. This is alike the specification in column 7 of Table A.4. To get the incremental R2 , we compute the
difference between the R2 of a regression when we exclude the variable from the set of explanatory variables and the R2 when
we include the variable in the set of explanatory variables. For each variable considered, we run both regressions on the same
set of observations.



A.3     Groups of Socially Connected Countries
In Section 1, we used a hierarchical clustering algorithm to construct 30 clusters of countries with high
within-cluster social connectedness. Table A.6 lists the countries in the 30 clusters described.




                                                              A.14
                        Table A.6: 30 Clusters of Socially Connected Countries

Cluster    Countries
   1       Angola, Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo, Cote
           d'Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
           Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal,
           Sierra Leone, South Africa, Swaziland, Togo, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe
   2       Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Canada, Cayman Islands, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, Saint Lucia,
           Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Trinidad and Tobago, United States
   3       Egypt, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Palestine, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syrian
           Arab Republic, Yemen
   4       Albania, Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Germany, Italy, Malta, Slovenia, Switzerland, the Republic
           of North Macedonia
   5       Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Ireland, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Sweden, United Kingdom
   6       Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Ukraine, Uzbekistan
   7       Australia, Cook Islands, Fiji, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Vanuatu
   8       Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brunei Darussalam, Malaysia, Maldives, Oman, Singapore, Sri Lanka
   9       Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama
   10      Argentina, Bolivia, Cuba, Paraguay, Spain, Uruguay
   11      Bhutan, India, Nepal, Qatar, United Arab Emirates
   12      Bulgaria, Cyprus, Greece, Republic of Moldova, Romania
   13      Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Venezuela
   14      Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius, Seychelles
   15      Cape Verde, Luxembourg, Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe
   16      Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Somalia
   17      Hong Kong, Macau, Philippines, Taiwan
   18      Burma, Cambodia, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Thailand
   19      Belgium, Netherlands, Suriname
   20      Chile, Dominican Republic, Haiti
   21      Czech Republic, Hungary, Slovakia
   22      Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia
   23      France, French Polynesia, New Caledonia
   24      Afghanistan, Pakistan
   25      Indonesia, Timor-Leste
   26      Japan, Viet Nam
   27      Republic of Korea, Mongolia
   28      Brazil
   29      Poland
   30      Turkey

Note: The table reports 30 groups generated by hierarchical agglomerative linkage clustering.




                                                          A.15
B       Trade and Social Connectedness
In this section, we present material complementary to our analysis of country-level trade in Section 2.
Section B.1 explains the construction of the data, Section B.2 shows robustness to using OLS estima-
tion instead of PPML, Section B.3 estimates time-varying elasticities of trade to social connections, and
Section B.4 runs a horse race between different gravity variables in explaining international trade.

B.1      Construction of Trade and SCI Data
For the analyses in Section 2, we merge data on international social connectedness with product-level
trade data from CEPII. Of the 180 countries for which we have data on international social connected-
ness, six countries are not contained in the trade data. These countries are Botswana, Lesotho, Luxem-
bourg, Namibia, Sudan, and Swaziland. In the original data, products are classified according to the
6-digit HS96 classification into 4,914 product categories.
        In order to construct total bilateral trade, used in Section 2.1, we aggregate trade across all products
for each exporter-importer pair. We replace missing trade values with zero trade values. Our final data
that contain both social connectedness and aggregate bilateral trade include 174 countries and 30,102
observations.
        In Section 2.2, we use data on product-level trade instead of total trade. For computational reasons,
we aggregate trade flows up to the first two digits of the HS96 product code for each exporter-importer
pair.4 This procedure results in 96 product categories. We replace missing trade values with zeros. The
panel on product-level trade and social connectedness contains 2,889,792 (=174 x 173 x 96) observations.
        Additionally, we use rule of law measures from the Worldwide Governance Indicators provided by
the World Bank. This data lack four countries: Cook Islands, New Caledonia, Palestine, and French
Polynesia. The data that contain product-level trade, international SCI and the rule of law measure
include 170 countries and 2,758,080 (=170 x 169 x 96) observations.

B.2      Gravity Regressions (OLS) - Intensive Margin of Trade
Table 2 in Section 2.1 showed results from regressing aggregate bilateral trade on social connectedness
and other gravity variables. The regression was estimated using Poisson Pseudo Maximum Likelihood
(PPML) to account for zero bilateral trade between countries. Here, we show that the results are robust
to estimating the relationships using OLS. We focus on the intensive margin of trade in order to avoid
problems with zero-trade observations. We estimate the following regression:

                                          log( Xi, j ) =  +  Gi, j + i + j +       i, j                                   (B.1)

The dependent variable log( Xi, j ) denotes the logarithm of the total value of exports from country i to
country j.
        The results are reported in Table B.1. As before, social connectedness is successful in explaining a
substantial part of the variation in bilateral trade at the intensive margin. Column 2 shows that social
connectedness explains 28.1% of the within variation of trade after controlling for exporter and importer
4 Thefirst two digits of the product code are referred to as the "HS chapter". One example is for example this chapter 09, which
 includes " Coffee, Tea, Maté and Spices".


                                                              B.1
fixed effects, nearly as high as the within- R2 of 28.9% for distance (see column 3). Similarly to Table 2,
column 4 shows that gravity variables together explain a much smaller share of variation--here, less
than half as much--than social connectedness. Column 7 shows that, after controlling for distance and
other gravity variables, the coefficient on social connectedness is similar to that obtained using PPML
(0.387 vs. 0.325). Overall, these results show that our baseline results are not an artefact of the specific
estimation method.

                  Table B.1: Gravity Regressions (OLS) - Intensive Margin of Trade

                                                       Dependent variable: Aggregate Bilateral Trade

                                  (1)        (2)         (3)           (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)

 log(SCI)                                 0.813                                 0.454                  0.387         500
                                           (0.030)                               (0.033)                (0.034)    Quantiles

 log(Distance)                                        -1.706                    -1.027     -1.534      -1.026       -1.019
                                                       (0.063)                   (0.072)    (0.064)     (0.073)      (0.072)

 Common Border                                                       3.573                 0.866       0.660        0.467
                                                                      (0.222)               (0.182)     (0.169)      (0.155)

 Common Official Language                                            1.289                 0.586       0.241        0.266
                                                                      (0.151)               (0.088)     (0.081)      (0.083)

 Common Colonizer                                                    0.816                 0.628       0.350        0.276
                                                                      (0.184)               (0.140)     (0.118)     (0.120)

 Colonial Relationship                                               0.630                 1.168       0.629        0.591
                                                                     (0.249)                (0.176)     (0.134)      (0.132)

 Orig. and Dest. Country FE        Y          Y           Y             Y          Y          Y           Y            Y

 N                               20,054    20,054      20,054        20,054      20,054     20,054      20,054       20,054
 Adjusted R2                      0.679     0.769       0.772         0.719       0.785      0.778       0.787        0.788

Note: Table shows results from regression B.1. We estimate the regression on non-zero trade observations (intensive margin)
using OLS. The dependent variable is total exports from country i to country j. Controls include the logarithm of SCI, the
logarithm of distance, a common border dummy, a common official language dummy, a dummy indicating whether the two
countries had a common colonizer post 1945, a dummy indicating whether the pair of countries was in a colonial relationship
post 1945 and 500 quantiles of SCI. All specifications include exporter and importer country fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered by exporter and importer country. We have data on trade and social connectedness for 174 countries, which leads to
20,054 non-zero trade observations. Significance levels: *(p<0.10), **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).


B.3    Time-variation in Trade Elasticities
In this section, we examine how the elasticity of trade with respect to social connectedness and distance
varies over time. For this purpose, we use The Direction of Trade Statistics from the IMF that reports
aggregate bilateral trade data from 1948 to 2018. Because the earlier years contain a lot of missing trade
entries and we want to keep the set of countries constant across time, we focus on the time period from
1981 to 2018. For each year, we regress aggregate bilateral trade on our distance measure and our social
connectedness measure from March 2019. This allows to estimate year-specific regression coefficients


                                                               B.2
that are shown in Figure B.1. These findings highlight that the elasticity of trade to both distance and
social connectedness has been highly constant over the past fourty years.

             Figure B.1: Time-variation in Elasticity of Trade to Social Connectedness

                    (A) Univariate Regressions                               (B) Multivariate Regression




Note: Figures show year-specific regression coefficients from regressing trade on log(SCI ) and log( Distance) as specified
in Equation 2. Panel A shows the regression coefficients obtained in univariate regressions, Panel B shows the regression
coefficients obtained in multivariate regressions. The dark grey line shows the coefficient on social connectedness, while the
light grey line shows the coefficient on distance. Both regression specifications include exporter and importer country fixed
effects.


B.4    Gravity Regressions - A Horse Race of Predictors
In Table 2 of the main paper, we regressed aggregate bilateral trade on the logarithm of social connect-
edness and other gravity variables. However, it might be instructive to look at how trade interacts with
each of these variables individually, exploring the relative economic and statistical significance of each
variable separately. In this section, we conduct this analysis using both, PPML regressions and OLS
regressions on the intensive margin of trade. We report the results of this "horse race of predictors" in
Table B.2. Columns 1 to 6 are estimated using PPML, while columns 7 to 12 are estimated using OLS.
Consistent with our other results, we find that distance and social connectedness are the most successful
in explaining variation in bilateral trade. In the PPML regression, distance and social connectedness are
the only two variables that individually explain more than 90% of bilateral trade after controlling for ex-
porter and importer country fixed effect. A similar results emerges from the OLS regression: Including
distance and social connectedness raises the R2 significantly compared to all other gravity variables.




                                                             B.3
                                                            Table B.2: Gravity Regressions - Horse Race

                                                                                      Dependent variable: Aggregate Bilateral Trade

                                                                      PPML                                                                     OLS

                                         (1)         (2)        (3)           (4)          (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)          (9)           (10)      (11)       (12)

       log(Distance)                  -0.996                                                                 -1.706
                                        (0.06)                                                                (0.063)

       log(SCI)                                   0.683                                                                  0.813
                                                   (0.04)                                                                 (0.03)

       Common Border                                         1.900                                                                    4.205
                                                              (0.204)                                                                  (0.230)

       Common Official Language                                          0.936                                                                   1.809
                                                                          (0.146)                                                                 (0.163)

       Common Colonizer                                                                 1.439                                                                 1.564
B.4




                                                                                         (0.156)                                                               (0.199)

       Colonial Relationship                                                                       0.607                                                                 1.544
                                                                                                   (0.325)                                                                (0.404)

       Orig. and Dest. Country FE         Y          Y           Y             Y            Y         Y         Y           Y            Y             Y         Y          Y

       Adjusted R2                      0.929      0.919       0.887          0.845      0.839      0.835      0.772      0.769        0.703         0.699     0.688      0.680
       N                               30,102      30,102     30,102         30,102      30,102     30,102    20,054     20,054       20,054         20,054   20,054     20,054

      Note: Table shows results from regression 2 (PPML) and regression B.1 (OLS). We estimate the regression using PPML in columns 1­6 and using OLS in columns 7­12.
      The dependent variable is total exports from country i to country j for the PPML regressions, and the logarithm thereof for the OLS regressions. Controls include the
      logarithm of SCI, the logarithm of distance, a common border dummy, a common official language dummy, a dummy indicating whether the two countries had a
      common colonizer post 1945, and a dummy indicating whether the pair of countries was in a colonial relationship post 1945. All specifications include exporter and
      importer country fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by exporter and importer country. We have data on trade and social connectedness for 174 countries,
      which leads to 30,102 (= 174 x 173) observations. The OLS regressions use only non-zero trade observations (intensive margin of trade). Significance levels: *(p<0.10),
      **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).
C     Trade and Subnational Social Connectedness in Europe
In this section, we explain the construction of the data used in Section 3 when analyzing trade and
subnational social connectedness across European regions.

C.1       Construction of Data for Input-Output-Weighted Connectedness
Our analyses in Section 3.1 use information on employment at the industry-NUTS2 region level, mapped
to input-output data at the industry-country level and trade data at the product-country level. (As de-
scribed in the text, we use product and industry interchangeably.) The final analyses include 28 countries
for which all three sets of data were available.5 The industry employment data come from the Eurostat
Structural Business Statistics series, which includes employment in NUTS2 regions for NACE Rev. 2
industry classifications at the division level.6 In each region, we use the most recent year in which the
data were available starting with 2017. 64% of the data come from 2017, 26% from 2016, 1.6% from 2015,
1.3% from 2014, and 3.22% from between 2013 and 2008. Observations prior to 2016 may be categorized
using different NUTS2 regions, as these boundaries periodically change. In instances when we use an
observation prior to 2016 in a region that changed, we use a crosswalk described in Section C.2, below.7
For each industry and country, we calculate the share of employment in each region (e.g. the share of
Greek construction industry workers that are in the Attica Region).
      We then match these data to the World Input-Output data by country and industry of origin and
destination. Our mapping from NACE Rev. 2 industry classifications to the World Input-Output classi-
fications comes from correspondence tables provided by Eurostat. We then add product-level trade data
from CEPII by mapping the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System (HS96) product
classifications to the World Input-Output industry classifications. This mapping comes from correspon-
dence tables provided by the World Bank, UN Statistics Division, and Eurostat. For the purpose of our
analysis, our focus is on goods that are used as an intermediate input to another production process in
the country of destination. Accordingly, we drop industries for which more than half of the exports are
used for final consumption. Our final analysis includes the 20 industries listed in Table C.1.

C.2       Construction of Rail Freight Data
Our analyses in Section 3.2 use information on European region-to-region rail goods transportation
from Eurostat. The data are based on individual reports from European Union members, European
Free Trade Association members, and European Union candidates. The data are reported for 2005,
2010, and 2015, in accordance with Directive 80/1177/EC of the European Commission and subsequent
regulatory updates. We use the 2015 data and prepare them for our analyses as described below. This
process was informed by the "Reference Manual on Rail Transport Statistics" and our correspondence
with the Eurostat data providers.
5 These  countries are Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Ger-
  many, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Roma-
  nia, Spain, Sweden, Slovenia, Slovakia and the United Kingdom.
6 Notably, the SBS series does not cover agriculture, forestry, and fishing. For more information on the series see: https://

  ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/structural-business-statistics. For more information on NACE Rev. 2 classifi-
  cations see: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products-manuals-and-guidelines/-/KS-RA-07-015.
7 Here, the necessary assumption we make for regions that split is that employment by industry in each new region is propor-

  tional to 2015 populations.


                                                            C.1
                  Table C.1: Products Used in Input-Output-Weighted Regressions

 Industry
 Architectural and engineering activities; technical testing and analysis
 Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply
 Manufacture of basic metals
 Manufacture of chemicals and chemical products
 Manufacture of coke and refined petroleum products
 Manufacture of computer, electronic and optical products
 Manufacture of electrical equipment
 Manufacture of fabricated metal products, except machinery and equipment
 Manufacture of machinery and equipment n.e.c.
 Manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers
 Manufacture of other non-metallic mineral products
 Manufacture of other transport equipment
 Manufacture of paper and paper products
 Manufacture of rubber and plastic products
 Manufacture of wood/products of wood and cork, except furniture; manufacture of straw articles and plaiting materials
 Mining and quarrying
 Other professional, scientific and technical activities; veterinary activities
 Other service activities
 Printing and reproduction of recorded media
 Publishing activities

Note: Table shows the 20 industries that are included in the input-output-weighted analyses in Section 3.1. Industry
descriptions come from the NACE Rev. 2 European statistical classifications of economic activities.



       We first restrict the data to observations that are at the NUTS2 region level, including country-level
data for countries which consist of only a single NUTS2 region. We exclude all pairs that include a
region with the unknown indicator "XX" or the extra-regio territory indicator "ZZ".8 From here, we
are faced with four challenges: 1) As confirmed by the authors' correspondence with Eurostat, when
the data appear as "non-available" in a particular row, this could mean either that there was no rail
traffic or that the relevant country did not provide the data.9 2) There are a number of hypothetical
region pairs missing, even between countries that did report data elsewhere. 3) For some international
region pairs, there are data reported from both countries on the same train flows, and the reported tons
of goods transported does not match. 4) The 2015 data are reported by 2013 NUTS2 region, while our
social connectedness and distance data are by 2016 NUTS2 region.
       With respect to challenges 1 and 2, we use the fact that each country reports data to Eurostat in two
intermediate data sets: one for domestic transport of goods and another for international transport of
goods. To identify countries that submitted a particular set of data in a particular year, we group the
data by the reporting country, year, and whether the region pair is international or domestic. We then
generate a list of countries that had at least one non-missing entry in each year/domestic-international
group. These lists are provided in Table C.2. When "non-available" values are reported by a country
that did not report data elsewhere in the year/domestic-international group, we treat the observation
as missing and exclude it. When "non-available" values are reported by a country that did report data
8 Observations with these two codes makeup 4.9% of tonnage transported in the data.
9 In
   some instances, countries report the data to Eurostat, but flag them as confidential so that they are not included in the
 public release. We always treat these data as missing in our final analysis.


                                                            C.2
elsewhere in the group, we treat this value as a zero (no traffic). Additionally, for countries that reported
data in a particular group, we fill any missing region pairs (i.e. pairs that are not in the data) in the
group with zeros. Together, these assumptions handle challenges 1 and 2.
        For each international region pair, there still remain two possible reports: one from each of the
regions' home countries in the pair. In instances when only one country reports the data, we take the
non-missing value from the reporting country. However, there are a number of instances when each
country reports data for the same international region pair (challenge 3). In these instances, we take
the average of the two reports.10 Finally, to update the data to the 2016 NUTS2 regions (challenge 4)
we build a crosswalk using the history of NUTS information provided by Eurostat.11 In instances when
a 2013 NUTS2 region split into multiple regions, we set the tons of goods transported in each of the
2016 NUTS2 observations equal to the corresponding 2013 NUTS2 region tons of goods transported,
multiplied by the region's 2015 population share (i.e. we assume that tons of goods transported in each
of these regions is proportional to the 2015 population).

                    Table C.2: Rail Freight Data Availability By Reporting Country

 Reporting                         Domestic      International         Reporting                     Domestic       International
 Country                            Data             Data              Country                        Data              Data
 Albania                               N               N               Lithuania                         Y               Y
 Austria                               N               N               Luxembourg                        Y               Y
 Belgium                               N               N               Malta                             N               N
 Bulgaria                              Y               Y               Montenegro                        N               N
 Croatia                               Y               Y               Netherlands                       Y               N
 Cyprus                                N               N               Norway                            Y               Y
 Czech Republic                        Y               Y               Poland                            Y               Y
 Denmark                               Y               Y               Portugal                          Y               N
 Estonia                               Y               Y               Romania                           Y               N
 Finland                               Y               Y               Serbia                            N               N
 France                                N               N               Slovakia                          Y               Y
 Germany                               Y               Y               Slovenia                          Y               Y
 Greece                                N               N               Spain                             Y               Y
 Hungary                               N               N               Sweden                            N               N
 Iceland                               N               N               Switzerland                       N               N
 Ireland                               Y               Y               North Macedonia                   N               N
 Italy                                 Y               Y               Turkey                            Y               N
 Latvia                                Y               Y               United Kingdom                    N               N
 Liechtenstein                         N               N

 Note: Table shows the rail goods transportation data availability by reporting country and by type of trade (domestic or
international). Y (N) indicates the data are (not) available. The table only shows availability at the reporter level, not whether
any regions from this country are included in the final analysis. For example, although Austria did not report international
data in 2015, pairs that include an Austrian region and a region in a country that did report international data in 2015 are
nevertheless included.




10 Infew instances, a "third-party" country will report transport between regions in two other countries. We exclude these
   observations from our analysis.
11 Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/nuts/history



                                                                 C.3
D        International Asset Holdings and Social Connectedness
In this section, we examine the relationship between international asset holdings and social connected-
ness. We obtain asset holdings from the Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey (CPIS) released by
the IMF. The CPIS data contain information on cross-border holdings of portfolio securities (equities
and debt securities). The value of asset holdings is reported in USD. We focus on data reported for the
end of the year 2018 and replace missing values with the corresponding value at the end of year 2017 if
available. In the original CPIS data, there are 87 countries that report their foreign asset holdings. From
this set of countries we drop 8 countries or regions that are not in our trade data set; namely Aruba,
Netherlands Antilles, Bermuda, China, Guernsey, Gibraltar, Jersey, Isle of Man. Furthermore, we drop 6
countries ­ Albania, Bangladesh, Bolivia, Liberia, Palau, Singapore ­ from the list of asset holding coun-
tries, because these countries report very few asset holdings.12 We follow the literature and also exclude
11 financial offshore centers: the Bahamas, Bahrain, Cayman Islands, Cyprus, Lebanon, Luxembourg,
Macao, Malta, Mauritius, Panama, Vanuatu. As a last step, we replace missing values with zeros. Our
final data set contains 62 countries that report their assets in 161 countries. The regression specification
we estimate is similar to the one for aggregate trade:

                    Ai, j = exp  1 log(SCIi, j ) +  2 log( Distancei, j ) +  3 Gi, j + i + j ·    i, j ,            (D.1)

where Ai, j denotes the asset holdings of country i in country j. Gi, j is a vector of controls, i is a reporting
country fixed effect, and j is a fixed effect for the country of the underlying assets.
        The results from estimating regression D.1 are presented in Table D.1. Column 1 shows that the
country fixed effects alone explain 95% of the variation in bilateral portfolio holdings. In column 2, we
introduce the social connectedness between each country pair as an additional regressor. The elasticity
of asset holdings with respect to social connectedness is 0.60, which is close the elasticity we estimated
for bilateral trade (0.68). This suggest that a 1% increase in the social connectedness is associated with a
0.60% increase in cross-border portfolio holdings. Column 3 excludes social connectedness, but controls
for the geographical distance between countries. The explained variation is slightly below the variation
that is explained using only social connectedness. The same is true when we use other gravity variables
in column 4. When we simultaneously control for geographical distance and social connectedness in
column 5, the elasticity of asset holdings with respect to social connectedness drops from 0.60 (column
2) to 0.37 (column 5). Similarly, the elasticity with respect to distance drops from -0.57 to -0.30. In
column 7 we include the full set of control variables. The elasticity with respect to social connectedness
remains fairly stable and is highly economically significant. The estimates suggest that a doubling of
social connectedness between two countries is associated with a 27% increase in bilateral asset holdings
controlling for a host of control variables.


12 Wedrop these countries, because we do not want to make the assumption that all unreported asset holdings of these coun-
 tries are zero.


                                                           1
                     Table D.1: Gravity Regressions - International Asset Holdings

                                                           Dependent variable: Bilateral Asset Holdings
                                     (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)             (6)            (7)
 log(SCI)                                      0.604                                        0.366                         0.273
                                                (0.078)                                     (0.082)                        (0.071)

 log(Distance)                                               -0.566                        -0.300         -0.433          -0.266
                                                              (0.069)                       (0.087)        (0.079)         (0.079)

 Common border                                                               1.005                         0.336          0.266
                                                                              (0.102)                       (0.083)        (0.067)

 Common official language                                                     0.212                        0.308            0.171
                                                                             (0.159)                       (0.157)         (0.154)

 Common colonizer                                                            1.503                         0.947          0.857
                                                                              (0.477)                      (0.391)         (0.326)

 In colonial relationship                                                     0.168                          -0.139         -0.205
                                                                             (0.198)                        (0.487)        (0.439)

 Rep. and Asset Country FE            Y            Y             Y              Y              Y              Y              Y
 R2                                 0.950        0.968         0.967          0.965          0.970          0.970           0.971
 N                                  9,920        9,920         9,920          9,920          9,920          9,920           9,920
 N - Explained by FE                 404          404           404            404            404            404             404

Note: Table shows results from regression D.1. The dependent variable is the value of assets of country j that country i
holds. Controls include the logarithm of SCI, the logarithm of distance, a common border dummy, a common official language
dummy, a dummy indicating whether the two countries had a common colonizer post 1945, a dummy indicating whether the
pair of countries was in a colonial relationship post 1945 and 500 quantiles of SCI. All specifications include fixed effects for the
reporting country and the asset country. Standard errors are clustered by the reporting country and the asset country. Our final
data contain 62 countries that report their assets in 161 countries, which yields 9,920 observations. Observations that are fully
explained by the fixed effects are dropped before the PPML estimation. Significance levels: *(p<0.10), **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).




                                                                 2
