                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   REVERSING RESERVES

                                        Parag A. Pathak
                                        Alex Rees-Jones
                                        Tayfun Sönmez

                                      Working Paper 26963
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26963


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




We are grateful to Ori Heffetz, Ted O'Donoghue, Germán Reyes, Ran Shorrer, Jason Somerville
and seminar audiences at Cornell University and Pennsylvania State University for helpful
conversations. We thank the National Science Foundation and the Wharton Behavioral Lab for
financial support. The project described in this paper relies on data from surveys administered by
the Understanding America Study, which is maintained by the Center for Economic and Social
Research (CESR) at the University of Southern California. The content of this paper is solely the
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of USC, UAS,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Parag A. Pathak, Alex Rees-Jones, and Tayfun Sönmez. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Reversing Reserves
Parag A. Pathak, Alex Rees-Jones, and Tayfun Sönmez
NBER Working Paper No. 26963
April 2020
JEL No. C9,D47,D9

                                          ABSTRACT

Affirmative action policies are often implemented through reserve systems. We contend that the
functioning of these systems is counterintuitive, and that the consequent misunderstanding leads
individuals to support policies that ineffectively pursue their goals. We present 1,013 participants
in the Understanding America Study with incentivized choices between reserve policies that vary
in all decision-relevant parameters. Many choices are rationalized by a nearly correct decision
rule, with errors driven solely by the incorrect belief that reversing the processing order has no
effect. The prevalence of this belief helps to explain otherwise surprising decisions made in field
applications of reserve systems.

Parag A. Pathak                                  Tayfun Sönmez
Department of Economics, E52-426                 Boston College
MIT                                              Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive                                140 Comm. Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02142                              Chestnut Hill, MA, 02467
and NBER                                         tayfun.sonmez@bc.edu
ppathak@mit.edu

Alex Rees-Jones
Cornell University
Economics Department
404 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14850
and NBER
arr34@cornell.edu




An online appendix is available at: http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26963
                                     Reversing Reserves

   Market organizers commonly seek to advantage some group in the course of an assignment
procedure. Seats at a school may be granted according to a lottery, but with the desire to
admit a comparatively large fraction of local students. Positions at a job may be granted
according to a measure of merit, but with easier access granted to members of historically
underrepresented groups. Visas may be granted in the order that applications are received,
but with some desire to prioritize the allocation of visas to the most educated applicants.
   Distributional goals like these are often pursued through the deployment of a reserve
system. In such a system, some of the objects being allocated are reserved for the group
targeted for preferential treatment. When reserve slots are processed, the members of the
targeted group with the highest priority receive them. When unreserved slots are processed,
members of any group (targeted or otherwise) are admitted in order of their priority.
   Despite their prevalence, the theoretical performance of reserve systems has only recently
been thoroughly explored. As has become clear in this recent work (see, e.g., Dur et al., 2018;
Dur, Pathak and S¨
                 onmez, 2019; Pathak, Rees-Jones and S¨
                                                      onmez, 2020), the functioning of
these systems is complex. With this complexity comes the possibility that constituencies
adopting reserve systems might not fully understand them, opening the possibility of adopt-
ing systems that run counter to the constituency's stated goals. And indeed, as we discuss
in Section 2, in several of the large-scale applications of these systems--such as in Boston's
public school system and in the H-1B visa system for U.S. immigration--key stakeholders
have come to support policies that are comparatively ineffective at advancing the admission
of their own constituency. These stakeholders additionally fail to detect cases when adminis-
trators unilaterally change or neglect to specify important features of the system--with the
administrator's decisions at times driven by confusion as well.
   In this paper we consider a simple hypothesis: that misguided preferences over reserve
policies are largely driven by a specific form of misunderstanding. We are motivated by the
belief that the importance of processing order in reserve systems is highly counterintuitive.
As is shown in Dur et al. (2018), the order in which positions are processed influences the
degree of advantage conferred to the target group in a manner of comparable importance to
the number of positions that are reserved. By processing reserve seats last, the same degree
of affirmative action can be achieved with many fewer positions reserved. Constituencies


                                              2
                                      Reversing Reserves

that do not appreciate this fact could deploy reserve systems in a manner that significantly
blunts the degree of affirmative action achieved by a reserve of a fixed size.
   To test this hypothesis, we deployed a preregistered online experiment to 1,013 mem-
bers of a nationwide survey panel that is approximately representative on a broad range of
demographic variables. In this experiment, subjects faced simple scenarios mirroring two
high-profile applications of reserve systems: allocation of seats at a high school or allocation
of work visas. In the scenarios, subjects are members of a group that will have positions
reserved. Subjects face financial incentives to maximize the chance that their admission is
attained in a simulation. They then choose how they would like the reserve system to be
administered, selecting from pairs of policies that differ in the both the number of seats
reserved and in the order that the reserve seats are processed.
   Our experiment was designed to reveal the rate at which subjects adopt several competing
decision rules. In our empirical model, the population consists of individuals choosing from
a rich set of potential choice functions. These choice functions dictate which policy the
subject prefers given the number of seats assigned to both the "reserves-first" and "reserves-
last" policies. If subjects choose optimally, they switch from preferring the reserves-first
policy to preferring the reserves-last policy when the number of reserves-first seats surpasses
a known threshold. Optimal behavior then leads to a discontinuity in choice probability at
that threshold, and the size of the discontinuity identifies the fraction of decisions made by
application of that choice function. Similarly, if subjects understand that more seats are
better but treat processing order as irrelevant, they switch from preferring the reserves-first
policy to preferring the reserves-last policy when the number of reserves-first seats surpasses
the number of reserves-last seats. This na¨
                                          ive behavior then leads to a discontinuity in choice
probability at that different threshold, and again the size of the discontinuity identifies the
fraction of decisions made by applying that choice function.
   Our results illustrate that subjects often miss the importance of processing order. Our
primary estimates suggest that 3% (s.e. = 2pp) of subjects apply the optimal decision rule;
we are unable to reject the hypothesis that the optimal decision rule is never applied. In
contrast, we estimate that 40% (s.e. = 2pp) of subjects adopt a decision rule that responds to
reserve size but treats processing order as irrelevant. The widespread adoption of this decision


                                               3
                                         Reversing Reserves

rule helps explain the frequency of experimental decisions that are not payoff maximizing
for subjects.
      Beyond documenting the prevalent belief that processing order does not matter, we also
document an important correlate of this belief: cognitive ability. Perhaps surprisingly, sub-
jects with higher education, subjects with higher performance on cognitive ability tests exter-
nal to our survey, and subjects with a higher performance on comprehension tests within our
survey all show a greater likelihood of adopting our misguided decision rule of interest. This
contrasts with a common finding in the behavioral market design literature that misreaction
to matching-mechanisms' incentives is more prevalent among those of lower cognitive ability
(see, e.g., Basteck and Mantovani, 2018; Rees-Jones, 2018; Rees-Jones and Skowronek, 2018;
Shorrer and S´
             ov´
               ag´
                 o, 2018; Rees-Jones, Shorrer and Tergiman, 2020; Hassidim, Romm and
Shorrer, 2020). In this instance, however, the finding may be rationalized by noting that
adoption of this decision rule reflects a general understanding of incentives in this procedure.
Our decision rule of interest is almost sophisticated, missing one subtle component of large
ultimate importance.
      This paper builds on a long tradition of using lab-experimental methods to test for
understanding of matching mechanisms (see, e.g., Chen and S¨
                                                           onmez, 2006; Calsamiglia,
Haeringer and Kljin, 2010; Echenique, Wilson and Yariv, 2016; Rees-Jones and Skowronek,
2018).1 Within this literature, these findings reinforce a growing body of work showing large
potential for misunderstanding. While clear and transparent explanation of a matching
procedure is often thought to be sufficient for widespread understanding to arise, our results
suggest that this is insufficient in reserve systems. These findings mirror similar results
showing that misunderstanding of the deferred-acceptance or top-trading-cycles algorithms
persists even in settings with substantial training and feedback (Ding and Schotter, 2017;
Guillen and Hakimov, 2018; Rees-Jones and Skowronek, 2018). Of course, there remains
some possibility that an effective method of training could be discovered, but the pursuit of
this method in these related environments has seen limited success.
      Two forces lead us to worry that eliminating the problem will be challenging. First,
  1
    For a recent review of experimental examinations of matching markets, see Hakimov and K¨
                                                                                           ubler (2019).
For a recent review of the interaction between market design and behavioral economics, see Chen et al.
(2020).


                                                   4
                                     Reversing Reserves

our findings with regard to cognitive ability clearly indicate that this is not analogous to
a small, careless mistake that would easily be resolved by more careful thinking. Training
people out of this mistake requires teaching them careful consideration of relatively subtle
statistical selection problems--a class of problems that remains challenging even for the
highly educated. Second, and relatedly, the individuals who run the market may often not
understand the importance of these issues, or, worse yet, may be actively incentivized to
foster misunderstanding. In such cases, reliance on the internal provision of training and
advice will clearly be insufficient to ensure that the final policy adopted efficiently pursues
the goals of the populace adopting it. In the conclusion, we further discuss these issues and
some potential means to overcome them.
    The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 1 we present a brief review of the theory of
reserve systems. In Section 2 we describe several field applications in which the complete
understanding of reserve systems appears suspect. In Section 3 we formally present our
candidate models of decision rules and our econometric strategy for identifying their rate of
adoption. In Sections 4 and 5 we describe the design and deployment of our experiment. In
Section 6 we present results. In Section 7 we conclude.



1     Theoretical Importance of Reserve Order
In this section, we briefly present existing theoretical results on the functioning of reserve
systems. This summary primarily draws upon the work of Dur et al. (2018).


1.1    Decision Environment

Consider a setting in which some number of objects must be allocated. For concreteness,
say the objects to be assigned are seats at a school. The school has n seats available, and in
the absence of reserve considerations would assign these seats to applicants according to a
linear priority order (for example, outcomes of a standardized test or results from a lottery).
However, this school wishes to provide some advantage to a particular group of applicants.
Call this group the reserve applicants. Call those outside of this group the general-category
applicants.

                                              5
                                       Reversing Reserves

   To help advantage the reserve applicants, the school labels nr of their n seats as reserved
seats (with 0 < nr < n). The remaining n - nr seats are open seats.
   To determine the assignment of seats at the school, the school fills seats sequentially one
at a time. When processing an open seat, the school admits the student with the highest
priority among all those not yet admitted. Reserve-category status is not considered. When
processing a reserved seat, the school admits the reserve applicant with the highest priority
among all those not yet admitted. General-category applicants are ineligible for these seats.
   To fully specify the assignment procedure, the sole remaining requirement is to specify
the processing order for reserved and open seats. Conceptually, any permutation is possible:
one could process one reserved seat, followed by seven open seats, followed by two reserved
seats, and so on. In practice, however, these systems are commonly administered in one of
two configurations: processing all reserve seats either prior to all open seats or after all open
seats. We will restrict attention to these two extremal policies.


1.2    Comparative Statics of Interest

In a system like that just specified, two key comparative statics govern the degree of advan-
tage conferred to the reserve group.

   Seat-number comparative static: Hold fixed the priority order and the processing
    order. Increasing the number of reserved seats weakly increases the number of admitted
    reserve students.

   The seat-number comparative static captures an obvious and intuitive determinant of
assignments: saving more seats for a group helps the group. While some may harbor the
intuition that this is the only relevant comparative static, a second more subtle comparative
static follows from the work in Dur et al. (2018).

   Processing-order comparative static: Hold fixed the priority order and the number
    of reserved seats. Switching from processing the reserved seats first to processing the
    reserved seats last weakly increases the number of admitted reserve students.

   Two forces contribute to the result in the processing-order comparative static. The first is
a selection effect. When reserved seats are processed last, reserve applicants are admitted in

                                               6
                                       Reversing Reserves

the first-stage processing of open seats at a rate determined by their distribution of priorities
relative to general-category applicants. Except for differences in priorities, competition for
the open seats is effectively a level playing field between the two groups. In contrast, when
reserved seats are processed first, the highest-priority members of the reserve group are
removed from the applicant pool before the processing of the open seats. The competition
for open seats is therefore between all members of the general category and the comparatively
low-priority members of the reserve group, tilting admissions in favor of the general-category
applicants.
    The second force driving the processing-order comparative static is a composition effect.
To illustrate, notice that when reserve seats are processed last, competition for the open
seats is between all general category applicants and all reserve applicants. In contrast, when
reserve seats are processed first, competition for open seats is between all general-category
applicants and the reserve applicants with nr group members already removed. In the latter
situation, reserve applicants make up a smaller portion of the total applicant pool. As a
result, even in the absence of selection effects, admissions are again tilted in favor of the
general-category applicants.
    These two forces result in benefits to the reserve applicants if reserved seats are processed
last. Ultimately, the quantitative benefit from choosing this processing order depends on a
variety of factors, including the number of members of each applicant group and the nature
of the priority ordering used. As we will see in the following section, this impact has been
large in several field applications of interest.



2     Motivating Field Environments
In this section we briefly review two of the field environments that motivate our study.
In each of these environments a reserve system is used for an assignment procedure, with
some evidence that at least some stakeholders appear to harbor misunderstanding of the
importance of processing order.




                                                   7
                                     Reversing Reserves

2.1    The Boston Public School Match

In 1999 Boston Public Schools (BPS) abandoned its use of racial and ethnic criteria for
school admissions, instead adopting a system that reserves half of each schools' seats for
students from the neighborhood surrounding the school, known as the walk-zone.
   Leading up to the adoption of the reserve system, different groups of parents, school offi-
cials, and involved community members advanced two opposing viewpoints. One viewpoint
emphasized the importance of unrestricted school choice. Under this viewpoint, allowing
families to select the school that best suits their needs was critically important. Such a pol-
icy would be particularly valuable to families living near a low-performing school, granting
them a means of escaping a bad default assignment. An alternative viewpoint emphasized
the importance of neighborhood schooling. Under this viewpoint, drawing the student popu-
lation from the school's walk-zone benefits the local community and the students themselves.
Such a policy would be particularly valuable to families living near a high-performing school,
allowing them to avoid intense competition for seats by restricting the admission of non-local
students.
   Consideration of these two opposing viewpoints led to the reservation of 50 percent of
seats for walk-zone students. The remaining seats were open to all. Public accounts of
this policy described it as an "uneasy compromise between neighborhood school advocates
and those who want choice" (Daley, 1999). And indeed, the superintendent's memorandum
presenting this policy explicitly described his desire to accommodate these two viewpoints,
and his belief that the new policy "provides a fair balance" (BPS, 1999).
   Ultimately, this reserve system was abandoned in 2013. This abandonment was motivated
in part by the discovery that this system only minimally advanced the admission of walk-zone
applicants. Because a 50-50 reserve split was incorrectly (but widely) perceived to be an
accommodation to both sides, the superintendent advocated for the usage of a new system
that would be "honest and transparent" (Johnson, 2013).
   The understanding that this system was misleading arose due to the intervention of mar-
ket designers. In the course of studying this reserve system, Pathak and S¨
                                                                          onmez discovered
that software code used to determine the final assignment processed all reserved seats before



                                              8
                                      Reversing Reserves

all open seats. By simulating the assignments that would have been achieved with different
policies in the preceding years, they found that the 50% reserve resulted in minimal walk-
zone advantage relative to a policy with zero seats reserved. These results were delivered
in testimony to the Boston School Committee (Pathak and S¨
                                                         onmez, 2013), and minutes of
subsequent meetings of the BPS Executive Action Committee acknowledged that the results
described would constitute an "unintended consequence that is not in stated policy" (EAC,
2013).
   In summary: at the time of the adoption of the reserve system following the 1999 reform,
processing order was neither discussed nor specified in the formal policy documents. With
this component unspecified, a programmer's arbitrary choice of processing order eliminated
nearly all benefits meant to be conferred to walk-zone applicants. This elimination appears
to have been unrecognized by advocates for walk-zone preferences for more than a decade,
and led to rapid reform once it was discovered.
   For further details, this reserve system and its history are documented in Dur et al.
(2018). The overview above draws on this work.


2.2      U.S. H-1B Visa Assignment

The U.S. H-1B Visa program enables American companies to temporarily employ foreign
workers with specialized knowledge. When this program was amended in the H-1B Visa
Reform Act of 2004, a reserve system was adopted to help to promote the granting of visas
to highly educated applicants. As specified by this legislation, 20,000 visas would be reserved
specifically for applicants with qualifying advanced degrees in addition to the 65,000 visas
that would be open to all eligible applicants.
   While this legislation precisely specifies the number of reserve seats, it does not specify
details of processing order. The specification of the number of reserve seats is consistent
with legislators understanding the seat-number comparative static described in Section 1.
Omitting the specification of processing order is consistent with either a lack of understanding
of the processing-order comparative static, or with a desire to leave this dimension unspecified
to give the administrators of the H-1B program a means of modifying the degree of advantage
given to highly educated applicants (henceforth, "skill bias") without need for congressional

                                                 9
                                       Reversing Reserves

approval.
   Consistent with the possibility of underappreciating the importance of processing order,
the administration of this reserve system was modified several times in the years after its
initial deployment. These changes were at least in part (and potentially entirely) motivated
by logistical considerations; the fact that these reforms had large effects on the degree of
skill bias was not publicized nor formally acknowledged.
   At the time of first adoption of this reserve system, priority was determined by the time
of receipt of the visa application. The agency tasked with the enactment of this policy, the
U.S. Customs and Immigration Service (USCIS), initially chose to implement the policy as
reserves-first. This decision is perhaps surprising: as is documented in Pathak, Rees-Jones
and S¨
     onmez (2020), this version of implementation results in the lowest degree of skill bias of
all policies that comply with the legislation. This decision contrasts with the stated intents
of the legislation itself, which was explicitly to introduce skill bias into this system.
   Despite this initial plan, passage of the relevant act occurred at a time when applica-
tion processing was already well underway. The reserves-first implementation was therefore
considered impossible to administer in the first year of the new regime, and as a result the
reserve seats were processed last. This version of implementation results in the highest de-
gree of skill bias of all policies that comply with the legislation (matched only by a later
policy adopted in FY2020). This policy was applied for one year only (FY2005), before the
reserves-first version was adopted for a window of three years (FY2006-2008).
   Over this initial window of the new regime, seats began filling earlier and earlier in the
application season. This became a critical concern by FY2008, when all open seats were
filled by applications that arrived on the first day that petitions would be considered. This
motivated the regime adopted in FY2009 under which arrival time was replaced by lottery
numbers as a means of determining priority. In contrast to the other settings considered
thus far, a separate priority (i.e., lottery number) was generated for the reserve seats and
the seats open to all. This adjustment eliminates the selection effect induced by processing
order described in Section 1, but not the composition effect. As such, the USCIS's decision
to continue processing advanced-degree applications first preserved a comparatively lower
degree of skill bias in this system.


                                               10
                                       Reversing Reserves

   This regime persisted until its recent modification by the Trump administration. In the
2017 Buy American and Hire American Executive Order, the administration instructed the
USCIS to switch to a reserves-last system for the explicit purpose of maximizing the degree
of skill bias. Upon its implementation in FY2020, this restored the degree of skill bias in
the reserve system to that achieved in its very first year--the theoretically maximal degree
possible of all policies that comply with the legislation. Unlike prior reforms, discussion of
this policy in the Federal Register included consideration of the effect of processing order on
skill bias, as well as discussion of the policy's legality.
   Across this period of 15 years, four different regime changes were put into effect, each
influencing the level of skill bias. The reform proposed in 2017 was explicitly enacted for
the intent of increasing the share of H-1Bs granted to highly educated applicants; esti-
mates suggest that this reform granted approximately 5,000 more of the fixed 85,000 H-1Bs
to advanced-degree applicants (an increase of 16% to the rate of advanced-degree awards
granted). While this change is indeed substantial, we note that both of the preceding
reforms--enacted without explicit intent to affect skill bias and seemingly motivated by
logistical considerations--had even larger effects. The change applied between FY2005 and
FY2006 is estimated to have resulted in a reduction of 14,000 annual awards granted to
advanced-degree applicants. The change applied between FY2008 and FY2009 is estimated
to have resulted in an increase of 9,000 annual awards granted to advanced-degree applicants.
Unlike the 2020 reform, the effect of these reforms on skill bias was not contested despite
being more pronounced.
   Given that changes to immigration policy are often fiercely contested in U.S. politics,
we view the lack of discussion and debate of these earlier reforms as suggesting that their
importance was not widely understood.
   For further details, this reserve system and its history are documented in Pathak, Rees-
Jones and S¨
           onmez (2020). The overview above draws on this work.


2.3    Summary

Across these field applications we observe motivated groups of stakeholders supporting or
enacting versions of reserve policies that appear in contrast with their stated goals. In

                                                 11
                                     Reversing Reserves

each case, we believe the history of these policies supports the idea that confusion regard-
ing the functioning of reserve systems impacted the manner in which they were deployed.
Furthermore, these two cases are not alone. There is similar potential for confusion in the de-
ployment of reserve systems for school admissions in Chicago (see Dur, Pathak and S¨
                                                                                   onmez,
2019) and in New York City (NYCDOE, 2019). And as we will further discuss in Section
7, such worries are also present in the constitutionally mandated reserve systems for school
choice and government employment used in India.
    While we believe that misunderstanding is widespread in these environments, we note that
in all cases mentioned above that claim is only speculative. This motivates our development
of the experimental paradigm in this paper, aimed to directly measure understanding of these
systems in a broad swath of the U.S. populace. Should misunderstanding of the importance
of processing order be found to be prevalent in this population, it lends credence to the idea
that citizens considering immigration policy or parents considering their children's school
assignment may fail to correctly assess these policies.



3     Identifying the Perceived Importance of Processing
      Order
In this section we present our empirical model for inferring understanding of reserve systems.
The experiment that we present in the remainder of the paper was tailored for utilization of
this empirical model.
    Consider an individual (i) facing an assignment problem like that described in Section
1. This individual is a member of the group that qualifies for reserve seats. He is presented
with two potential policies that could be applied to determine admissions: a "reserves-first"
(RF) policy with sRF reserve seats, and a "reserves-last" (RL) policy with sRL reserve seats.
Beyond seat numbers and processing order, all other features of decision environment are
held fixed. The individual's task is to choose between these two policies.
    In this environment, the key objects of interest are individuals' choice functions, denoted
by C : (sRF , sRL )  [0, 1]. Given an assigned number of reserve seats for both the RF and



                                              12
                                           Reversing Reserves

the RL policies ((sRF , sRL )  R2
                                + ), a choice function outputs the individual's probability

of indicating a preference for the RF policy. When holding fixed all other elements of the
assignment problem, such a function completely characterizes an individual's observable
preferences. At times we will consider a choice function adopted by a specific individual, in
which case it will be subscripted by i.
       If the choice function were observed, it would provide a direct means of testing an indi-
vidual's understanding of the theory described in Section 1. For any given number of RL
seats, there exists a threshold number of RF seats (T  (sRL )) such that the RF policy will
be most favorable to the individual if and only if its number of reserve seats exceeds the
threshold. An individual who correctly analyzes the environment and chooses the policy in
his best interest would therefore adopt the choice function
                                                 
                                                 1 if sRF > T  (sRL )
                               C  (sRF , sRL ) =                      .
                                                 0 if sRF  T  (sRL )


Adopting this choice function would serve as strong evidence in support of a sophisticated
understanding of the decision problem.2
       Just as observation of the choice function would allow for the identification of sophis-
tication, it is also useful for identification of the type of misunderstanding that we have
posited. Consider next the choice function that would be observed among individuals who
understand the seat-number comparative static but who are unaware of the processing-order
comparative static. Such individuals adopt the choice function
                                                     
                                                     1 if sRF > sRL
                                  C n (sRF , sRL ) =                .
                                                     0 if sRF  sRL

This choice function dictates choosing the policy that offers more seats, regardless of order.
The superscript n denotes the fact this choice function reflects a degree of na¨
                                                                               ivet´
                                                                                   e in his
understanding of incentives.
   2
    Note that at the point of indifference (sRF = T  (sRL )) any choice probability can be rationally sup-
ported. The choice functions written in this section resolve the indeterminacy at the point of indifference
arbitrarily. In our experimental design, we intentionally do not present such cases to respondents, motivating
our choice to not belabor the details of behavior at this point in this theory.



                                                     13
                                      Reversing Reserves

   Given these considerations, we formulate our approach to testing based on the aggregate
choice function that would arise from a heterogeneous population of individuals making these
decisions. Consider an individual's average choice function :


                             ¯i (sRF , sRL ) = p C  (sRF , sRL ) +
                             C                  i

                                              pn  n RF
                                               i C (s  , sRL ) +

                                                    pk  k RF
                                                     i C (s  , sRL ).
                                                k


In this framework, we allow for the individual to probabilistically apply different choice func-
tions at different times. The term pi denotes the individual's probability of using the optimal

choice function; pn
                  i denotes the probability of using the na¨
                                                           ive choice function of interest; the
pk
 i terms denote the probabilities of using a set of other arbitrary choice functions. This set

of other choice functions is included in the framework for two reasons. First, these other
choice functions can capture other reasoned heuristics. Second, their inclusion also provides
a means of modeling mistakes. For example, an individual who always tries to apply the
optimal choice rule but periodically fails to apply it correctly could be modeled as having,
e.g., pi = 0.9 with the remaining 10% probability weight placed on choice function that as-

signs a 50-50 chance to each choice regardless of the seats assigned. As another example, an
individual who attempts to apply the optimal choice rule but assesses the optimal threshold
T  (sRL ) with error could be modeled with a choice function that replaces the discontinuity
at T  (sRL ) with a smooth transition "around" T  (sRL ). Because of the inclusion of these al-
ternative choice-functions, the interpretation of p       n
                                                   i and pi is the probability that the subject

applies the exact choice function of interest, as opposed to the choice function with standard
notions of error allowed.
   To arrive at our final model for estimation, consider the aggregate choice function C :
(sRF , sRL )  [0, 1] that would be observed in a population of individuals with heterogeneous
average choice functions.




                                               14
                                      Reversing Reserves




                                ¯i (sRF , sRL )|sRF , sRL ] = E[p
             C (sRF , sRL ) = E[C                                     RF
                                                                 i ]C (s , sRL ) +

                                                             E[pn   n RF
                                                                i ]C (s  , sRL ) +

                                                                  E[pk   k RF
                                                                     i ]C (s  , sRL ).
                                                              k


   In the equation above, E is used to denote the expectation taken over all individuals i.
In this formulation, the relative weight placed on each choice function is its average rate of
use in the population. Under the additional assumption that all auxiliary choice functions
are continuous in the neighborhood of the sets of (sRF , sRL ) values satisfying sRF = sRL and
sRF = T  (sRL ), these average rates of use may be isolated through the following relationships:


                    lim C (T  (sRL ) + , sRL ) - C (T  (sRL ) - , sRL ) = E[pi]             (1)
                    0

                            lim C (sRF + , sRL ) - C (sRF - , sRL ) = E[pn
                                                                         i ].               (2)
                             0



   To help in understanding these equations, consider the case where we hold sRL constant
and vary sRF . As sRF crosses the threshold T  (sRL ), the optimal choice function dictates
that the probability of choosing the reserves-first policy changes discontinuously from zero
to one. Note that for the na¨
                            ive choice function, as well as all auxillary choice functions (due
to the continuity assumption above), no such discontinuity exists. Thus, any discontinuity
observed at this point may be attributed to the rate of use of the optimal choice function.
Furthermore, the magnitude of the discontinuity will simply be the predicted change in choice
probability (known to be one) multiplied by the fraction of individuals applying the optimal
choice function (E[pi ]). This explains the reasoning behind equation (1) above; equation (2)

holds by an analogous argument applied at the point where sRF crosses the threshold sRL .
   These equations imply that the average rate of use of these choice functions may be
estimated by standard regression-discontinuity techniques applied at the two thresholds of
interest. We designed our experiment to apply this empirical strategy.




                                                15
                                               Reversing Reserves

4          Experimental Design
In this section we present the details of our experiment. Complete text of the experiment,
along with details of all data collected, are available in the UAS Experimental Codebook.3


4.1          Overview of Design

The primary purpose of our experiment is to present subjects with incentivized scenarios
posing choices between RF and RL policies. In these scenarios, subjects are presented
with either a high-school admissions problem or a work-visa allocation problem. Seats are
assigned based on a randomly generated priority, but with some number of seats set aside
for the reserve group. The subjects know they are members of the reserve group, and are
given a series of choices between an RF and an RL policy with varying reserves. One of their
choices is used to determine the final policy that is applied, and if the subject is allocated a
school seat or visa as a result of this policy they are given a $5 bonus payment.
         These data allow us to examine the probabilities of choosing the RF policy across a range
of (sRF , sRL ) values, thus allowing us to deploy the empirical strategy described in Section
3.
         On average, our study took 8 minutes to complete. Subjects received a baseline payment
of $5 and an average bonus of $3.91.


4.2          Walk-through of Survey Content

To concretely illustrate the nature of our experimental task, we present the text associated
with the school-choice version of our experimental protocol. The visa version of this pro-
tocol is extremely similar, with differences primarily comprised of replacing references to
"students" with references to "workers" and references to "seats at a school" with references
to "work visas."
         The study began with an overview:

           In this study, we are interested in understanding how you think about school
     3
         Available at https://uasdata.usc.edu/index.php, listed as Survey 210.



                                                        16
                                      Reversing Reserves

      admissions policies. Your bonus payment for taking this study will be affected
      by a simulation of such policies. You will have the opportunity to choose some
      features of the policy.

   Followed by a further elaboration:

      To begin, we will explain the type of school admissions policies we will be con-
      sidering.

      Imagine you are applying for a position at an elite high school. Only 100 students
      will be admitted. The school considers two factors when deciding whom to admit.
      First, it considers a randomly generated lottery number. Second, it considers
      group composition.

      There are two groups of people, the Blue students and the Green students. Due
      to their historical underrepresentation, the school particularly values admitting
      Blue students.

   As is illustrated by this text, "Blue" and "Green" labeling dictated group membership.
We chose to avoid the usage of more standard racial, gender-based, or income-based group
definitions to avoid inviting the subject to rely on beliefs about the desirability of affirmative
action for these groups. While the two groups are always labeled Blue and Green, we
randomly assign which of these groups is chosen to be favored.
   This introduction was followed by an initial presentation of possible reserve policies:

      In order to meet its goal of admitting Blue students, the school is considering
      two policies. In this example, both policies will involve reserving 30 seats for the
      Blue students. When applying either policy, students will be admitted one at a
      time.

      Admissions will happen in two stages.

      In one stage, seats are available to both Blue and Green students. When each
      seat is assigned, it will be given to the student with the highest lottery number
      who has not yet been admitted. Color will not be considered.

                                               17
                                    Reversing Reserves

     In the other stage, seats are reserved for Blue students only. When each seat is
     assigned, it will be given to the Blue student with the highest lottery number
     who has not yet been admitted.

     The policies that the school is considering differ in the order of these stages.

     Policy 1: Save the last 30 seats for the Blue students.

        · Stage 1: The first 70 seats will be assigned to the 70 students who have the
          highest lottery numbers, regardless of color.

        · Stage 2: The remaining 30 seats will be assigned to the 30 Blue students
          who have the highest lottery numbers of all Blue students not yet admitted.

     Policy 2: Save the first 30 seats for the Blue students.

        · Stage 1: The first 30 seats will be assigned to the 30 Blue students who
          have the highest lottery numbers.

        · Stage 2: The remaining 70 seats will be assigned to the 70 students who
          have the highest lottery numbers of all students not yet admitted, regardless
          of color.

   The assignment of the RF and RL policies to policy 1 and policy 2 was randomized at the
subject level. After the initial randomization, these number assignments remained constant
throughout the survey.
   To test for understanding of the policies presented, this screen contained four comprehension-
check questions following the text above. Across these four questions, the subject was asked
to consider several students and select who among them would be selected for the first seats
assigned by policy 1 and 2 and the last seats assigned by policy 1 and 2. To motivate careful
thought, a $1 reward was given if all four comprehension-check quesitons were answered
correctly. After answers were submitted, a feedback screen reported the correct answer for
each question and highlighted where mistakes were made.
   At this stage, subjects were introduced to our primary experimental task:




                                              18
                                  Reversing Reserves

  To better understand how you think about these policies, we will now present
  you with a series of choices. Your choices will affect the bonus you earn in this
  study.

  In each choice, you will face a simulated school admissions process like the one
  that we have been considering. You must choose between two policies describing
  different ways of assisting the Blue students. In the simulation, you are one of the
  Blue students, so you will benefit if you choose the policy that is most favorable
  for this group.

  Across these policies, we will vary both the order in which reserve seats are
  processed and the number of seats that are reserved.

And, on the following page:

  Simulation Details:

  All six of the choices you face will have the same basic set-up.

  Consider a setting where 200 students are applying to the school. 100 students
  are Blue and 100 students are Green. You are one of the Blue students.

  As before, only 100 students can be admitted. Admissions decisions are still made
  based on lottery numbers and on diversity considerations. Lottery numbers will
  be simulated by assigning each student a random number between 1 and 100.
  All students' numbers, regardless of color, are randomly drawn from the same
  uniform distribution, so there are no differences across groups in lottery numbers.
  If two students have the same lottery number, ties will be broken randomly.

  Compensation Details:

  One of the six choices you make will be randomly selected to be the choice that
  "counts." After you answer all six questions, we will reveal the question that
  "counts" and simulate the admissions decision in the scenario you chose. If you
  are admitted based on this simulation, an additional $5 will be added to your
  bonus.


                                          19
                                     Reversing Reserves

     Since you do not know which of the six choices will be chosen to "count," it is in
     your best interest to answer all six carefully.

   Following these screens, subjects faced six screens presenting choices as described above.
Each screen took the following format:

     Consider the following two ways in which the school could implement its admis-
     sions policy.

     Policy 1: Save the last (sRL ) seats for the Blue students.

        · Stage 1: The first (100-sRL ) seats will be assigned to the (100-sRL ) students
           who have the highest lottery numbers, regardless of color.

        · Stage 2: The remaining (sRL ) seats will be assigned to the (sRL ) Blue stu-
           dents who have the highest lottery numbers of all Blue students not yet
           admitted.

     Policy 2: Save the first (sRF ) seats for the Blue students.

        · Stage 1: The first (sRF ) seats will be assigned to the (sRF ) Blue students
           who have the highest lottery numbers.

        · Stage 2: The remaining (100-sRF ) seats will be assigned to the (100-sRF )
           students who have the highest lottery numbers of all students not yet ad-
           mitted, regardless of color.

     As a Blue student, which policy would you prefer?

   As described in the prior section, our empirical strategy relies on observing choices be-
tween RF and RL policies for a range of (sRF , sRL ) tuples. To that end, these values were
randomly generated for each choice the subject faced. The six decisions presented six values
of sRL , assigned deterministically but in random order: 40, 44, 48, 52, 56, and 60 seats. For
each of these scenarios, the required number of seats needed for the RF policy to be optimal
was 70, 72, 74, 76, 78, and 80, respectively. For each sRL value, sRF was uniformly sampled
from 13 potential values: -5, -3, -1, +1, +3, or +5 seats relative to both the optimal and

                                              20
                                             Reversing Reserves

na¨
  ive thresholds, as well as an additional point approximately between the two thresholds.
By sampling values in the vicinity of our two thresholds of interest, this design ensures that
we are well powered to deploy our proposed regression-discontinuity approach.
        Following these choices, one of the six scenarios was randomly selected for simulation
as described above. Their chosen policy was implemented, their admissions decision was
simulated as specified, and the results of the simulation and the associated payoffs were
announced. The study then concluded with a brief elicitation of their degree of interest in
the survey and an opportunity for free-response comments on the study.4


4.3         Preregistration

Our experiment was preregistered on aspredicted.com. For reference, the preregistration
document is included in the Online Appendix. In this document, we specify our exact
hypotheses of interest and the details of our regression discontinuity approach. We also
commit to our sample size and exclusion restrictions. While we will also present some
exploratory analyses that were not preregistered, we do not deviate from this preregistration
in our presentation of primary results.



5         Experimental Deployment and Sample

5.1         The Understanding America Study

We deployed our experiment in the Understanding America Study (UAS).5 The UAS is an
online panel of American Households recruited for their demographic diversity. The advan-
tage of this panel is its established infrastructure for reaching a broad group of respondents
and its substantial efforts to achieve representative sampling. Additionally, by using this
panel we can merge data from many other surveys into our analyses, which enables our
analysis of the demographic predictors of the behaviors we study.
        The UAS panel is recruited through address-based sampling. Respondents are targeted
for recruitment based on a random draw from postal records. Once targeted for recruitment,
    4
        The inclusion of these final two questions is standard practice in the Understanding America Study.
    5
        For a detailed description of the UAS, see Alattar, Messel and Rogofsky (2018).

                                                       21
                                     Reversing Reserves

substantial efforts to integrate the individual into the panel are pursued. After an initial
attempt to recruit a targeted respondent to the panel, follow-up continues over an approx-
imately six-month period. This follow-up involves attempts to resolve common barriers to
survey participation. For example, targeted respondents who do not have internet access
are provided with a tablet and broadband internet access so they may participate. Addi-
tionally, all UAS materials are available in Spanish to allow for the recruitment of solely
Spanish-speaking targeted respondents.
   In principle, such a sampling approach can approximate census-level quality in represen-
tative sample construction. In practice, however, recruitment of this variety is challenging,
and the ultimate panel-entry rate among targeted respondents typically ranges from 10% to
15%. This does introduce the possibility of selection in the sample. However, the UAS's
quarterly collection of a very broad set of demographics permits testing for selection on
observables, and the construction of sample weights that correct for it. Selection on unob-
servables remains possible. Despite this concern, we note that the procedures described here
minimize this worry relative to other commonly-used experimental platforms. Furthermore,
we will reconstruct our primary analyses making use of sampling weights aimed to correct
for these issues in Section 6.3.1.


5.2    Deployment

Our survey was deployed to the UAS population in December 2019 and January 2020.
With the help of UAS personnel, our study was integrated into their online platform and
translated into Spanish for the relevant respondents. To achieve our targeted sample size
of 1,000 responses, the UAS drew a random subsample of 1,500 respondents from their full
panel. These 1,500 respondents received invitations both through the UAS online platform
and by mail to take our study, with periodic reminders provided. The survey was closed
shortly after the target sample size was attained, ultimately resulting in 1,013 complete
observations and a 67% response rate.




                                             22
                                     Reversing Reserves

5.3    Demographic Properties of Sample

Table 1 summarizes basic demographics of our respondents. As is seen across panels of this
table, our sample is demographically diverse. However, due to the selection that occurs in the
process of recruitment to online panels, our sample differs from the general U.S. population
in several ways. Compared to the general adult population of the U.S., members of our
sample are somewhat more likely to be female, married, and U.S. citizens. Our sample also
skews to be somewhat older and somewhat more likely to be white.
    While there is some evidence of selection on observables influencing the general UAS
population, we find little evidence that such effects influence which UAS participants respond
to our survey. In the final column of this table, we present formal tests for differences in
the demographic variable across respondents who did and did not participate. Only two
of the nine tests conducted reach significance at traditional levels. First, participants are
slightly less likely to be employed (59.2% vs 66.1%; p = 0.01), consistent with the possibility
that those not working have more time to complete online studies. Second, participants
who completed our study have a notably different age distribution. On average, those who
completed our survey are 3.79 years older than those who did not (s.e. = 0.90; p = 0.00).
    We additionally examine the geographic distribution of respondents. Figure 1 presents
the number of observations obtained for respondents residing in each U.S. state. As is
observed in the figure, our survey reached a broad populace: the only U.S. state with no
representation in our sample is Delaware. Furthermore, we see no evidence of selection by
geography: a chi-squared test for differences in state of residency by completion status yields
a p-value of 0.24. A similar lack of selection is observed based on place of birth (by country:
p = 0.42; by state: p = 0.28).



6     Experimental Results

6.1    Primary Test of Misguided Policy Choices

In this subsection, we present the preregistered tests of our primary hypothesis: that a
substantial fraction of respondents mistakenly believe that processing order does not matter


                                              23
                                      Reversing Reserves

in these assignment mechanisms.
   To test this hypothesis, we estimate models of the form


                         Yij =  +  n Nij +   Oij + f (sRF    RL
                                                       ij , sij ) +   ij .                   (3)


Subscripts i and j index the respondent and choice number, respectively. In this model, the
dependent variable Y is an indicator for whether the RF policy was chosen in a given binary
choice. Variables Nij and Oij provide the value of Y dictated by the na¨
                                                                       ive or optimal choice
                                                              RL
function. Formally, Nij = I (sRF    RL                 RF
                              ij > sij ) and Oij = I (sij > T (sij )), where I () denotes

the indicator function taking the value of 1 when the statement in parentheses is true.
(sRF    RL                                                                          RF    RL
  ij , sij ) denote the number of seats assigned to each policy, as before, and f (sij , sij )

denotes a function meant to control for the number of each type of seats assigned. Across
specifications, we will consider a variety of approaches to handling this control, including
modeling f as a local polynomial, a cubic spline, or a fifth-order polynomial.
                                                                                             
   Interpreted in light of our model from Section 3,  n serves as an estimate of E[pn
                                                                                    i ] and 

serves as an estimate of E[pi ]. Despite this interpretation, the model above does not constrain

the sign of  n or   to be positive. In principle, this means that these estimates could yield
invalid probabilities. We would interpret the detection of a (statistically significant) negative
value for these parameters as a rejection of our framework for type estimation.
   Table 2 presents our estimates of this model. In columns 1 and 2, we report estimates
of this model with the data restricted to sRF
                                           ij values that are within 5 seats of the two
thresholds. This amounts to a simple difference in means of the rate of choosing the RF
policy when sRF
             ij is immediately above versus immediately below each threshold. Formally,

no term controlling for f (sRF    RL
                            ij , sij ) is included in the regression; instead, the influence of

this term assumed to be nearly constant for a sufficiently narrow region of sRF
                                                                             ij values, and

the estimation sample is correspondingly restricted to a narrow region near the threshold.
   Interpreting the results from column 1, we see that on average, the RF policy is 40
percentage points (s.e. = 2pp) more likely be chosen when the number of RF seats is just
above (versus just below) the number of RL policy seats. This finding is consistent with
respondents using the na¨
                        ive choice function for 40% of decisions.


                                               24
                                             Reversing Reserves

      In contrast, column 2 demonstrates that on average, the RF policy is only 3 percentage
points (s.e. = 2pp) more likely to be chosen when the number of RF seats is just above
(versus just below) the threshold from the optimal decision function. This coefficient is
statistically distinguishable from zero (p = 0.03), but quantitatively suggests that effectively
no respondents apply the optimal choice function.
      In the remaining columns of the table, we provide a variety of approaches to formally
estimating these regression discontinuities through more technical means. All approaches
provide similar results. Varying our approach to controlling for f (sRF    RL
                                                                     ij , sij ) with a local

polynomial, a spline, or a high-order polynomial, our estimates of the rate of utilization of the
na¨
  ive choice functions range from 36 to 37%. Across these specifications, the estimated rate
of utilization of the optimal choice function never exceeds 3%, and is generally statistically
indistinguishable from zero.
      Figure 2 helps in visualizing these results. Recall that, for a fixed number of RL seats,
the number of RF seats takes values of -5, -3, -1, +1, +3, or +5 seats relative to each of the
thresholds of interest. One additional point was sampled between the two thresholds. In
this figure, each dot illustrates the average rate of choosing the RF policy for the the number
RF seats illustrated on the x-axis, with the six dots above each point summarizing choices
under the six RL seat amounts. The solid line presents a fitted spline analogous to that in
column 5 of Table 2. This figure illustrates a stark change in the rate of choosing RF at the
na¨
  ive threshold of interest. In contrast, there is no apparent discontinuity at the threshold
where it should occur among optimizing agents.
      In principle, our estimates of the rate of choice-function adoption could differ across
the school-choice and visa-allocation versions of our scenarios. In practice, however, the
estimated differences are small in magnitude. Appendix Table A1 reproduces Table 2, re-
stricting the data to each of these scenarios in turn. The estimates in these tables typically
are within 3 percentage points of the estimates of Table 2,6 and the difference never exceeds
6 percentage points. Furthermore, in our primary specifications, we find no statistically sig-
nificant interaction between the estimated discontinuities and the scenario version (p = 0.18
and p = 0.63 for the column 1 and 2 analysis, respectively). In short, we find no evidence of
  6
      More specifically, they are no larger than 3 percentage points for 17 of the 24 estimates.


                                                       25
                                      Reversing Reserves

differences in choice-rule adoption based on the framing of the scenario.


6.1.1   Summary of Primary Findings

We estimate that a large fraction of respondents (40% in our primary regression) adopt a
choice function that reflects an understanding of the seat-number comparative static while
reflecting ignorance of the processing-order comparative static. These respondents under-
stand that more seats are better, but do not see the benefits of the reserves-last design.


6.2     Predictors of Optimal and Na¨
                                    ive Choices

In this subsection we explore cross-group differences in policy choices. In contrast to the
previous section, which presents pregistered analyses, most analysis here is exploratory.
   To help assess the predictors of the choice functions of interest, we reconduct the primary
analysis of Table 2 while allowing the estimated parameters to vary by group. Interpreted
in light of our empirical model, this allows us to infer the rate of use of the two focal choice
functions within each group.
   Formally, we estimate regressions of the following form.


                          Yij =  +  n Nij + Gi + Gi × Nij +        ij                        (4)

                           Yij =  +   Oij + Gi + Gi × Oij +        ij                        (5)


In these regressions, the term Gi is an indicator variable indicating membership in the
relevant group. In groups where classification is not binary, we will split the group into two
approximately equal-sized bins. For example, in one regression the group variable will take
the value of 1 for male respondents; in another, it will take the value of 1 for respondents
of age 50 or greater. The terms Gi × Nij and Gi × Oij capture the interaction between this
indicator variable and the choice function of interest (which itself is an indicator variable
taking the value of 1 when the relevant threshold is surpassed). Except for the terms involving
Gi , these regressions are the same as columns 1 and 2 of Table 2. Importantly, we maintain
the same sample restriction, estimating the regression only from observations in which the
number of RF seats is no more than 5 away from the relevant threshold.

                                              26
                                      Reversing Reserves

6.2.1   Predictors of Adopting the Na¨
                                     ive Choice Function

We begin by examining estimates of equation (4), capturing differences in the rate of applica-
tion of the na¨
              ive choice function. When interpreting the results of this estimating equation,
note that term  measures the difference in the discontinuity seen at the na¨
                                                                           ive threshold,
and thus estimates the difference in the rate of adoption of the na¨
                                                                   ive choice function between
those in and out of this group. Furthermore, note that in the immediate vicinity of the na¨
                                                                                          ive
threshold, the optimal decision is to choose the RL policy. Since a negative value of  indi-
cates a higher propensity to choose the RL policy, this should be interpreted as indicating
on average "better" decisions by this group, holding fixed their rate of adoption of the na¨
                                                                                           ive
choice function.
   Estimates of these equations are presented in Table 3. In panel A, we split the sample by
the demographic groups previously considered in Table 1. We omit only the variables related
to race or citizenship status: these classifications yield small subgroups in which our analysis
is substantially less powered. Examining the estimates of the term  , we find some evidence of
cross-group differences in the rate of adopting the na¨
                                                      ive choice function. Focusing attention
on estimates reaching significance at the 5% -level, we find that married respondents are 10
percentage points more likely at adopt this choice function (s.e. = 4pp); working respondents
are 9 percentage points more likely (s.e. = 4pp); respondents with an Associate's degree
or above are 20 percentage points more likely (s.e. = 4pp); and respondents with annual
household income of at least $50,000 are 21 percentage points more likely (s.e. = 4pp). No
statistically significant differences are found based on gender or age.
   We next examine the estimates of  , which inform the general decision quality in the
region near the na¨
                  ive threshold among those not adopting the na¨
                                                               ive choice function. Again,
we find some evidence of variation across the groups considered. Focusing attention on
estimates reaching significance at the 5% -level, we find that married respondents are
6 percentage points more likely to correctly choose the RL policy (s.e. = 3pp); working
respondents are 8 percentage points more likely (s.e. = 3pp); respondents with an Associate's
degree or above are 15 percentage points more likely (s.e. = 3pp); and respondents with
annual household income of at least $50,000 are 14 percentage points more likely (s.e. = 3pp).



                                              27
                                          Reversing Reserves

Again, we find no statistically significant difference based on gender or age.
       The finding that education has comparatively large predictive power for the rate of use of
the na¨
      ive choice function suggests that the choice function's adoption may relate to cognitive
performance. And indeed, general measures of cognitive performance have been shown to
predict mistakes in the use of assignment systems in prior literature (see, e.g., Basteck and
Mantovani, 2018; Rees-Jones, 2018; Rees-Jones and Skowronek, 2018; Shorrer and S´
                                                                                ov´
                                                                                  ag´
                                                                                    o,
2018; Rees-Jones, Shorrer and Tergiman, 2020; Hassidim, Romm and Shorrer, 2020). To
further explore this hypothesis, we make use of several cognitive performance measures
available in the UAS. The first is a measure of numeracy, derived from subjects' ability to
complete a sequence of numbers with one number missing. The second is a measure of verbal
abilities, in which subjects must choose the correct completion to an analogy. The third is
a measure of vocabulary, in which the subject must name an item that is indicated in a
picture. Finally, we analyze a measure of subjective numeracy, constructed from a series of
Likert-scale questions directly eliciting self-assessments of mathematical abilities (e.g., "How
good are you at working with fractions?").7 These measures come from independent modules
deployed to the UAS sample with broad coverage. Each measure is available for at least 92%
of our sample.8 In addition to these measures, we analyze one measure internal to our study
that is plausibly related to cognitive ability: passing the first-stage comprehension check
described in Section 4.2.
       Panel B of Table 3 reports analysis of these variables. Across these measures, a consistent
picture emerges: higher cognitive performance is associated with a higher rate of adoption of
the na¨
      ive choice function. These results are statistically significant for all cognitive measures
except that measuring the breadth of vocabulary--the measure we believe to be the least
related to general logical ability. Furthermore, these differences are large in magnitude:
higher ability respondents are estimated to be 17 to 31 percentage points more likely to adopt
the na¨
      ive decision rule across measures, excluding the measure of breadth of vocabulary.
Individuals with high cognitive performance appear to face a pitfall when attempting to
   7
     For complete documentation of these measures, see Moldoff and Becker (2019). We apply the aggregate
Wave-12 measures discussed under topics N, V, and A: n12nsa score, a12vea score, and v12pva score. Ad-
ditionally, the subjective numeracy measure discussed below is documented under Topic C: c12avgsnsscore.
   8
     Whenever these data are used, we conduct our analyses on all observations for which these measures are
available, consistent with an assumption that these measures are missing at random.


                                                    28
                                         Reversing Reserves

choose optimal policies. Note, however, that if this pitfall is avoided, those of high cognitive
performance choose comparatively well in this region: estimates of  reveal that, among
those not responding to the threshold, the rate of incorrectly choosing the RF policy is
lower.9


6.2.2      Predictors of Adopting the Optimal Choice Function

We next examine estimates of equation (5), which measure differences in the rate of appli-
cation of the optimal choice function. This analysis and its interpretation closely follow that
just presented above.
       Table 4 shows relatively small differences in the rate of optimal choice function adoption
across groups. Interaction effects that are significant at the 5% -level are only detected by
marital status (married respondents are 8 percentage points less likely to adopt the optimal
choice function; s.e. = 3pp) and by education (respondents with an Associate's degree or
higher are 7 percentage points more likely to adopt the optimal choice function; s.e. = 3pp).
Despite this difference by education, insignificant and quantitatively small differences are
seen for all cognitive measures examined in panel B--i.e., these results do not suggest that
more cognitively able respondents are more likely to adopt the optimal choice function.
Overall, while some cross-group differences are observed in the baseline rate of choosing the
RF policy (as measured by parameter  ), these analyses generally support a much smaller
degree of heterogeneity in adoption of the optimal choice rule as compared to the na¨
                                                                                    ive
choice rule. This lower degree of heterogeneity is perhaps expected given the lower overall
adoption of the optimal choice rule.


6.2.3      Implications for Payoff Maximization

Our results on cross-group differences in choice-function adoption motivate a practical ques-
tion: how do these differences in inferred perceptions of optimal behavior map into the rate
of optimal choice? Since the optimal choice function is estimated to be rarely adopted, the
   9
    For comparability to the panel A results, panel B presents analyses of a discrete above/below median
indicator for the cognitive performance measures. Note that the same qualitative results arise from exami-
nation of the underlying continuous measures (see Appendix Tables A2 and A3).




                                                   29
                                      Reversing Reserves

answer to this question ultimately depends on the performance of the na¨
                                                                       ive choice function
as compared to other suboptimal choice functions in use.
   In Table 5 we explore this question with particular focus on the differences in outcomes
arising due to cognitive performance. This table reports the estimated average marginal
effects arising from a series of logit regressions. In these regressions, the dependent variable
indicates whether the respondent chose the payoff maximizing option of the two policies
presented. The independent variables are the group affiliations considered in the previous
two subsections.
   In the first three columns we present results from regressions predicting choice of the
payoff-maximizing option using our three objective cognitive measures individually. These
regressions suggest that individuals with above-median cognitive performance are more likely
to choose the payoff-maximizing option. However, effect sizes are modest, with point esti-
mates ranging from 1pp to 3pp. Statistically significant effects are found only for the first
two measures. As illustrated in columns 4, 5, and 6, in which all three measures are included
simultaneously along with additional controls, the average marginal effect of these variables
either remains stable or declines in magnitude.
   Overall, these results illustrate a consequence of conflicting findings from the prior
sections. On the one hand, cognitive performance predicts adoption of the na¨
                                                                            ive choice
function--a behavior that pushes respondents to make suboptimal choices in some circum-
stances. On the other hand, conditional on not responding to the threshold associated with
the na¨
      ive choice function, cognitive performance predicts better choices in the vicinity of
the na¨
      ive threshold. The results presented here show the the benefits of wisdom inherent in
this latter finding are mostly offset by the costs of the na¨
                                                            ivet´
                                                                e in the former. Adopting a
choice function that is nearly optimal--failing to attend only to the processing-order com-
parative static--offsets the comparatively high rate of payoff-maximizing choices that would
be realized in the absence of this pitfall.
   Finally, column 7 of this table presents results using only our demographic variables to
predict choices. Again, cross-group heterogeneity is shown to be quite modest.




                                              30
                                          Reversing Reserves

6.2.4    Summary

Taken together, these findings demonstrate that misunderstanding of the importance of
processing order in reserve systems is a prevalent, cross-group phenomenon. Across a wide
range of demographic variables available, some variation in decision rules exists; however,
adoption of the na¨
                  ive choice function remains common among all groups studied. Indeed,
the subjects who traditionally would be expected to be the most likely to avoid this pitfall--
the highly educated, the comparatively rich, the cognitively able, and those who pass our
internal comprehension checks--are those that are most susceptible to it in our data.


6.3     Robustness Considerations

6.3.1    Sample Weights

As emphasized in Section 5, the UAS follows a variety of good practices to target repre-
sentative sampling, but some selection into the survey panel remains. To help assess the
importance of this issue to our primary estimates, we reproduce all main analyses with the
inclusion of sampling weights (see Appendix Section B.1). These weights, constructed by
the UAS, account for both the adaptive sampling procedure used in recruitment as well as
any differences in attrition seen across measured demographics (for complete details, see
Angrisani et al. (2019)). In these analysis, the reweighting has very modest effects on our
estimates, and all qualitative findings remain--a reassuring finding, albeit one that is to be
expected given the small differences between our sample and the general population.


6.3.2    Importance of Stake Size

In our experiment, the financial reward for admission in the simulation is a $5 bonus pay-
ment.10 We believe that this is lower than the material rewards to the real-world assignment
of a desirable school seat or a work visa. While our incentives are in line with standard
practices in the experimental market design literature, a reader may reasonably question
  10
    Furthermore, the return to making an optimal choice is less than $5, since the optimal choice does
not guarantee admission and the suboptimal choice does not rule it out. Across all scenarios presented in
our study, the average difference in the probability of assignment across the two policies was 13 percentage
points, translating to an increase in the expected value of an optimal choice of 63 cents.



                                                    31
                                     Reversing Reserves

whether the quality of the decisions would respond to increases in the financial consequences
of suboptimal choice.
   Whether the misunderstanding of assignment procedures observed in the lab predicts
mistakes in the field is a topic of ongoing debate. Several studies support the possibility:
for example, Shorrer and S´
                          ov´
                            ag´
                              o (2018) find that financially consequential mistakes are
observed in the Hungarian college-admissions match, and Rees-Jones and Skowronek (2018)
find that medical students show misunderstanding of the deferred acceptance algorithm
immediately after their participation in the high-stakes medical residency match that uses
it. In contrast, Artemov, Che and He (2020) find that the mistakes made in the Austrialian
college-admissions match are often payoff irrelevant, suggesting a more minimal role for the
field-importance of misunderstanding.
   Despite this ongoing debate, we believe that the applications that motivate our study
are less susceptible to criticism of mismatched stakes size than the environments considered
above. Note that in most studies of suboptimal behavior in assignment mechanisms, the
object of interest is the preferences that the individual submits to the assignment system.
In the field, incorrect submission of these preference can easily lead to consequences much
larger than can be feasibly recreated in the lab. In contrast, our study concerns policy
preferences: i.e., how individuals would like a reserve system to be implemented. In the field,
the implementation of these systems rarely directly responds to an individual's preference.
Instead, that preference can determine which candidates or administrators the individual
supports or how the individual votes--both behaviors with much lower (and potentially zero)
payoff consequences. In short, we believe that the intuitions we elicit in our experiment are
comparatively likely to be the same intuitions that a parent would call upon in a school-
board meeting when discussing a school-choice policy, or the same intuitions that a citizen
would call upon when considering the wisdom of H-1B policy. Of course, further study would
be needed to formally validate this belief, however plausible it may be.


6.3.3   Confirmatory Evidence from Amazon Mechanical Turk

Prior to the deployment of our study, we ran two large-scale pilots on Amazon Mechanical
Turk (MTurk). Both pilots examined the "school choice" version of the study, as presented

                                              32
                                      Reversing Reserves

above. The first pilot assessed the rate of optimal choice in a single scenario with non-
randomized seat numbers. The second pilot was nearly identical to the study deployed in
the UAS, with the exception of excluding the visa version of the scenarios. Across these two
pilots, we find extremely similar qualitative and quantitative results as reported in this paper.
Due to the higher incentives offered in our UAS study, along with the comparatively high
quality of the UAS panel's recruitment procedures, we believe the results derived from this
sample are the most credible. However, we view the fact that closely analogous results arise
on MTurk reassuring, serving as a replication among a different sample. For documentation
of these pilots, see the Online Appendix.



7     Discussion
In this paper, we have examined the general understanding of reserve systems held by the U.S.
populace. Among participants in the Understanding America Study, we found that a very
small fraction adopted the choice function that reflects a fully sophisticated understanding
of these systems. In contrast, a plurality of respondents--40% in our leading specification--
adopt a nearly sophisticated choice function, demonstrating general understanding of the
decision environment but a lack of understanding of the importance of processing order.
In contrast to many other environments, we do not find that this misguided behavior is
tempered by education or cognitive ability, but rather that it is primarily driven by the
educated and cognitively able.
    Given the rapid proliferation of reserve systems--used to enact affirmative action poli-
cies in a wide variety of settings--the tendency for misunderstanding that we document is
unfortunate. We believe this misunderstanding serves as a primary explanation for several
surprising elements of the history of the school-choice reserve system in Boston and the
H-1B visa allocation system in the United States. Furthermore, we believe the potential
for this misunderstanding to influence policy (or policy's reception by the public) extends
well beyond these two examples. Indeed, when reserve systems are deployed, this type of
misunderstanding may be the rule and not the exception.
    When facing such a situation, a well-meaning market organizer may benefit from taking


                                               33
                                         Reversing Reserves

steps to help his constituency clearly assess the consequences of potential implementations
of a reserve policy. One potential solution that we view as promising is to have stakeholders
vote on policies with transparent forecasts of their degree of affirmative action provided.
Even the mere requirement to provide such a forecast imposes discipline on the process: a
forecast cannot be made without specifying processing order, eliminating the possibility that
this component will be left undefined. Furthermore, when the degree of affirmative action
is made transparent, we speculate that failures to pursue one's own best interests would be
reduced. As a concrete illustration, we believe that proponents of neighborhood schooling
in Boston would have been substantially less supportive of the original 50-50 reserve system
if it had been presented alongside forecasts showing its lack of advancement of walk-zone
students.
       Of course, information interventions like these are only possible when market organizers
actively and intelligently attempt to improve their constituents' understanding. If market
organizers themselves do not understand reserve systems, these steps will not be taken. As
was illustrated in the case of H-1B policy, it's not obvious that administrators are always
aware of these issues. However, as this literature continues to evolve and as market design-
ers continue their interactions with market organizers, we believe that the probability that
market organizers are informed will be higher. We hope that papers like this one will help.
       Even in cases where market organizers are informed, however, the assumption that they
will be motivated to debias the populace is a strong one. When policy makers benefit from
misunderstanding, we believe there is relatively little to stop them from using it to their
advantage. This may mark one of the most potentially costly implications of the behavior
we have documented.
       While our interpretation is only speculative, we believe that a version of this story played
out in recent reassessments of reserve policy in India.11 In India, a reserve for members
of historically disadvantaged castes is applied in some school-assignment and government-
job allocation procedures.12 The implementation of these reserves was considered in the
landmark Supreme Court case Indra Sawhney and others v. Union of India (1992). In this
  11
    For extensive market-design analysis of these systems see S¨
                                                               onmez and Yenmez (2019a,b).
  12
    Formally, the primary groups considered are the "scheduled castes," "scheduled tribes," and "other
backwards castes." Each label is precisely defined in law.


                                                  34
                                          Reversing Reserves

case, the court interpreted constitutional support for the "the reservation of appointments
or posts in favor of any backward class of citizens"13 to specify that a reserves-last policy
should apply, providing these groups with the most effective policy for achieving affirmative
action. It also specified that other reserves promoting equality of opportunity14 should be
implemented as reserves-first, granting them a lower degree of affirmative action for the same
number of seats. We view this court case as a rare demonstration of clear understanding of
the use of reserve order as a policy lever.
       In the lead-up to the 2019 election, this reserve system became the topic of public debate
and criticism. Many economically disadvantaged Indians do not come from a historically dis-
advantaged caste. Based on their economic disadvantage, it seemed unreasonable to many
that their admission was deprioritized relative to more affluent members of historically disad-
vantaged castes. In response to these concerns, incumbent President Modi widely publicized
his pursuit of a 10% reserve for the "economically weaker sections" (EWS). Partially moti-
vated by a desire to pass this policy before the spring election, the One Hundred and Third
Amendment of the Constitution of India went from its first presentation in the lower house
of parliament to its final passage in the upper house of parliament over a period of two days
in January, 2019. The EWS reserve policy took effect four days later.
       Despite its public support, this amendment and its passage received substantial criticism.
The process of passing the bill was rushed15 , and perhaps as a result the bill did not specify
the order in which this reserve would be processed. This omission is important, since one
reading of Indra Sawhney (1992) suggests that this policy would be implemented as reserves-
first.16 Similar to the application in Boston Public Schools, a reserves-first policy would not
                                           onmez, 2019). In a memo17 following shortly
be effective in these markets (Pathak and S¨
after passage of the amendment, the administration clarified that this should be internally
  13
     See Article 16(4) in the Constitution of India (1949).
  14
     As specified in Article 16(1) in the Constitution of India (1949).
  15
     A recent court case notes that copies of the bill were not furnished to members of parliament with
sufficient time for review, and that the parliamentary session was unexpectedly extended by one day to allow
for the bill's speedy passage. See R.S. Bharathi v. The Union of India (2019), Madras High Court.
  16
     This could be justified both by its potential classification as an equal opportunity provision, and by
the fact that adding an additional 10% of seats to the reserves-last group would exceed the mandated 50%
maximum on reserves. For public support of this opinion, see Khemka (2019).
  17
     Memo available here: https://dopt.gov.in/sites/default/files/ewsf28fT.PDF. Last accessed: 3/24/2020.




                                                    35
                                            Reversing Reserves

implemented as a reserves-last policy, leading to an immediate and ongoing battle over the
constitutionality of this policy.18
       The passage of this bill was perceived by some as a politically motivated attempt to woo
economically disadvantaged voters who did not qualify for the existing reserves.19 If these
portrayals are accurate--which we cannot guarantee, but do view as plausible--they belay a
shrewd reliance on misunderstanding of processing order. Given the unique legal precedents
in India, we believe that the likelihood that an EWS preference would be implemented as a
reserves-first policy would be known to informed politicians, as would be the lesser efficacy
of these policies. The results of this paper--perhaps already intuited by politicians--suggest
that at least some potential voters would be unaware of these nuances, instead only seeing
this policy as a step to help voters like them. Modi ultimately did win reelection, and while
this issue was widely publicized, we cannot say definitively if misunderstanding of processing
order played any role. However, we view the possibility as worrying.
       Our hope is that our work ultimately fosters transparent implementation of reserve sys-
tems in settings with potential for either manipulation or confusion.




  18
       See, e.g., Youth for Equality v. Union of India (2019).
  19
       See, e.g., Ashraf (2019), Dhingra (2019), Mathew (2019), or Mishra (2019).


                                                      36
                                   Reversing Reserves

References
Alattar, Laith, Matt Messel, and David Rogofsky. 2018. "An Introduction to the
  Understanding America Study Internet Panel." Social Security Bulletin, 78(2).

Angrisani, Marco, Arie Kapteyn, Erik Meijer, and Htay-Wah Saw. 2019. "Sampling
  and Weighting the Understanding America Study." Working Paper.

Artemov, Georgy, Yeon-Koo Che, and Yinghua He. 2020. "Strategic `Mistakes':
  Implications for Market Design Research." Working Paper.

Ashraf, Ajaz. 2019. ""The Supreme Court has Erred": Former Madras HC Judge
  K Chandru on EWS and Maratha Reservations." The Caravan. Available at:
  https://caravanmagazine.in/law/k-chandru-madras-hc-judge-ews-maratha-reservations-
  supreme-court, last accessed: March 24, 2020.

Basteck, Christian, and Marco Mantovani. 2018. "Cognitive Ability and Games of
  School Choice." Games and Economic Behavior, 109: 156 ­ 183.

BPS. 1999. "Modifications to Controlled Choice Student Assignment Plan, School Commit-
  tee Order, November 10." Available from the archives of the Boston School Committee.

Calsamiglia, Caterina, Guillaume Haeringer, and Flip Kljin. 2010. "Constrained
  School Choice: An Experimental Study." American Economic Review, 100(4): 1860­1874.

Chen, Yan, and Tayfun S¨
                       onmez. 2006. "School Choice: An Experimental Study." Jour-
  nal of Economic Theory, 127: 202­231.

Chen, Yan, Peter Cramton, John A List, and Axel Ockenfels. 2020. "Market Design,
  Human Behavior, and Management." NBER Working Paper 26873.

Daley, B. 1999. "Plan Drops Race Role in Enrollment, Compromise Misses Point, Critics
  Say." Boston Globe, B1, October 20.

Dhingra, Sanya. 2019. "Why Modi Government's Quota Move May Not Yield the Re-
  sults it Wants." The Print. Available at: https://theprint.in/india/governance/why-

                                           37
                                      Reversing Reserves

  modi-governments-quota-move-may-not-yield-the-results-it-wants/174197/, last accessed:
  March 24, 2020.

Ding, Tingting, and Andrew Schotter. 2017. "Matching and Chatting: An Experimen-
  tal Study of the Impact of Network Communication on School-Matching Mechanisms."
  Games and Economic Behavior, 103(C): 94­115.

Dur, Umut, Parag A. Pathak, and Tayfun S¨
                                        onmez. 2019. "Explicit vs. Statistical
  Preferential Treatment in Affirmative Action: Theory and Evidence from Chicago's Exam
  Schools." forthcoming, Journal of Economic Theory.

Dur, Umut, Scott Kominers, Parag A. Pathak, and Tayfun S¨
                                                        onmez. 2018. "Reserve
  Design: Unintended Consequences and The Demise of Boston's Walk Zones." Journal of
  Political Economy, 126(6).

EAC.     2013.    "Minutes     from     the   Meeting      of        the   Committee,   January
  14."   External     Advisory     Committee,      City         of     Boston,   Available   at:
  http://bostonschoolchoice.files.wordpress.com/2013/01/eac-minutes-1-14-2013.doc,
  last accessed: April 14, 2013.

Echenique, Federico, Alistair Wilson, and Leeat Yariv. 2016. "Clearinghouses for
  Two-Sided Matching: An Experimental Study." Quantitative Economics, 7(2): 449­482.

Guillen, Pablo, and Rustamdjan Hakimov. 2018. "The Effectiveness of Top-Down
  Advice in Strategy-Proof Mechanisms: A Field Experiment." European Economic Review,
  101(C): 505­511.

Hakimov, Rustamdjan, and Dorothea K¨
                                   ubler. 2019. "Experiments on Matching Mar-
  kets: A Survey." WZB Berlin Social Science Center Discussion Papers, Research Unit:
  Market Behavior SP II 2019-205.

Hassidim, Avinatan, Assaf Romm, and Ran I. Shorrer. 2020. "The Limits of Incen-
  tives in Economic Matching Procedures." forthcoming, Management Science.




                                              38
                                       Reversing Reserves

Johnson, Carol R. 2013. "Speech to Boston School Committee, March 13." Avail-
  able at: http://bostonschoolchoice.files.wordpress.com/2013/03/3-13-13-superintendent-
  sc-memo-on-assignment.pdf, last accessed: April 14, 2013.

Khemka,      Shreenath         A.    2019.   "The    State's   Social     Policy   on   Economic
  Disadvantage     is     Simply    Inconsistent."   The    Indian      Express.   Available   at:
  https://indianexpress.com/article/%20opinion/columns/124th-constitutional-
  amendment-bill-reservation-5534333/, last accessed: March 24, 2020.

Mathew, Pramod. 2019. "Ahead of Polls, India Clears Job and Educational Quotas for the
  Economically Weak." Quartz India. Available at: https://qz.com/india/1519912/modi-
  government-clears-10-quota-for-general-category-in-india/, last accessed: March 24, 2020.

Mishra, Satish. 2019. "Who Will Gain from 10% Reservation for EWS?" Observer Re-
  search Foundation. Available at: https://www.orfonline.org/expert-speak/who-will-gain-
  from-10-reservation-for-ews-47312/, last accessed: March 24, 2020.

Moldoff, Michael, and Andrew Becker. 2019. "UAS Comprehensive File Data Descrip-
  tion." USC Dornsife Center for Economic and Social Research Working Paper.

NYCDOE. 2019. "Diversity in our Schools." https://www.schools.nyc.gov/about-
  us/vision-and-mission/diversity-in-our-schools.

Pathak, Parag A., Alex Rees-Jones, and Tayfun S¨
                                               onmez. 2020. "Immigration Lottery
  Design: Engineered and Coincidental Consequences of H-1B Reforms." NBER Working
  Paper 26767.

Pathak, Parag A., and Tayfun S¨
                              onmez. 2013. "Recommendation on Algorithm Pro-
  cessing, Public Testimony to EAC." Available at: https://economics.mit.edu/files/16966.

Pathak,    Parag        A.,   and   Tayfun     S¨
                                                onmez. 2019. "Implementation Issues in
  10% Reservation." The Hindu. Available at: https://www.thehindu.com/opinion/op-
  ed/implementation-issues-in-10-reservation/article27130396.ece, last accessed: March 24,
  2020.


                                               39
                                    Reversing Reserves

Rees-Jones, Alex. 2018. "Suboptimal Behavior in Strategy-Proof Mechanisms: Evidence
  from the Residency Match." Games and Economic Behavior, 108: 317 ­ 330.

Rees-Jones, Alex, and Samuel Skowronek. 2018. "An Experimental Investigation
  of Preference Misrepresentation in the Residency Match." Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 115(45): 11471­11476.

Rees-Jones, Alex, Ran I. Shorrer, and Chloe Tergiman. 2020. "Correlation Neglect
  in Student-to-School Matching." NBER Working Paper 26734.

Shorrer, Ran I., and S´
                      andor S´
                             ov´
                               ag´
                                 o. 2018. "Obvious Mistakes in a Strategically Sim-
  ple College Admissions Environment: Causes and Consequences." SSRN Working Paper
  2993538.

S¨
 onmez, Tayfun, and Bumin Yenmez. 2019a. "Affirmative Action in India via Vertical
  and Horizontal Reservations." Working paper.

S¨
 onmez, Tayfun, and Bumin Yenmez. 2019b. "Constitutional Implementation of Verti-
  cal and Horizontal Reservations in India: A Unified Mechanism for Civil Service Allocation
  and College Admissions." Working paper.




                                            40
                                             Reversing Reserves


                      Table 1: Demographic Information and Sample Selection
                                            (1)        (2)          (3)                               (4)
                                              Survey Completion Status                        Test for Difference
                                        Complete Incomplete All Recruits
Basic Demographics
Female                                            56.2           57.2             56.5              p = 0.71
Married                                           58.4           59.1             58.7              p = 0.80
Working                                           59.2           66.1             61.4              p = 0.01
U.S. Citizen                                      97.9           97.9             97.9              p = 0.98
Hispanic or Latino                                10.8           13.6             11.7              p = 0.12
Race
   White Only                                     82.2           77.1             80.5
   Black Only                                      9.0           10.1             9.4
   Am. Indian or Alaska Native Only               1.3             2.3             1.6               p = 0.11
   Asian Only                                      2.8            2.7             2.7
   Hawaiian/Pacific Islander Only                  0.6            0.5             0.5
   Multiple Races Indicated                        4.3            7.2             5.2
Education
   < 12th grade                                    5.4           4.5              5.1
   High school grad.                              19.3           19.9             19.5
   Some college                                   20.0           25.1             21.7              p = 0.30
   Assoc. degree                                  13.6           13.3             13.5
   Bachelor's degree                              24.7           21.6             23.7
   Master's degree +                              16.9           15.6             16.5
Household Income
   < $10,000                                       6.7           7.2               6.9
   $10,000 - $24,999                              12.9           13.8             13.2
   $25,000 - $49,999                              21.5           21.9             21.6              p = 0.87
   $50,000 - $74,999                              18.2           17.8             18.1
   $75,000 - $99,999                              14.3           12.0             13.6
    $100,000                                      26.4           27.3             26.7
Age
   18-29                                          10.5           15.7             12.2
   30-39                                          19.3           21.3             19.9
   40-49                                          17.1           22.5             18.9              p = 0.00
   50-59                                          19.3           17.4             18.6
   60 +                                           33.9           23.1             30.4

  Notes: This table presents summary statistics characterizing the demographic features of our sample. With
  the exception of p-values, all numbers presented are the percentage of respondents with a given row's
  classification. The first panel characterizes a series of binary demographic variables, and the panels that
  follow present tabulations of individual categorical variables. The first column presents results for subjects
  included in our primary analyses. To help assess selection into our study, the second and third columns
  present results for the subjects who were contacted but did not complete the study and all contacted
  subjects, respectively. The final column provides p-values for chi-squared tests for differences in the
  distribution of the categorical variable by survey completion status.

                                                         41
                                            Reversing Reserves




             Table 2: Estimates of Choice Functions Governing Policy Preferences

                            (1)           (2)           (3)      (4)        (5)       (6)      (7)       (8)
  n : Nij                   0.40                       0.39                0.36      0.37      0.36      0.36
                           (0.02)                     (0.04)              (0.02)    (0.04)    (0.02)    (0.04)

   : Oij                                 0.03                    0.02      -0.01     0.03      -0.01     0.03
                                        (0.02)                  (0.03)    (0.02)    (0.03)    (0.02)    (0.03)

 Control for sRF (f)       Sample Restriction          Local Poly         Cubic Spline        5th-order Poly
 sRL Fixed Effects                No                       No                  Yes                  Yes
 sRL FEs × f                No        No               No      No          No      Yes          No      Yes
 Respondents                990       991             1013    1013        1013     1013        1013     1013
 N                         2865      2709             6078    6078        6078     6078        6078     6078
 R2                        0.155     0.001                                0.169 0.174         0.169 0.174

Notes: This table reports regressions of an indicator for choosing the RF policy on controls for the number
of seats reserved. Variables Nij and Oij provide the value that Y should take if the respondent adopts the
na¨ive or optimal choice function defined in Section 3. Across columns, we present a variety of approaches
to estimating the model Yij =  +  n Nij +   Oij + f (sRF        RL
                                                          ij , sij ) + ij , varying the means of controlling for
the number of seats assigned to the RF and RL policies through term f (sRF           RL
                                                                               ij , sij ). In columns 1 and 2, we
attempt to control for this term by assuming that it is approximately constant in a small enough window.
Each column restricts the data to observations in which the number of seats in the RF policy is within 5
seats of those provided in the RL policy. In columns 3 and 4, we present estimates arising from local
polynomial regressions, applying a rectangular kernel with a bandwidth of 3. In column 5, f (sRF          RL
                                                                                                    ij , sij ) is
approximated with a cubic spline over sRF                                                                   RL
                                         ij combined with fixed effects for the six possible values of sij . In
                                                                                       RL
column 6, the spline is interacted with the fixed effects, effectively allowing for sij -value-specific splines
over sRF
       ij . Columns 7 and 8 follow the same format as 5 and 6, replacing the usage of splines for
approximation with the usage of a 5th order polynomial. Standard errors, clustered by respondent, are
reported in parentheses.




                                                       42
                                          Reversing Reserves


            Table 3: Cross-Group Differences in Na¨
                                                  ive-Choice-Function Adoption

      Panel A: Demographic Groups
                      (1)        (2)                       (3)         (4)             (5)           (6)
 Group Indicates:    Male      Married                   Working      High            High          High
                                                                    Education       Income          Age
 : Constant                  0.30          0.32            0.33       0.37            0.37          0.28
                            (0.02)        (0.02)          (0.02)     (0.02)          (0.02)        (0.02)

  n : Nij                    0.39          0.35            0.35         0.29          0.28          0.40
                            (0.03)        (0.03)          (0.03)       (0.03)        (0.03)        (0.03)

  : Group                    -0.04         -0.06           -0.08        -0.15         -0.14         0.02
                            (0.03)        (0.03)          (0.03)       (0.03)        (0.03)        (0.03)

  : Interaction              0.03          0.10            0.09         0.20          0.21          0.00
                            (0.04)        (0.04)          (0.04)       (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.04)
 Respondents                  990           990             990          990           988           989
 N                           2865          2865            2865         2865          2859          2863
 R2                         0.164         0.165           0.166        0.176         0.174         0.163

 Panel B: Cognitive Performance Measures
                         (1)      (2)                      (3)         (4)                           (5)
 Cog. Measure:       Number Analogies                    Picture    Subjective                     Comp.
                     Sequence                            Vocab.     Numeracy                       Check
 : Constant             0.37      0.36                    0.31         0.34                         0.39
                       (0.02)    (0.02)                  (0.02)       (0.02)                       (0.02)

  n : Nij                    0.30          0.32            0.37         0.33                        0.24
                            (0.03)        (0.03)          (0.02)       (0.03)                      (0.03)

  : High Cog. Perf.          -0.17         -0.16           -0.06        -0.11                       -0.20
                            (0.03)        (0.03)          (0.03)       (0.03)                      (0.03)

  : Interaction              0.23          0.20            0.07         0.17                        0.31
                            (0.04)        (0.04)          (0.04)       (0.04)                      (0.04)
 Respondents                 968            943             956          914                         990
 N                           2811          2724            2772         2640                        2865
 R2                         0.178         0.176           0.161        0.170                       0.190

Notes: This table reports regressions analogous to that in column 1 of Table 2, but additionally including a
control for group affiliation and an interaction with the estimated discontinuity. High education indicates
that the respondent completed an Associate's degree or higher. High income indicates that the
respondent's household income is $50,000 per year or more. High age indicates that the respondent is 50
years old or higher. In panel B, we present similar analyses based on splitting the sample by tests of
cognitive performance. Standard errors, clustered by respondent, are reported in parentheses.


                                                    43
                                          Reversing Reserves


           Table 4: Cross-Group Differences in Optimal-Choice-Function Adoption

      Panel A: Demographic Groups
                      (1)        (2)                       (3)         (4)             (5)           (6)
 Group Indicates:    Male      Married                   Working      High            High          High
                                                                    Education       Income          Age
 : Constant                  0.79          0.75            0.79       0.76            0.74          0.77
                            (0.02)        (0.02)          (0.02)     (0.02)          (0.02)        (0.02)

   : Oij                     0.03          0.08            0.04         -0.01         0.01          0.04
                            (0.02)        (0.03)          (0.03)       (0.02)        (0.03)        (0.02)

  : Group                    0.00          0.07            0.01         0.06          0.09          0.04
                            (0.03)        (0.03)          (0.03)       (0.03)        (0.03)        (0.03)

  : Interaction              0.00          -0.08           -0.01        0.07          0.05          -0.02
                            (0.03)        (0.03)          (0.03)       (0.03)        (0.03)        (0.03)
 Respondents                  991           991             991          991           989           990
 N                           2709          2709            2709         2709          2703          2705
 R2                         0.002         0.006           0.002        0.019         0.021         0.003

 Panel B: Cognitive Performance Measures
                         (1)      (2)                      (3)         (4)                           (5)
 Cog. Measure:       Number Analogies                    Picture    Subjective                     Comp.
                     Sequence                            Vocab.     Numeracy                       Check
 : Constant             0.75      0.75                    0.78         0.75                         0.70
                       (0.02)    (0.02)                  (0.02)       (0.02)                       (0.02)

   : Oij                     0.02          0.03            0.03         0.03                        0.04
                            (0.02)        (0.02)          (0.02)       (0.02)                      (0.02)

  : High Cog. Perf.          0.10          0.10            0.04         0.10                        0.17
                            (0.03)        (0.03)          (0.03)       (0.03)                      (0.03)

  : Interaction              0.02          0.00            0.03         0.00                        -0.00
                            (0.03)        (0.03)          (0.03)       (0.03)                      (0.03)
 Respondents                 969            943             957          916                         991
 N                           2642          2579            2614         2510                        2709
 R2                         0.023         0.017           0.007        0.018                       0.051

Notes: This table reports regressions analogous to that in column 2 of Table 2, but additionally including a
control for group affiliation and an interaction with the estimated discontinuity. High education indicates
that the respondent completed an Associate's degree or higher. High income indicates that the
respondent's household income is $50,000 per year or more. High age indicates that the respondent is 50
years old or higher. In panel B, we present similar analyses based on splitting the sample by tests of
cognitive performance. Standard errors, clustered by respondent, are reported in parentheses.


                                                    44
                                          Reversing Reserves


          Table 5: Cross-Group Differences in Rate of Payoff-Maximizing Choice
                                (1)     (2)     (3)     (4)     (5)     (6)    (7)
     High Performance:         0.03                     0.03   0.03    0.03
        Number Sequences      (0.02)                   (0.02) (0.02) (0.02)

     High Performance:                          0.03               0.02      0.03     0.02
        Analogies                              (0.02)             (0.02)    (0.02)   (0.02)

     High Performance:                                    0.01     0.00      -0.00    -0.00
        Picture Vocab.                                   (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.02)   (0.02)

     High Performance:                                                       -0.01    -0.02
        Subjective Numeracy                                                 (0.02)   (0.02)

     Passed Comp. Check                                                      -0.01    -0.01
                                                                            (0.02)   (0.02)

     Male                                                                             0.02      0.02
                                                                                     (0.02)    (0.02)

     Married                                                                          -0.03     -0.03
                                                                                     (0.02)    (0.02)

     Working                                                                          0.01      0.00
                                                                                     (0.02)    (0.02)

     High Education                                                                   0.03      0.04
                                                                                     (0.02)    (0.02)

     High Income                                                                      0.02      0.01
                                                                                     (0.02)    (0.02)

     High Age                                                                         -0.01     -0.02
                                                                                     (0.02)    (0.02)
     Respondents                       991       964     979        964      921       917      1009
     N                                5946      5784     5874      5784      5526     5502      6054

Notes: This table reports average marginal effects of logit regressions predicting the choice of the payoff
maximizing policy with cognitive performance and demographic measures. The "high performance"
measures are indicator variables indicating above-median performance on the cognitive measure of interest.
High education indicates that the respondent completed an Associate's degree or higher. High income
indicates that the respondent's household income is $50,000 per year or more. High age indicates that the
respondent is 50 years old or higher. All other variables are indicators of their respective title. Standard
errors are reported in parentheses, and are calculated by applying the delta-method to the clustered (by
respondent) standard errors of the logit coefficient estimates.




                                                    45
                                            Figure 1: Geographic Distribution of Survey Respondents




46
                                                                                                                                                         Reversing Reserves




       Observations
         (27,123]
         (13,27]
         (7,13]
         [0,7]


     Notes: This figure presents the number of respondents in our sample who reside in each state. Four respondents are omitted: 1 from Alaska, 1 from
     Hawaii, and 2 with unknown states of residence. The ranges of values indicated in the legend are split to form quartiles.
                                                                        Reversing Reserves




                                                    Figure 2: Illustration of Regression Discontinuity Estimates

                                                     Naïve Threshold                                  Optimal Threshold
                                              1




                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                 =0.03
  Fraction Choosing the Reserves-First Policy
                          .6       .8




                                                                n
                                                               =0.36
         .2       .4    0




                                                  -5 -3 -1 +1 +3 +5                             -5 -3 -1 +1 +3 +5
                                                     Seats in Reserves-First Policy Relative to Decision Thresholds



Notes: This figure illustrates the discontinuities in choice probabilities that occur at the thresholds of
interest. In our experiment, subjects faced six scenarios containing choices between reserves-first and
reserves-last policies. The scenarios always contained the same six reserves-last policies. In each scenario,
the number of seats in the reserves-first policy was randomly drawn from 13 values spanning the the x-axis,
defined by their position relative to two thresholds. Vertical dashed lines demarcate these thresholds: the
point where the number of reserves-first seats comes to exceed the number of reserves-last seats (the na¨    ive
threshold), and the point where the number of reserves-first seats comes to exceed the amount needed to
make choosing the reserves-first policy optimal (the optimal threshold). The six dots above each point on
the x-axis illustrate the average rate of choosing the reserves-first policy across the six scenarios. As seen in
this figure, subjects' average propensity to choose the reserves-first policy increases substantially when the
na¨ive threshold is exceeded, but does not change substantially when the optimal threshold is exceeded.
The plotted line is a fitted cubic spline over these points, with its associated 95% confidence interval.
Reported in the figure are the formal estimates of the discontinuity at these two points arising from this
spline, which closely matches the results from Table 2.




                                                                                47
