                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   SHOULD GERMANY HAVE BUILT A NEW WALL? MACROECONOMIC LESSONS
                  FROM THE 2015-18 REFUGEE WAVE

                                       Christopher Busch
                                         Dirk Krueger
                                       Alexander Ludwig
                                         Irina Popova
                                        Zainab Iftikhar

                                      Working Paper 26973
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26973


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020

This paper is being prepared for the Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Migration Policy:
Implications for Growth, Inequality, and Welfare. We thank our discussants Tommaso Porzio,
Sebastian Heise and Chris Moser, as well as Friedrich Breyer, Alfred Garloff, Chiara Lacava,
Joan Llull, Kjetil Storesletten and Marco Weißler and seminar participants at Houston, Montreal,
Northwestern, UQAM, Wharton, the UPenn Macro Public Finance, EIEF and Carnegie Rochester
NYU Conferences, the Norface TRISP Meeting and the Macro Inequality Group at UAB for very
helpful comments and Anna-Maria Maurer for excellent research assistance. Chris Busch
gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Spanish Ministry of Economy and
Competitiveness, through the Severo Ochoa Programme for Centres of Excellence in R&D. Alex
Ludwig gratefully acknowledges financial support by NORFACE Dynamics of Inequality across
the Life-Course (TRISP) grant 462-16-120 and by the Research Center SAFE, funded by the
State of Hessen initiative for research LOEWE. Dirk Krueger thanks the NSF for support under
grant SES 1757084. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Christopher Busch, Dirk Krueger, Alexander Ludwig, Irina Popova, and Zainab
Iftikhar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Should Germany Have Built a New Wall? Macroeconomic Lessons from the 2015-18 Refugee
Wave
Christopher Busch, Dirk Krueger, Alexander Ludwig, Irina Popova, and Zainab Iftikhar
NBER Working Paper No. 26973
April 2020
JEL No. E20,F22,H55

                                        ABSTRACT

In 2015-2016 Germany experienced a wave of predominantly low-skilled refugee immigration.
We evaluate its macroeconomic and distributional effects using a quantitative overlapping
generations model calibrated using German micro data to replicate education and productivity
differentials between foreign born and native workers. Workers are modelled as imperfect
substitutes in aggregate production leading to endogenous wage differentials. We simulate the
dynamic effects of this refugee wave, with specific focus on the welfare impact on low skilled
natives. Our results indicate that the small losses this group suffers can be compensated by
welfare gains of other parts of the native population.

Christopher Busch                             Irina Popova
Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona,            Goethe University Frankfurt
MOVE, and Barcelona GSE                       House of Finance
Campus de Bellaterra-UAB Edifici B            Theodor-W.-Adorno-Platz 3
ES-08193 Cerdanyola del Vallès                D-60629 Frankfurt am Main
Barcelona, Spain                              popova@econ.uni-frankfurt.de
chris.busch@movebarcelona.eu
                                              Zainab Iftikhar
Dirk Krueger                                  Goethe University Frankfurt
Economics Department                          House of Finance
University of Pennsylvania                    Theodor-W.-Adorno-Platz 3
The Ronald O. Perelman Center                 Frankfurt 60629
 for Political Science and Economics          Germany
133 South 36th Street                         iftikhar@econ.uni-frankfurt.de
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
dkrueger@econ.upenn.edu

Alexander Ludwig
Goethe University Frankfurt
House of Finance
Theodor-W.-Adorno-Platz 3
D-60629 Frankfurt am Main
Ludwig@safe.uni-frankfurt.de
1    Introduction
In the last few years, Europe has experienced a massive refugee wave from Africa and Asia
(and Syria specifically) that has brought in an inflow of mostly young, mostly unskilled
refugees, substantially increasing the flow in-migration into Western Europe from other parts
of the world. Germany has been the recipient of a large share of these refugees. In 2015
and 2016 alone, ca. 2 million political and economic migrants came to Germany, making
it by far the largest recipient of migration in Europe. This flow is large in absolute terms,
relative to a total population in Germany of 82 million, and has created substantial political
backlash and the rise of right-wing political parties. The flow is comparable to the flow of
individuals migrating from East to West Germany after World War II, inducing the political
regime in East Germany to build the Berlin Wall in 1961. It is larger than the net inflow
of ca. 1.8 million individuals from East Germany into West Germany from 1989 to 2006
after the wall came down in 1989, see Glorius (2010). This in-migration of young foreigners
occurs against the backdrop of a secular massive ageing of the native German population,
raising the possibility that reforms of the public pay-as-you-go pension system necessitated
by population ageing could be postponed or moderated.
    Motivated by these observations we evaluate the macroeconomic and welfare implications
of the large wave of refugee inflows into the German economy in the short- and in the
long run. Simply put, we ask whether it would have been in the economic interest of the
local population to erect, figuratively speaking, a new wall to fence Germany off from the
observed migration flow. The more nuanced question we answer is what are the economic
characteristics of the group of natives that are most bound to gain and to lose from a
large-scale refugee wave into a high-income ageing domestic economy with a mature social
insurance system. We view Germany as an interesting case study with excellent micro data
on migrants (which aids the calibration and estimation of our model) that was subject to
a large migrant inflow in recent years, but the main economic forces, and thus the main
results, we conjecture, apply to other recipient countries as well.
    To answer our research question we employ a quantitative OLG model with time-varying
demographic structure and neoclassical production that is subject to empirically realistic
inflows of a low-skilled migrant population. To gain intuition we first construct a simple two-
period version of the model as in Diamond (1965), and show analytically that these migrant
inflows have four main impacts on welfare of natives. First, they raise overall labor supply
and thus lower the capital-labor ratio and wages, and increase rates of return, as long as the
economy is closed. Second, the migration inflow changes the supply of low-skilled foreign
workers, relative to that of their native counterparts, and relative to high-skilled labor.


                                              1
If these workers are imperfect substitutes, then wages of skilled native workers rise (since
skilled workers have become relatively scarcer), but the impact on wages of unskilled native
workers is ambiguous. Unskilled workers are now more abundant, which lowers their wages.
But to the extent that unskilled native and unskilled migrant workers are also imperfect
substitutes, the native unskilled are now scarcer as well. The net effect on the relative wage
of this group is then determined by the substitutability of skilled v/s unskilled labor relative
to the substitutability between unskilled native and migrant labor. If this latter substitution
elasticity is high relative to the former (as we estimate empirically), relative wages of native
unskilled workers fall. Third, since migrants are young, an increase in their inflow reduces
the old-age dependency ratio and increases the relative return on the PAYGO social security
system for native contributors. Finally, the inflow of low-skilled migrants leads to an increase
of tax-financed administrative government expenditures which reduces welfare of the natives.
    We then extend our analysis to a quantitative OLG economy with a national labor mar-
ket in order to quantify the relative importance of these four channels. As in the simple
model workers with differential skill levels and different migratory background are imperfect
substitutes in production. We model the public social security system closely following the
actual German system, and introduce a realistic demographic structure, including a demo-
graphic transition towards an ageing population. This demographic transition necessitates
reforms of the social security system in the absence of migration inflows of young workers.
Our main thought experiment consists of a sudden, unexpected inflow of refugees of the size
and composition experienced in the years 2015 to 2018. We compute the transition induced
by this refugee wave and contrast it with the scenario in which the refugee inflow does not
occur, and thus the ageing of the population continues at pre-refugee speed. By comparing
these scenarios we quantify the macroeconomic, distributional and welfare consequences for
natives in different skill classes from this recent refugee wave in the short- and long run.
    In order to conduct our quantitative analysis we require as inputs aggregate migration
flows, the skill composition of migrants, as well as micro estimates for wage profiles and
assimilation speeds of migrants. To derive the latter two we turn to micro data from the
German Socio-Economic Panel Study (SOEP). The structure of the SOEP allows us to
measure wages of immigrants from different geographic origins over a long period of time
(1984­2017). We use this information to estimate the elasticity of substitution between
different groups of natives and immigrants, key ingredients in the aggregate production
function for the quantitative analysis. Apart from the core samples of the SOEP we also
use data from the IAB-SOEP Migration Sample (2013-2017), which oversamples immigrants
from Arab and Islamic countries, the main source countries of the immigration wave from
2015-18 we study, as well as the IAB-BAMF-SOEP Refugee sample (2015-2017), which


                                               2
samples the refugee population that arrived in Germany in the years of interest. We use this
information to characterize the incumbent migrant population and the incoming refugees.

                                Figure 1: Wages since Immigration




Note: Wages of migrants, relative to natives with the same level of education, age and family background,
as a function of the time since arrival in Germany. Source: Own calculations based on SOEP.


    Figure 1 displays wages of migrants, relative to natives with the same level of education,
age and family background, as a function of the time since arrival in Germany. It shows
very sizeable initial wage discounts, in the order of 30% for economic immigrants from poor
countries, and in excess of 40% for political asylum seekers, with very significant convergence
towards native German wages over time, especially for the economic migrants, but at much
slower speed for political refugees.1 As documented in Brell, Dustmann, and Preston (2020),
labor market participation rates of asylum seekers are initially low and increase slowly over
time. In our evaluation of the economic impact of the low-skill in-migration to Germany
low wages, low participation rates and slow convergence are key data moments targeted
in the quantitative analysis. The availability of rich micro data on migrant labor market
outcomes is an important benefit of quantitatively analyzing the German experience in the
context of world-wide immigration flows in the last five years. Equipped with these key
   1
     The much slower convergence among the asylum seekers might not be due to slow productivity con-
vergence, but also reflects restricted access to the German labor market by this group stemming from
administrative hurdles described in section 3. It could also stem from reduced incentives to accumulate
Germany-specific human capital since political refugees face a much larger probability of return migration.


                                                    3
empirical ingredients we simulate the macroeconomic and distributional impacts of the recent
migration wave. We feed into our model the actual evolution of the domestic and migrant
population (the high migration scenario), as well as two counterfactual scenarios in which
we either fix migration flows to relatively low average levels (the baseline scenario) or only
let political refugees in-migrate (the refugee migration scenario). We obtain three main
quantitative findings. First, gross wages of unskilled natives deteriorate, on account of
increased competition on the labor market from equally unskilled refugees. This effect is
only partially offset by lower effective contributions to social security; thus net wages of low
skilled natives decrease throughout our entire projection period. Thus, low skilled individuals
currently alive experience welfare losses. Second, medium and high skilled natives experience
significant welfare gains. Third, the aggregate gains, measured as consumption equivalent
variation, are larger than the aggregate losses. This suggests that a compensation of low
skilled natives is possible. Our aggregate welfare measure shows that the overall effects are
positive, small initially, and increasing over time. Importantly, this aggregate measure masks
the fact that the migration impact is very heterogeneous across the skill distribution and
sizable for some population groups. Specifically, we find that the welfare losses of a young
low-skilled native in the refugee migration scenario of age 35 in 2013 are about -0.2% in
terms of a consumption equivalent variation. This contrasts with welfare gains accruing to
young high and middle-skilled natives also of 0.2%.
    Based on these results our answer to the question motivating this paper is that Germany
should not have built a new wall. This is true even from the perspective of the native
low-skilled population, which, among the natives, is most severely subjected to migrant
competition on the German labor market, but only if this population group is compensated
for their net wage losses using the gains of the rest of the German population.


2    Related Literature
Our work relates to four strands of the literature. First, we build on a large literature study-
ing the effects of immigration on incomes and welfare of natives. An early influential paper
is Borjas (1999) who shows that an influx of immigrants into a host country (the U.S. in
his context) leads to redistribution among natives towards capital income and an overall net
benefit to native households which Borjas calls the 'Immigration Surplus'. As long as capital
and (immigrant) labor are not perfect substitutes in production. Ben-Gad (2004) extends
the analysis to endogenous labor supply and capital accumulation and finds a smaller im-
migration surplus to the U.S. The same effect of an inflow of labor will be present in our
analysis, and it dampens the long-run decline in the labor force due to the demographic

                                               4
transition of the native population. Motivated by the evidence in Borjas (2003) subsequent
papers assume imperfect substitution among workers with different characteristics so that
immigration lowers the wages of competing workers. Ben-Gad (2008) allows for heteroge-
neous skills and concludes the immigration surplus is maximized with skilled immigration
due to complementarity between skilled labor and capital. In a study for Germany D'Amuri
et al. (2010) show that the pre-2010 inflow of immigrants leaves wages and employment lev-
els of natives broadly unaffected; incumbent immigrants are adversely affected by the inflow
of new migrants. Felbermayr et al. (2010) and Ottaviano and Peri (2012) largely confirm
these conclusions. In our model we take these relative gross wage responses into account by
allowing for a flexible substitution structure across skill and nationality groups. This ap-
proach is subject to the criticism by Dustmann et al. (2016) who argue that the assumption
that migrants can be sorted into conventional experience-, education- and nationality cells
might be invalid, a concern we address through sensitivity analyses.2
    Second, our paper is related to the literature on assimilation of economic migrants and
political refugees. Borjas (1985) emphasizes the (positive) selection problem of immigrants
who stay in a given country when estimating assimilation speeds. More recently, the work
by Weiss et al. (2003) and Eckstein and Weiss (2004) study the adjustment of occupational
choices and human capital formation for wage growth of immigrants to Israel. Dustmann
and Preston (2012) point to initial skill degradation among immigrants upon arrival into host
countries and Lessem and Sanders (2019) find skill upgrading of immigrants over time, em-
phasizing the role played by language skill in this process.3 Finally, Brell et al. (2020) discuss
the differences in the labor market integration between economic immigrants and political
refugees. Motivated by this evidence we capture assimilation by allowing the conditional
productivity of immigrants to increase with time since immigration, by estimating assimila-
tion speeds of wage processes, based on the data shown in Figure 1. Consistent with Brell
et al. (2020) we allow these speeds to differ between economic and political migrants.
    Third, regarding the fiscal effects of migration we follow Storesletten (2000), who analyzes
the impact of immigration to the U.S. from 1960-1990 in a general equilibrium overlapping
generation economy such as ours. The key finding is that only medium- and high-skilled im-
migration can ease the fiscal burden in the country, whereas low-skilled immigration cannot.
In the context of the ageing population of Japan, Imrohoroglu et al. (2017) reach similar
   2
     Llull (2018) observes that imperfect substitutability across workers is an endogenous outcome of het-
erogeneous education, labor supply and career choices of natives and incumbent immigrants to show that
natives who are close competitors of immigrants are adversely affected. Similarly, Colas (2019) argues that
natives and old immigrants respond to new immigrants by internally migrating to different labor markets,
and Burstein et al. (2017) analyze how these adjustments vary across tradeable and non-tradeable sectors.
   3
     Lagakos et al. (2018) show that returns to experience in the birth country before migrating to the U.S.
are positively correlated with birth-country GDP per capita.


                                                     5
conclusions. Chojnicki et al. (2011) perform a retrospective analysis of the immigration
wave of 1945-2000 to the U.S. and conclude that welfare gains could have been achieved for
natives had the past immigration to the U.S. been dominantly high-skilled. Similarly, the
findings of Guerreiro et al. (2019) suggest that free immigration is welfare-maximizing for
natives if immigrants can be excluded from the social welfare system. Finally, using SOEP
data Kirdar (2012) estimates the fiscal impact of immigration on Germany in the presence
of an endogenous return migration choice.4
    Finally, this paper contributes to studies on the impact of the most recent immigration
wave into the European Union, and into Germany specifically. d'Artis Kancs and Lecca
(2018) analyze alternative refugee integration scenarios for the period 2016-2040 to show
that full repayment of investment in refugees' integration is achieved in 9 to 19 years and
that immigration has a positive growth effect on the German economy.5 Scharfbillig and
Weissler (2019) find no evidence that immigrants displace employment of natives but that
employment of incumbent migrants is adversely affected. Their results suggest that natives
and immigrants are imperfect substitutes in production despite having similar qualifications,
whereas the degree of substitution between asylum seekers and other migrant residents of
Germany is higher, which is a key ingredient in our quantitative model.


3       Institutional Background
In this section we give a brief description of the historical and institutional background of
the large migration inflow in 2015-16. The goal is not to provide a comprehensive review,
but rather give the background for justifying key modelling assumptions in the quantitative
model. More than 50% of the increase in migrants in 2015 and 2016 stems from political
refugees originating in Syria. The Syrian civil war officially began on March 15, 2011.
Political asylum seekers started arriving in numbers via land and sea in Europe in 2013,
and in 2015 the crisis reached its peak when the EU received more than one million asylum
applications from Syria alone. Germany was the main destination country for these refugees.
Chancellor Angela Merkel announced in August 2015 a temporarily suspension of the EU
Dublin regulations which required refugees to apply for asylum in the country to which they
arrive first. In September 2015 Germany agreed to let refugees from Hungary enter Germany.
    As the flow of new asylum seekers subsided in 2017, the focus of policy shifted towards
the integration of these refugees into the German labor market. In August, 2016 the Pri-
    4
     A related recent literature uses frictional labor market models and stresses positive effects on immigration
on host economies through endogenous job creation, see e.g. Chassamboulli and Palivos (2014), Nanos and
Schluter (2014), Moreno-Galbis and Tritah (2016), Battisti et al. (2017) and Iftikhar and Zaharieva (2019).
   5
     Related, St¨ahler (2017) studies the macroeconomic effects of (failed) integration.


                                                       6
ority Review policy that restricted the access of the immigrants to the labor markets was
suspended until August of 2019. In June 2019 "The Alien Employment Promotion Act"
was adopted to promote assistance with asylum procedures and integration into the labor
market. Whereas officially recognized political refugees (those having been granted asylum)
have unrestricted access to German job market and have the same rights as German citizens,
asylum seekers cannot access the labor market during the first three months of their arrival
in Germany. After this waiting period is over access to the labor market is granted with
restrictions. In order to get a work permit the asylum seeker must have a job offer and
the German job centers examine that neither an EU citizen nor a non-EU citizen with a
residence permit is displaced as a result of hiring the asylum seeker. All asylum seekers are
barred from taking up self-employment for the duration of their asylum procedure. These
restrictions negatively impact employment opportunities of asylum seekers and their wages.
Consequently, wages and earnings of these immigrants are initially low, as Figure 1 showed.
    Finally, in order to evaluate the fiscal consequences of the recent migration wave, it is
important to assess the extent to which migrants qualify for social assistance. Asylum Seekers
are provided social and medical benefits in accordance with the Asylum-Seekers' Benefits
Act. Benefits include food, housing, heating, healthcare, personal hygiene, assistance in
sickness, pregnancy and birth as well as household durables and consumables. In October,
2015 the level of social benefits were raised and 'in kind' benefits were substituted by 'in
cash' benefits. Furthermore asylum seekers are entitled to standard social benefits and full
healthcare after receiving social benefits under Asylum Seekers' Benefits Act for 15 months.
Thus, it is a fairly accurate approximation of reality to assume that asylum seekers are
eligible for the same type of social assistance payments as natives, certainly after an initial
period in which these benefits are moderately lower. For a refugee (i.e. a successful asylum
applicant) the same statement applies.
    Against this background, and motivated by the massive inflow of migrants in 2015-16
into an aging German labor market, we first develop a simple model to study the qualitative
impact of these developments, before quantifying them in a more realistic version intended
to capture the institutional details of Germany in this period more accurately.


4    Simple Model
We now develop an OLG model with two-period lived households whose basic structure will
also form the foundation for the quantitative model in the next section. The purpose of
this simple model is to clarify the main trade-offs from the recent migration inflows. On
one hand, the asylum seeking immigrants are on average young, and thus help to stabilize

                                              7
social security budgets. On the other hand, at least initially these migrants have low labor
productivity in the German labor market and the migration system has to be administered
which is costly. In addition, migrants impact wages of natives in the labor market.
    Competitive firms operate a technology that uses capital and three types of labor. There
are high-skilled (hi) native (na) workers and low skilled workers (lo), which might either
also be natives or foreigners (f o). These three different groups of workers are assumed to
be imperfect substitutes in production. This structure captures three main effects of an
inflow of migrants on gross wages: First, it increases the relative scarcity of high skilled
workers, which, in a model with imperfect substitutability, increases relative wages of the
high skilled and reduces wages of low-skilled workers. Second, if low-skilled natives and
low-skilled foreigners are imperfect substitutes, an increase in migration raises the relative
wage of low-skilled natives. Finally, an inflow of workers increases overall labor supply, and
thus decreases the wage level in general equilibrium.
    We assume that the economy is ageing, modelled as an exogenous population growth
rate  n < 1 of the native population. In addition, in every period a number of young
migrants enter the country, shifting the demographic composition of the population towards
younger individuals. In retirement, households earn social security income, which is related
to past contributions in a Bismarckian pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) pension scheme. Pensions
in the PAYGO system are financed by levying the contribution rate  on labor income of
young workers. Migration increases the population growth rate and thus the share of the
young in the population, thereby raising the implicit rate of return of the pension system.


4.1    Population
There are two-period lived households. We denote by Nt (0) the size of the period t young
population and by Nt (1) the size of the old. We ignore mortality risk, thus Nt+1 (1) = Nt (0).
The young population in each period t consists of native high skill workers, Nt (0, hi, na),
and low skill native- and foreign-born workers Nt (0, lo) = Nt (0, lo, na) + Nt (0, lo, f o). There
is a constant share  of high skilled workers in the native population, thus Nt (0, hi, na) =
Nt (0, na) and Nt (0, lo, na) = (1 -  )Nt (0, na). The population grows at an exogenous
rate t and thus the young population in t is given by Nt (0) = t Nt-1 (0).
    This population growth rate t is determined jointly by the fertility rate of the native
                                                                             n
population and the migration rate of individuals from abroad. Let t            denote the birth
rate of the native population. We assume that once migrants enter the country, they have
the same fertility rate as native individuals. We further express the exogenous migration
flow as a share of the population stock of the young population in the previous period,


                                                8
Nt (0, lo, f o) = µt Nt-1 (0). Combining these two assumptions yields

                      n                               n
             Nt (0) = t Nt-1 (0) + Nt (0, lo, f o) = (t + µt ) Nt-1 (0) = t Nt-1 (0).                 (1)

                                                n                                       n
Therefore the population growth rate t = t        + µt is the sum of the fertility rate t of
individuals living in the country when young, and the migration rate µt . A positive immi-
gration µt > 0 then acts like an increase in the fertility rate of the economy.


4.2    Technology
Production takes place with a nested CES-Cobb-Douglas production function of form

                                   -
                        Yt = Kt L1
                                 t                                                                    (2)
                                                                            1
                                            1- 1                1- 1    1- 1
                        Lt =      Lt (lo)      lh   + Lt (hi)      lh      lh      .                  (3)
                                                                                          1
                                               1-  1                       1-  1       1-  1
                    Lt (lo) =     Lt (lo, na)        nf   + Lt (lo, f o)        nf          nf   .    (4)

Here lh is the elasticity of substitution between skilled and unskilled labor, and nf is the
elasticity of substitution between low-skilled labor supplied by natives and migrants. Notice
that Lt (s, i) are efficiency weighted units of labor with productivity differences across types
of workers described next. Finally, there is full depreciation of capital,  = 1.


4.3    Households
Households work one unit of time when young and have skill-specific (s  {lo, hi}) labor
productivity (s, i) that also depends on their migratory origin i  {na, f o}. We normalize
 (hi, na) = 1. The group-specific wage per unit of time is denoted by wt (s, i), on which
individuals pay social security contributions at rate t . When young they consume ct (0, s, i)
and save at+1 (s, i). Assets earn a gross risk-free interest rate Rt+1 . When old they receive
retirement income bt+1 (s, i) and consume ct+1 (1, s, i). The budget constraints in the two
periods of life for workers in group s, i, are thus given by

                             ct (0, s, i) + at+1 (s, i) = wt (s, i)(1 - t )                          (5a)
                           ct+1 (1, s, i) = at+1 (s, i)Rt+1 + bt+1 (s, i).                           (5b)




                                                     9
Households born in period t of type (s, i) have logarithmic preferences over consumption,
discount the future with factor . Thus, their lifetime utility function Ut (s, i) given by

                               Ut (s, i) = ln(ct (0, s, i)) +  ln(ct+1 (1, s, i)).                      (6)


4.4     Government
The government organizes a PAYG pension system. We assume that pensions of workers of
group i are proportional to their wages when young, where the replacement rate t determines
the size of the social security system, and is assumed to be constant across all groups:

                                         bt (s, i) = t t-1 wt-1 (s, i).                                 (7)

The pension system is Bismarckian in that benefits are tied to past contributions, an accurate
approximation of the actual German system.6 Note that t can be interpreted as the internal
gross return of the pension system since (7) implies

                                                     bt (s, i)
                                             t =                   .                                    (8)
                                                   t-1 wt-1 (s, i)

In addition, the government has to finance the bureaucracy in charge of integrating migrants
into Germany. We assume that per migrant a resource cost of   ~ t t wt is required to administer
the migration system. These resource costs constitute lost output rather than transfers, and
for analytical convenience we express them as a share ~t of tax payments. The total cost for
migrants then depends on the number of migrants, and is given by

                                       ~ t t wt Nt (0, lo, f o) = t t wt Lt                             (9)

where t =     ~ t Nt (0L
                       ,lo,f o)
                         t
                                . Written in this way, the cost t captures both the cost per migrant
~t , a parameter of the model, and the effect of an increase in the number of migrants (as
parameterized by µt ), since the ratio Nt (0L      ,lo,f o)
                                                     t
                                                            is strictly increasing in µt .
     Finally, we assume that the government budget is balanced in every period, which requires
that the sequence of payroll tax rates {t } satisfies:

               t         wt (s, i)Nt (0, s, i) = t t-1         wt-1 (s, i)Nt (1, s, i) + t t wt Lt .   (10)
                   s,i                                   s,i

   6
   The German legislation does not feature dependency on t-1 , but this is just a rescaling of the replace-
ment rate because we could equivalently write bt (s, i) = ~t wt-1 (s, i) with ~t = t t-1 .




                                                         10
By assumption there are no high-skilled migrants in the model, and thus Nt (0, hi, f o) =
Nt (1, hi, f o) = 0. Given labor income taxes {t } and costs for administrating migration
(as parameterized by t ), the social security replacement rate t adjusts to changes in the
demographic composition of the population, to ensure government budget balance.7


4.5     Characterization of Equilibrium
We relegate a formal definition of the competitive equilibrium to appendix A. The key
variable describing the dynamics of the competitive equilibrium is the capital-labor ratio kt =
Kt
 Lt
    . Starting from an initial capital K0 and for an exogenous sequence of skilled and unskilled
labor determined by fertility and migration rates as well as exogenous policy (social security
replacement rates), once the dynamics of the capital-labor ratio is determined, factor prices,
relative wages of each group, factor demands and consumption allocations of all private
households follow directly from the firm's optimality conditions and the household budget
constraints. The dynamics of the capital labor ratio itself is determined by private household
savings decisions and asset market clearing.
     We first characterize wages for a given sequence of the capital-labor-ratio, then demon-
strating that in the model all households optimally choose the same saving rate, which
determines the law of motion of the capital-labor ratio. We finally provide comparative
statics with respect to the size of migration flow determined by µt .

4.5.1    Firm Optimization and Equilibrium Wages

The representative firm hires three types of labor Lt (hi), Lt (lo, na), Lt (lo, f o), combines them
into a labor composite Lt and uses Lt and capital Kt to produce output. Profit maximization
implies that the gross return on capital and the wage per unit of the labor composite equal
the marginal products of capital and labor, respectively:

                                                       -1
                                        1 + rt = Rt = kt                                                (11)
                                                        
                                            wt = (1 - )kt .                                             (12)

Furthermore, the wage per unit of time for a worker of type (s, i) is determined by the product
of its labor efficiency units (s, i), the wage per efficiency unit of the labor composite wt and
   7
    For analytical convenience, in the simple model we consolidate the social security and general government
revenue budget; the quantitative model will separate these two budgets, as is realistic for the German case.




                                                     11
the marginal product of labor of type (s, i) in producing the labor composite Lt , that is,

                                                               Lt
                                wt (s, i) = wt · (s, i) ·                                  (13)
                                                              Lt (s, i)

Exploiting equations (3) and (4) yields wages (and thus labor incomes) as functions of the
common wage per labor efficiency units as well as the relative scarcity of different demo-
graphic groups, whose impact is controlled by the substitution elasticities between skilled
and unskilled labor lh and between unskilled labor of natives and migrants nf .
                                                    1
                                          Lt        lh
                    wt (hi) = wt ·                                                         (14)
                                        Lt (hi)
                                                               1                     1
                                                     Lt        lh        Lt (lo)     nf
                   wt (lo, i) = wt · (lo, i) ·                      ·                      (15)
                                                    Lt (lo)             Lt (lo, i)

Exploiting the market clearing conditions (49) and (50) and the demographic relationships
to express labor efficiency units in terms of demographic variables gives:

Proposition 1. Equilibrium wages of the different groups are determined as

                                                   n
                             wt (hi) = wt Whi (µt /t )
                                                   n              n
                         wt (lo, na) = wt Wlo (µt /t ) · Wna (µt /t )

                                                      n              n                         n
where the exogenous demographic factors Whi (µt /t      ), Wna (µt /t  ) are increasing in µt /t
              n                        n
and Wlo (µt /t  ) is decreasing in µt /t . The wage wt per labor efficiency unit is a strictly
increasing function purely of the aggregate capital-labor ratio kt .

4.5.2   Household Optimization

To derive the equilibrium dynamics of the capital-labor ratio it is useful to restate the
household maximization problem in terms of household saving rates

                                                    at+1 (s, i)
                                      st (s, i) =               .                          (16)
                                                     wt (s, i)

Using this definition and the household budget constraints we can rewrite lifetime utility as

                                                                         wt (s, i)
                Ut (s, i) = (1 +  ) ln(wt ) +  ln(Rt+1 ) + (1 +  ) ln
                                                                            wt
                                                                         t+1 t
                           + ln ((1 - t ) - st (s, i)) +  ln st (s, i) +           .       (17)
                                                                          Rt+1

                                                  12
This expression clarifies the three forces impacted by population ageing and migration. First,
demographic changes affect aggregate factor prices (wt , Rt+1 ) unless we analyze a small open
economy. Second, it changes relative wages of the different population groups, as summarized
by proposition 1. Third, it changes the relative return on the social security system measured
   t+1
by R t+1
         , and with it, the optimal saving decisions of households.
   Taking first order conditions with respect to (17) gives the optimal saving rate as
                                                             t+1
                                                (1 - t ) -       
                                                             Rt+1 t
                                 st (s, i) =                                              (18)
                                                       1+

Note that the saving rate is identical across all population groups and only depends on
the fiscal side of the model characterizing the PAYGO social security system. The only
remaining endogenous variable in the saving rate and thus in the welfare of a given generation
                                                     t+1
is the relative return of the social security system R t+1
                                                           . Using the budget constraint of the
government (10) and noting that Nt+1 (i, 1) = Nt (i, 0) we have

             t+1    t+1           s,i   wt+1 (s, i)Nt+1 (s, i, 0) - t+1 wt+1 Lt+1
                  =
             Rt+1   t Rt+1                       s,i wt (s, i)Nt (s, i, 0)
                        t+1 (1 - t+1 )wt+1 Lt+1   (1 - t+1 )t+1 wt+1 L
                    =                           =                                         (19)
                        t Rt+1    wt Lt                t       Rt+1 wt t+1

        L     Lt+1
where t  +1 = Lt is the growth rate of aggregate labor supply in efficiency units, a function
purely of the exogenous demographics of the model, as lemma 1 below shows. The general
equilibrium term Rw t+1
                   t+1 wt
                          is still endogenous and depends on the dynamics of the capital-labor
ratio. To establish a benchmark we first characterize the saving rate and welfare in a small
open economy where the interest rate R is constant and exogenous, which, from the firm
optimality conditions, implies a constant exogenous wage wt = w per labor efficiency unit
and a constant exogenous capital-labor ratio.

4.5.3   The Savings Rate and Welfare in a Small Open Economy

With an exogenous interest rate R the term Rw t+1
                                             t+1 wt
                                                    in equation (19) is exogenous and equals
 wt+1    1
Rt+1 wt
        =R . The following proposition immediately follows from equations (18) and (17):




                                                  13
Proposition 2. In a small open economy, the equilibrium saving rate and welfare of an
individual of type (s, i) born at time t are given by
                                                   L
                                                   t
                  (1 - t ) - (1 - t+1 )t+1         R
                                                     +1

     st (s, i) =                                             = st                                               (20)
                             1+
                                                                      wt (s, i)
    Ut (s, i) = (1 +  ) ln(w) +  ln(R) + (1 +  ) ln                                                             (21)
                                                                         wt
                                                                                                         L
                                                                                                         t +1
              +  ln( ) - (1 +  ) ln(1 +  ) + (1 +  ) ln 1 - t + (1 - t+1 )t+1                                   (22)
                                                                                                         R

4.5.4   The Dynamics of the Capital-Labor Ratio in General Equilibrium

In general equilibrium the ratio Rwt+1
                                  t+1 wt
                                         is endogenous and determined by the dynamics of the
capital-labor ratio. The market-clearing condition on the capital market implies

           Kt+1 =          at+1 (s, i)Nt (0, s, i) =         st (s, i)wt (s, i)Nt (0, s, i) = st wt Lt          (23)
                     s,i                               s,i


and thus
                                          
                Kt+1              (1 - )kt
                      = kt+1 = st     L
                                                                                                                (24)
                Lt+1                 t +1
                                    
               wt+1        (1 - )kt+1       (1 - )st
                      =     -1          
                                          =     L
                                                                                                                (25)
              Rt+1 wt   kt+1 (1 - )kt         t  +1
               t+1      t+1 (1 - t+1 )wt+1 L        (1 - t+1 )t+1 (1 - )st
                    t =                     t+1 t =                                                             (26)
              Rt+1       t      Rt+1 wt                       

Equations (18) and (26) can be solved for the saving rate in general equilibrium, which in
turn determines general equilibrium welfare. These results are summarized in the following

Proposition 3. The general equilibrium saving rate and welfare of an individual of type
(s, i) born at time t are given by

                               (1 - t )
  st (s, i) = st =                                                                                              (27)
                     (1 +  ) + (1 - )(1 - t+1 )t+1
                                                                      wt (s, i)
 Ut (s, i) = (1 +  ) ln(wt ) +  ln(Rt+1 ) + (1 +  ) ln
                                                                         wt
                                                                               + (1 - )t
           +  ln( ) + (1 +  ) ln(1 - t ) + (1 +  ) ln                                              (28)
                                                                      (1 +  ) + (1 - )(1 - t+1 )t+1




                                                       14
4.6    Comparative Statics: An Increase in the Migration Rate µ
In this subsection we derive the comparative statics of the model with respect to the mi-
                                                                      n
gration rate µt and the fertility rate (population growth rate) t       of the native population.
From propositions 2 and 3 we know that these are completely determined by the demographic
                                         n             n
factors driving relative wages Whi (µt /t  ), Wna (µt /t ) as well as the growth in aggregate la-
      L        n
bor t +1 (µt , t ). The following lemma, proved in appendix A, summarizes the impact of
migration and fertility rates on these exogenous demographic factors.
                                                                               n
Lemma 1. Consider a change in the migration and/or native fertility rate (µt , t )
                                           n             n                                  n
  1. The relative wage factors Whi (µt /t    ), Wna (µt /t ) are strictly increasing in µt /t and
              n                                  n
     Wlo (µt /t ) is strictly decreasing in µt /t  .
                                     n
  2. Suppose the changes in µt , t     are permanent. Then the growth rate of aggregate labor
      L        n                                  n
     t+1 (µt , t ) is strictly increasing in µt , t , and the share of migrants in labor Nt (0L
                                                                                              ,lo,f o)
                                                                                                t

     and the resource cost of migration t are strictly increasing in µt .

   Equipped with this result and propositions 2 and 3 we now can state

Theorem 1. Consider an unexpected but permanent increase in the migration rate µt .

  1. First consider a small open economy:

      (a) Welfare of all young native households is negatively impacted by an increase in the
          effective cost from migrants t+1 , positively impacted by an increase in the relative
                                     L                                         n
          return on social security tR +1
                                          . The relative wage effect Whi (µt /t  ) is unambigu-
                                                                 n             n
          ously positive for high-skilled natives, but Wlo (µt /t ) · Wna (µt /t ) is ambiguous
          for low-skilled natives.
       (b) Therefore as long as migrants are not too costly (~ t+1 and thus t+1 is sufficiently
           small), welfare of young high-skilled natives at the time of the migration boom,
           Ut (hi, na) increases due to the boom.
       (c) The welfare consequences for young low-skilled natives Ut (lo, na) are ambiguous,
           but positive as long as their relative wages do not decline too much. This is true
           as long as long as nf is sufficiently small relative to lh .

  2. In general equilibrium the migration cost and the relative wage effects are identical
     to those in the small open economy and the impact on the relative return on social
              L
     security tR+1
                   is absent. The wage level wt falls and the real return Rt+1 increases, and
     the overall general equilibrium effect (1 +  ) ln(wt ) +  ln(Rt+1 ) is negative as long as

                                                 15
        the capital share  is sufficiently large or the increase in labor in t and t +1 is of similar
        magnitude.8 In this case the welfare consequences from the migration boom shift down
        for all groups relative to the small open economy.

    The proof follows directly from lemma 1 as well as propositions 2 and 3. A similar
theorem can be derived for a decline in the population growth rate of the native population.
The main upshot of the simple model is that the welfare consequences of the 2015-106
immigration boom depends on four factors: i) the relative wage effects determined by the
relative substitution pattern of skilled, unskilled native and skilled native labor, ii) the
adjustment of the PAYGO pension system, iii) the costs to administer the migration system
and iv) general equilibrium level effects on wages and interest rates. We now seek to quantify
these effects in a more realistic large-scale overlapping generations economy.


5       The Quantitative Model
The quantitative model we employ is a large-scale overlapping generations model in the tra-
dition of Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987), but with time-varying, deterministic demographic
structure. The key model ingredients are i) a detailed demographic model that accurately de-
scribes migrant flows into and out of the country, ii) a production technology that allows for
flexible substitution patterns across workers with different skills and migratory backgrounds
and leads to relative wages that depend on the relative labor supplies of the different pop-
ulation groups, iii) households with consumption-savings and labor supply decisions, and
iv) a government that administers the migration system, a basic social insurance system, a
pay-as-you-go social security scheme, and that collects taxes.
    We now first describe the underlying demographic model that captures the flow of mi-
grants and asylum seekers into Germany. We then turn to the description of the economic
model, its production technology, endowments and preferences of households, as well as
government policies. The recursive formulation of the household problem and the formal
definition of equilibrium is relegated to the appendix. To provide an overview and set up
notation, Table 1 summarizes the state variables used in the model.


5.1      Demographics and Population Flows
We distinguish between the native population and the foreign-born population. Foreigners
are composed of those that entered the country as regular immigrants and those that came
    8
   The appendix provides conditions on fundamentals for this to be true; they are easily verifiable in the
quantitative model.


                                                   16
                                   Table 1: List of State Variables

                     State Var.       Values                     Interpretation
                         j        j  {0, 1, . . . , J }            Model Age
                         s        s  {lo, me, hi}               Skill (education)
                         i      i  {na, ho, rw, as}               Nationality
                         g          g  {f e, ma}                     Gender
                         a             a0                             Assets
                         e          e  {em, re}               Labor Market Status
Notes: List of state variables of the economic model. lo: low, me: medium, hi: high eduction; na: natives,
ho: high income OECD, HIOECD; rw: rest of the world, RW; as: asylum seekers, AS; f e: female, ma:
male; em: employed, re retired.


as refugees and are asylum seekers.9 The basic difference between native households and
foreigners is in their labor productivity, their access to government transfers as well as the fact
that labor inputs supplied by natives and foreigners are imperfect substitutes in production.
    We consider four nationalities denoted by i  {na, ho, rw, as}, where nationality deter-
mines an individual's labor productivity and the extent to which individuals have access
to the German social insurance system. Within the group of regular immigrants we dis-
tinguish between the population from high income OECD countries (ho) and the rest of
the world (rw). Each population group is composed of three education groups, the low,
medium, and high skilled, denoted by s  {lo, me, hi}. Within each group we consider
f emales and males, g  {f e, ma}. We assume that mortality and fertility rates are homo-
geneous across skill groups.
    Households are born at age j = 0 and live at most until age J > 0. The number of people
alive at time t, of age j , nationality i, and gender g is denoted by Nt (j, i, g ). Households
may die from t, j to t + 1, j + 1 and we denote the according exogenous survival rates
by t (j, i, g ). Further, we denote by µt (j, i, g ) the net migration rate, i.e., the percentage net
addition to the stock of (j, i, g ) type individuals from period t to t + 1, which accommodate
leaving and assimilation flows: Each period the stock Nt (j, as, g )t (j, as, g ) of asylum seekers
that survives to the next period faces the probability  l of having to leave the country.
Those that stay face a probability  ar to assimilate to population group rw. Likewise, we
assume that in each period a fraction  rh of the stock of population group rw assimilates
to population group ho. Appendix B.1 describes how we accordingly construct the net
    9
      We use the terms "refugees" and "asylum seekers" interchangeably. Empirically the latter group includes
all successful asylum seekers as well as those waiting for a decision of their application, and finally those
that have either been denied protection or lost their humanitarian residence title but remain in the country.




                                                     17
migration rates µt (j, i, g ). The dynamics of the size of each population group then obey

                     Nt+1 (j + 1, i, g ) = (t (j, i, g ) + µt (j, i, g )) Nt (j, i, g )            (29)

where t (J, i, g ) = µt (J, i, g ) = 0.
    Denote by t (j, i) the time t, age j , group i specific fertility rate and by  the exogenous
fraction of baby girls, assumed to be constant over time and across population groups. We
further assume that all newborns of group i are natives. We denote by jf the first f ertile
age of a woman and by jc the age of completed fertility. The number of native newborns of
gender g in period t + 1 is then given by

                                                          jc
                 Nt+1 (0, na, f e) =                            t (j, i)Nt (j, i, f e)            (30a)
                                         i{na,ho,rw,as} j =jf
                                                                   jc
                Nt+1 (0, na, ma) = (1 - )                               t (j, i)Nt (j, i, f e).   (30b)
                                                i{na,ho,rw,as} j =jf


Since all babies born in Germany are treated as natives, the foreign age 0 population groups
are those that migrated from t to t + 1 to Germany as babies, thus for i  {ho, rw, as}

                                    Nt+1 (0, i, g ) = Mt+1 (0, i, g ).                             (31)


5.2    Technology
Output Yt is produced with a neoclassical production function that displays constant returns
to scale in capital Kt , a labor aggregate Lt and a technology level At , which grows at constant
rate . Firms operate in perfectly competitive output and factor markets, and thus earn zero
profits in equilibrium. Given these assumptions, without loss of generality we consider the
problem of a representative firm. We assume a Constant Elasticity of Substitution (CES)
aggregate production function of the form
                                                                            1
                                     1- 1                           1- 1   1- 1
                           Yt =     Kt        + (1 - )(At Lt )                
                                                                                  ,                (32)

where  is the substitution elasticity between capital and the labor aggregate.




                                                    18
   Aggregate labor in turn is a CES aggregate of labor supplied by the different skill
groups s  {le, me, hi}, Lt (s), with substitution elasticity lmh :
                                                                                   1
                                                                                1-  1
                                                                                   lmh
                                                                   1-  1
                                Lt =                     Lt (s)       lmh                    .                 (33)
                                           s{lo,me,hi}


Next, labor of skill group s is the aggregate of different age (experience) groups ¯
                                                                                   j which we
model as perfect substitutes,
                                                          n¯
                                                           j

                                             Lt (s) =             Lt (¯
                                                                      j, s),                                   (34)
                                                         ¯
                                                         j =1


where n¯ j denotes the number of experience groups. These education and experience group
specific labor inputs are the CES aggregate of natives and f oreigners with substitution
elasticity nf :
                                                                                                    1
                                                         1                               1
                                               1-                   1-                           1-  1
                      Lt (¯
                          j, s) = Lt (¯              ~ t (¯
                                      j, s, na) nf + L    j, s, f o) nf                               nf   ,   (35)

      ~ t (¯
where L    j, s, f o) is a CES aggregate of foreigners given by
                                                                                         1- 1  1- 1 1
                                                                                            hr    hr

             ~ t (¯                         1- 1
             L    j, s, f o) = Lt (¯
                                   j, s, ho) hr +                            Lt (¯
                                                                                 j, s, i)             .        (36)
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
                                                                  i{rw,as}


We thus assume that conditional on education and experience, population groups rw and as
are perfect substitutes in production,10 whereas the composite of this group and foreigners
from group ho are imperfect substitutes with substitution elasticity hr . Those skill, expe-
rience group, and nationality specific labor inputs are aggregates of productivity-weighted
age-specific hours worked by men and women. We assume perfect substitution across age
and gender, so that we have

                                                       jh (¯
                                                           j,s)
                         Lt (¯
                             j, s, i) =                             (j, s, i, g )Lt (j, s, i, g ),             (37)
                                          g {f e,ma} j =jl (¯
                                                            j,s)

  10
     This is due to data limitations since we do not separately observe asylum seekers for all sample years used
in estimation of the production function, which inhibits the estimation of a substitution elasticity parameter.




                                                          19
where [jl (¯
           j, s), . . . , jh (¯
                              j, s)] is the education-specific age bracket of experience group ¯
                                                                                               j , Lt (j, s, i, g )
are hours worked, and (j, s, i, g ) is labor productivity of age, skill, nationality and gender
group j, s, i, g . We further assume a constant gender specific shifter of productivity pro-
files, which gives productivity as (j, s, i, g ) = (j, s, i) (g ). Finally, capital is assumed to
depreciate at constant rate  . The first-order conditions of the firm problem are provided in
Appendix B.


5.3     Households
5.3.1    Timing of Work and Retirement

Agents (females and males) work from age ja until at most the mandatory retirement age jr .
At age ja the idiosyncratic elements of the wage process (j, s, i, g ) realize. Skill s is exoge-
nously given at economic birth and we do not consider any inter-generational spillovers of
skills. There are three skill levels, low, medium and high, s  {lo, me, hi}. While agents
know their skill levels already at age ja , for an initial working period j  {ja , . . . , js } agents
of skill s lose fraction (s)  (0, 1) of labor productivity, standing in for time spend on formal
education, whereby the "education period" increases in the skill level, jhi > jme > jlo = ja -1.
Labor supply of groups i  {na, ho, rw} can be chosen from the discrete set {l1 , . . . , ln }. Asy-
lum seekers instead are restricted to supply an exogenous amount of hours. In the first year
of arrival asylum seekers only work amount la , and after the first year those that have not
assimilated and thus stayed in nationality group as work amount ¯      la > la . All agents retire
exogenously at age jr < J , and we denote the employment status by e  {em, re}, where em
is employment, re is retirement.

5.3.2    Endowments

Agents are endowed with one unit of productive time. An agent of skill s, age j , nationality i,
gender g earns an hourly gross wage of

                                          wt (j, s, i) (j, s, i) (g ),                                   (38)

where wt (j, s, i) is the age j , education s and nationality i specific aggregate wage component,
determined in equilibrium, (j, s, i) is age-, skill-, nationality-specific productivity, and (g )
is the gender-specific productivity component, see Section 5.2. Whereas agents know their
education at age ja , agents at age ja  j  js are still in formal education and thus experience
a reduction of their productivity by factor (s).



                                                      20
    In retirement, agents receive a pension income, which depends on all fixed observable
characteristics that measure productivity, (s, i, g ), to proxy the non-redistributive elements
of the German pension system. This component of pension income is denoted by p(s, i, g ).
Pension benefits are further indexed by the benefit level t , which adjusts to clear the ag-
gregate pension budget in each period, so that pension income is

                                          bp
                                           t (s, i, g ) = t · p(s, i, g ).                                  (39)

Agents start their economic life with zero assets. From then on they have access to a risk-free
savings technology with gross interest rate rt . In case of death assets are confiscated and
redistributed as accidental bequests, lump-sum across the population alive in period t, trt .
For asylum seekers, we distinguish between the first period in which they are asylum seekers
and all other periods in which they are accepted or tolerated (we do not distinguish between
those).11 In that first period, under the restricted access to labor market with exogenous
hours worked of la , asylum seekers receive transfer payments ba t (n), which are adjusted to
household size by the number of children n. At the end of the first period, conditional on
surviving to the next period they face the probability  l with which they have to leave the
country and, conditional on staying, the probability  ar with which they assimilate to the
foreign population group rw. The remaining fraction (1 -  l )(1 -  ar ) stays in state as
as accepted or tolerated asylees. From now on, asylees who remain in state as have full
                                                                                      a
access to the tax and transfer insurance scheme but their labor supply is fixed at l , which
is lower than for population group rw.12 At the end of each period they continue to face
the leaving and assimilation shocks conditional on surviving with respective probability  l
and conditional probability  ar . Asylees take into account the leaving probability in their
decision problem and we assume that the continuation value when leaving is the lifetime
utility from consuming the annuitized value of their total wealth in each period, assuming
that they work full time each period, with all details provided in Appendix B. Similar to
asylum seekers, foreigners from group rw face a constant, state-independent probability of
assimilation to population group ho, denoted by  rh .
    Finally, all agents pay contributions to a PAYG financed social security and health in-
surance, non-linear labor income taxes, consumption taxes and capital income taxes all of
which we specify in Section 5.4.
  11
     According to factual legislation, some are non-accepted asylees but are tolerated to stay. Of others the
status may still be pending after one year. Economically, there is little difference across these different types.
  12
     The focus of our analysis lies on the fiscal and general equilibrium consequences of refugee immigration,
which is why it is unproblematic not to model the refugee decisions in the same way as for the other groups
of the population.



                                                        21
5.3.3   Preferences

Households derive per period utility from the consumption of a market good c and leisure.
The household period utility function for gender g and skill s at age j is thus

                                               c
                                        u         ,1 - l                                       (40)
                                            1 + n

where  is a child equivalence parameter and n denotes the number of children of the
household. The recursive formulation of the life-cycle household model is contained in Ap-
pendix B.5.


5.4     Government
There are three separate government budgets, one for the pension system, one for the health
insurance system and one for the general tax and transfer system.

Pension System. Labor income is taxed at the linear rate tp to finance pension income.
We assume that all contributions to the pension system are paid by workers and are tax-
exempt. We also assume a balanced budget in the pension system, thus in each period the
sum of contributions is equal to all layouts.

Health Insurance System. In addition, earnings (labor income and pension income)
are taxed at rate th to finance average age, gender, and time-specific health expenditures
of households bh t (j, g ). These transfers are used to cover health expenditures that perfectly
restore the health stock. Thus, at the household level expenditures on health and trans-
fer payments received net to zero, and the average transfer payments bh      t (j ) only show up
explicitly in the budget of the health care system, which is balanced each period.

General Tax and Transfer System. The government also collects linear taxes on con-
sumption and on capital at rates (tc , tk ). Labor income (net of pension contributions) and
pension income is taxed through a non-linear labor income tax code Tt (yt ), where yt is tax-
able income of the household, i.e., labor income net of pension contributions during the
working period and pensions in retirement. Government revenues net of transfers implied
by tax code Tt (yt ) are used to finance an exogenous stream of government expenditures Gt ,
transfers to asylum seekers, ba                               l
                               t , and transfers to leavers, bt , all of which we aggregate in total
                                                                            a
transfers Zt , as well as administrative expenses per asylum seeker gt        , aggregated as Et .




                                                22
6      Calibration
Most parameters are calibrated externally to aggregate data or are based on our direct
empirical estimates. We calibrate endogenously the discount factor  , gender specific leisure
weights in the utility function and the level parameter of the income tax function. These
parameters are determined jointly so that the benchmark model in a steady state of 2010
matches moments for the period 1980-2010.13 A summary of the calibration is contained in
Table 5, provided in Appendix C.


6.1     Time
We assume that the economy is in an initial steady state in 1960 (model period t = 0),
the first year for which we have comprehensive population data from the Human Mortality
Database (HMD). On the basis of the HMD mortality rates we compute in 1960 a steady
state population distribution with a constant population, taking as given the size of the
age-0 population in 1960. From 1961 on we take actual population data, and thus assume
that, by surprise, the economy jumps to the actual demographic dynamics from beginning
of year 1961. The period until (including) year 2012 is a phase-in period, through which
we make sure that the demographic distribution in the model is consistent with the actual
demographic dynamics in the data, and that the dynamics of macroeconomic aggregates and
their distribution in the period of interest starting in 2013 is not affected by our initialization
in 1960-61.
    From 2013 on we consider three demographic scenarios across which we vary the size
of predominantly low-skill immigration to Germany. As our baseline scenario we assume
time-varying and age-specific mortality- and fertility rates and take time-varying migration
numbers as observed in the data, but ignore the migration inflow of population groups rw
and as from 2013-2018. The high refugee migration scenario takes the immigration by
the population of asylum seekers, and the high migration scenario additionally includes the
higher migration numbers from population group rw in those years. In all scenarios we model
the additional inflow of immigrants as a zero probability event, and assume a trend reversal
to long-run average migration from 2018 to 2022, assuming zero emigration of natives.
  13
    We compute a year 2010 steady state for calibration purposes only. Otherwise year 2010 is a year in our
transition of the phase-in period.




                                                    23
6.2     Population
The details underlying the population dynamics in all three demographic model variants
are described in Appendix C.1. Figure 2 shows the spike in the inflow of asylum seekers
from 2013 to 2017, and the fact that most of these migrants are 20 to 40 years old.14

                          Figure 2: Net Migration, Population Group as
                (a) Aggregate Inflow                                 (b) Age Distribution




Notes: Migration inflow of asylees. Panel (a): aggregate net immigration, Panel (b): average age distribu-
tion of net immigration during 2008-2018. Source: Own calculations based on Central Foreign Population
Registry (Ausl¨
              anderzentralstatistik, AZR).


    Figure 3 shows the corresponding age distribution in the native population and in the
population of group as; the respective distributions for the other population groups, ho
and rw, are shown in Appendix C, Figure 15. Overall, the foreign population stock is much
younger than the native population.
    To predict future mortality rates we extract data from the Human Mortality Database,
estimate a Lee-Carter model (Lee and Carter 1992) and hold predicted mortality rates con-
stant from year 2100 onwards. Finally, we combine data from the Federal Statistical Office
on age-specific fertility rates with the population stock data and the number of births to
determine age and time specific fertility distributions. We assume that those are identical
for all groups and adjust them such that from 2100 onwards the number of newborns is
constant. The model reaches a stationary population distribution by about 2200.15
  14
    Numbers for the other population groups are contained in Figures 13 and 14 of the Appendix.
  15
    During the phase-in period from 1960 to 2012 we have the exact data on the separate population stocks
only from 2008 onwards. Leading towards 2008 we forward shoot on the population dynamics using data on
the annual flow of migration and distribute those across the four groups such that we minimize the distance
between the model implied population stocks in the four groups in 2008 and the respective actual population
stock.



                                                    24
                          Figure 3: Age Distribution of Population Stock
                    (a) Group na                                          (b) Group as




Notes: Age distribution in the population during 2008-2018 among natives and foreigners of the
population group asylees. Source: Own calculations based on Central Foreign Population Registry
(Ausl¨
     anderzentralstatistik, AZR) and German Federal Statistical Office (Statistisches Bundesamt).


6.3     Age and Experience
Households start their economic life at age ja = 17, thus education of the low skilled is
completed at age jlo = 16. We set the age at which medium-skilled and high-skilled complete
education to jme = 20 and jhi = 24, respectively. Consistent with the data on fertility rates
the first fertile year is jf = 15, and fertility is completed by the age of jc = 50. The fixed
retirement age is jr = 66, and the maximum age is J = 100.
    We consider three experience groups of workers, n¯    j = 3, for years of experience 1 - 9,
10 - 19, and  20 years, assume that during education workers do not accumulate experience
and, since labor market experience is not a state variable in our model, experience increases
linearly with age after completion of education.


6.4     Firms
We follow the literature (cf., e.g., Borjas 2003) to estimate the elasticities of substitution
in production, summarized in Table 2.16 These estimates point to a relatively low degree
of substitutability across education groups, consistent with estimates from other studies for
Germany.17 The obtained elasticity of substitution between natives and immigrants lies
  16
     The point estimates of the inverse (and negative) of the elasticities with clustered standard errors in
parentheses are lmh = -0.33(0.12), nf = -0.08(0.01), and hr = -0.04(0.01).
  17
     The point estimate in D'Amuri et al. (2010) is 2.0, while Br¨
                                                                 ucker and Jahn (2011) estimate an elasticity
of about 6.5. For the United States, estimates are typically slightly lower: Borjas (2003) estimates an



                                                     25
in between similar estimates for Germany found in the literature.18 Finally, the degree of
substitutability within the group of foreigners is highest.

                          Table 2: Substitution Elasticities in Production

               Education (lmh )       Foreigners/Natives (nf )        Within Foreigners (hr )
                    3.05                       13.22                          22.61
Notes: Substitution elasticities in aggregate production. lmh : s.e. between lo, medium, high skilled; nf :
s.e. between natives and foreigners; hr : s.e. between HIOECD and RW. Source: Own calculations based
on SOEP.

    In terms of the remaining parameters of the production function we set  = 0.33 and
set  = 0.05. The rate of exogenous technological progress is set to  = 0.015. Through-
out, we detrend the economy by the technology level and thus can think of model wages
as detrended. We normalize the initial 2010 technology level A0 such that the detrended
aggregate wage rate is equal to one in that year. We also normalize the age j , education s,
group i, gender g -specific productivity profiles (j, s, i, g ) so that in the 2010 steady state
of the model we match the wage premia across groups that are implied by the age wage
profiles w(j, s, i) (j, s, i, g ).


6.5     Households
6.5.1    Preferences

The per-period utility function features logarithmic utility from consumption and linear-
additive logarithmic utility from leisure according to

                                        ln(c) + (g ) ln (1 - l(g ))                                      (41)

with gender specific leisure share parameters (g ). We discretize the labor supply choice
into three possible options for low participation, part-time and full-time work. For a week
with 112 hours of available time (corresponding to seven days with 16 hours each), a full
time job with 40 hours corresponds to 36% of time endowment. We accordingly set l(g ) 
{0.036, 0.18, 0.36}. Given this choice set, we calibrate (g ) to match average hours worked
in the period 2000-2009 of 25-65 year olds in the SOEP by gender g  {f e, ma}. A worker
elasticity of about 1.3, and Katz and Murphy (1992) of about 1.4. This is not surprising since we use three
education groups for Germany, whereas the US estimates are based on two education categories.
   18
      Felbermayr et al. (2010) find a substitution elasticity around 7, D'Amuri et al. (2010) of about 22, and
Br¨ucker and Jahn (2011) about 15-20, respectively. For comparison, Ottaviano and Peri (2008) also find a
slightly higher estimate of around 20 for the US.


                                                     26
is counted as participating if she works at least 520 hours in a given year. We compute
gender specific participation rates and annual hours worked conditional on participation in
the SOEP and translate the resulting unconditional annual hours into fractions of maximum
annual work hours of 2080 (52 weeks with 40 hours per year). This gives fractions of full
time hours of 47.5% for females and of 81.5% for males, our calibration targets for the
nationality specific leisure shares (g ). The resulting parameter values are (f e) = 2.846
and (ma) = 1.227.
    Households discount future utility at rate  . We calibrate it to match a rate of return on
capital of 4%, which, given a depreciation rate of 5%, is consistent with a capital to output
ratio of 3.6. This gives  = 0.983.

6.5.2   Skill Distribution

On the basis of the population of the 26-60 year olds in the SOEP we estimate the skill
distribution by gender and nationality group, summarized in Table 3. The high-skilled are
graduates from university and college, medium skill refers to the various vocational degrees
of the German education system, and low skilled are those with only general elementary
schooling or without any formal education. Observe that the biggest difference between the
native population and immigrants is a relatively low fraction of the population being low
skilled. Among group as about 50% have no formal education, and are thus in the low skill
group.

                           Table 3: Skill Distribution in Population

                                  Females                               Males
         Educ s / Region i  low   medium                high   low     medium      high
         Natives           0.0954 0.7457               0.1589 0.0525   0.7151     0.2324
         Foreigners ho     0.2458 0.5829               0.1713 0.2362   0.5839     0.1799
         Foreigners rw     0.2588 0.5388               0.2023 0.1921   0.6803     0.1276
         Foreigners as     0.5270 0.2580               0.2150 0.5019   0.2381     0.2600

Notes: Shares with education s  {lo, me, hi} among population groups i  {na, ho, rw, as} by gender.
Source: Own calculations based on SOEP.



6.5.3   Wage Process

Recall from equation (38) that hourly wages are

                                      wt (j, s, i) (j, s, i) (g ).                            (42)


                                                  27
We normalize male efficiency units (ma) = 1 and estimate (f e) = 0.8074 for average
female efficiency. The proportional productivity loss while still obtaining education is set
to (s) = 0.5, for s  {me, hi}. As discussed in Section 5.2, asylum seekers and foreigners
from the "rest of the world" are perfect substitutes, an assumption we make for reasons of
data limitations. We estimate the productivity of asylum seekers relative to "rest of the
world" foreigners, which we also translate into the calibrated assimilation probability  ar in
Section 6.5.4. For the remaining groups i  {na, ho, rw}, the productivity profiles (j, s, i),
respectively age wage profiles w(s, i) (j, s, i), are estimated from individual level data by
Mincer regressions of log wages on population group and education specific second-order
polynomials in age and a set of fixed effects.19 Figure 16 in Appendix C displays the age wage
profiles for natives in Panel (a) and foreigners from group "rest of the world" in Panel (b)
for the three education categories s  {lo, me, hi}.20

6.5.4    Immigrants' Unemployment, Assimilation and Leave Probabilities

We base the calibration of the probability  ar of nationality group as assimilating to nation-
ality group rw, and of the probability  rh of group rw assimilating to ho on estimates of
relative (residual) wages as a function of years since immigration. We take a sample from
SOEP of males who have completed their education and who work at least 520 hours. We
first purge log wages from a set of explanatory variables,21 and then fit a linear regression of
residual wages on years since immigration separately for the three immigrant groups. The
fitted regressions imply a wage gap upon immigration of as to rw immigrants of 23.76%,
which gives (j, s, as) = 0.7624 · (j, s, rw). Fitting a linear function to the relative produc-
tivity of as to rw over years since immigration implies that this gap would hypothetically be
closed half-way after about 87 years. This translates into an annual assimilation probability
of  ar = 0.8%. By the same logic, we estimate a half-time of the relative productivity of rw
to ho of about 11 years, which gives an annual assimilation probability of  rh = 6.0%.
    To compute the emigration probability  l , we take data on the flow of leavers from
the Federal Office for Migration and Refugees (Bundesamt f¨     ur Migration und Fl¨  uchtlinge,
BAMF). Since we do not distinguish in our analysis between involuntary and voluntary
leaves, we base our calculation on the total number of leaves. We relate those to the stock
  19
     Log wages are adjusted by the gender-specific productivity shifter from the production function esti-
mation, and the Mincer regressions are specified to be exactly consistent with the first order conditions of
the firm problem. Given persistent wage differences between East and West Germany, see Heise and Porzio
(2019), we also adjust wages for an East German wage penalty.
  20
     Population group "high income OECD countries", ho, is in between.
  21
     We control for year fixed effects, education fixed effects, quadratic polynomials over time and age for
each education group, age fixed effects, a West Germany fixed effect, household size, marital status, and
marriage and divorce effects.


                                                    28
of asylum seekers in a given year for the period 2008-2018. On average, about 6% leave, and
there is little variation over the 10 years of data. We thus take  l = 0.06. All probabilities,
i.e.,  ar ,  rh ,  l , apply only up to age jr - 1 = 65.
     In case of leaving, asylum seekers are also assumed to have lower labor productivity in
the destination country, which is reflected in parameter  . Since most asylum seekers came
from Syria, we proxy productivity differences by estimating aggregate production functions
for Germany and Syria and by comparing the resulting Solow residual. This gives  = 0.45.
The calculation of the annuity stream of leavers is outlined in Appendix B.

6.5.5    Participation Rates of Asylum Seekers

For asylees, we estimate labor market participation as a function of years since immigration
for the refugee cohort under study. We proceed in two steps. First, we estimate a Linear
Probability Model of participation using micro data on immigrants including the recent
refugee wave. Second, we use this model to predict the participation rate in the incoming
refugee cohort in our simulation, using the distribution of refugees over education, age, and
sex at the peak of the refugee immigration in 2015.
    Our estimation is based on data from the IAB-SOEP migration, and the IAB-BAMF-
SOEP refugee samples. From those samples we use data for sample years 2014-2017, and
we consider immigrants that immigrated in 2010 or later. We then regress participation22
on years since immigration and a refugee fixed effect (also controlling for age groups and
education groups). Using the estimated model gives an initial participation among the 25-
65 year old refugees of 16.6%. After seven years, the predicted participation is at 43.2%.
                                                                                            a
We translate these values of participation into the low and high hours states la and l ,
respectively, by assuming that conditional on participation asylum seekers work the same
number of hours as members of nationality group rw. Based on the average unconditional
hours in group rw our estimates of participation rates imply that in the first year refugees
work 10.9%, and in all other years they work 36.9% of full time, our values of the respective
model parameters la and ¯  la (expressed as fractions of full time work). Note that by our
assumption of stochastic assimilation, the model counterpart to the hours worked of refugees
after seven years is a weighted average of immigrant-group-specific hours worked.23
  22
     For the purpose of the estimation, participation is a dummy variable that takes on value 1 if the indicated
primary activity at the time of the survey is working.
  23
     Consider a cohort of asylees. Given that each year a fraction  ar = 0.008 of as assimilate to rw, and in
turn a fraction  rh = 0.06 of rw assimilate to ho, in expectation, after seven years 94.6% of the initial asylees
will still be in group as, 4.5% will be in group rw, and 0.9% will be in group ho.




                                                       29
6.5.6     Taste Shocks

Throughout we adopt taste shocks to smooth out the discrete choice decision problems.
Specifically, we assume that at the beginning of a period, if a household chooses between
discrete labor supply options l  {l1 , . . . , ln } then she solves the problem

                      Vt (S, ) = max {Jt (S, l1 ) + (l1 ), . . . , Jt (S, ln ) + (ln )} ,                   (43)

where, given state variables S , the function Vt (S, ) is the upper envelope of the labor choice-
specific value functions Jt (S, li ), and (li ) is the realization of a taste shock obeying an ex-
treme value type I (Gumbel) distribution with scale parameter  , cf., e.g., Iskhakov et al.
(2017). Given this distributional assumption the expected value E [Vt (S, )] and the cor-
responding choice probabilities have closed form expressions (McFadden 1973), which is
convenient for the computation of the model. We set the smoothing parameter to  = 0.1
for all discrete choice problems.


6.6     Government
6.6.1     Transfer Payments to Asylees and Administrative Expenses

Transfer Payments ba (·). Our data on transfer payments to asylum seekers is based on
the Asylum-Seekers' Benefits Act, which was introduced in 1993 to determine the entitle-
ments for asylum seekers.24 The act applies to asylum seekers who filed an application for
protection, those obliged to leave Germany as result of rejection of application and those
with a temporary suspension of removal.25 We base our calibration on the most recent data
for years 2011 to 2019. Based on this data the transfer schedule ba (n), taking the average
over years in constant 2010 prices, a weighted average of schedules of couples and singles,
assuming that transfers increase linearly in the number of children, is ba (n) = 3809+2844 · n.
We normalize benefits by average earnings in the model and the data and assume constant
growth of transfer payments at the rate of technological progress .
  24
     Consequently, data on transfer payments to asylum seekers is not available before 1994.
  25
     The benefits include food, housing, heating, healthcare, personal hygiene, assistance in sickness, preg-
nancy and birth as well as and household durables and consumables. In October, 2015 the law was revised
and the level of social benefits were raised furthermore, it substituted 'in cash' benefits for 'in kind' benefits
for asylum seekers staying in initial reception centers. Those moved to other decentralized locations receive
benefits in cash or kind depending upon the decisions of local authorities which are regulated by Federal
states. The 2015 reforms also state that the asylum seekers are entitled to standard social benefits and full
healthcare after receiving social benefits under Asylum Seekers' Benefits Act for 15 months.




                                                       30
Administrative Expenses g a . In addition to the direct transfer payments to asylum
seekers, estimated administrative and labor costs per asylum seeker are sizeable. Czerny
(2019) estimates administrative costs in 2010 prices of 2908 Euro of annual labor costs
and 4968 Euro of annual administrative costs per asylum seeker in prices of 2010. On this
basis we set g a = 7876, which again is appropriately normalized and grows at constant rate .

Emigration Transfers bl The Reintegration and Emigration Programme for Asylum-
Seekers in Germany (REAG/GARP) provides financial support to asylum seekers and rec-
ognized refugees who volunteer to return to their country of origin or a third country of
reception.26 The program provides assistance with travel cost, financial travel assistance,
medical costs, one-time financial start-up assistance.27 The cost of assisted return per refugee
grew from 686 Euro in 2003 to 1288 Euro per adult in 2008. The rise in cost is mainly due
to a decrease in the number of returnees from 11835 in 2003 to 2799 in 2008 (BAMF).
    In our model we do not distinguish between voluntary and involuntary leaves.28 We thus
first compute total expenses in the years 2003 to 2008 and then divide them by the total
number of leavers in these years. The resulting average for 2005-2008 in 2010 prices of is
about 166 Euro per person. We thus set bl = 166, normalized and growing at rate , and do
not distinguish between administrative costs and direct transfers to the refugees.

6.6.2    Taxes and Government Expenditures

We approximate the German labor income tax code by a parametric tax function, see Ben-
abou (2002):

                                                              1-1
                                              yt         yt
                                 Tt (yt ) =      - 0                 At                              (44)
                                              At         At

where the parameter 0 controls the level of taxes and 1 determines the progressivity of the
tax code. The trend adjustment by the technology level At insures that taxes grow at the level
of technology. Based on the estimates of Holter et al. (2019) we set 1 = 0.2035, and adjust
the tax level parameter 0 to match an average ratio of government spending to GDP, G    Yt
                                                                                          t
                                                                                            , in
the 2010 steady state of 19.12%, implying 0 = 0.842. Along the transition in the baseline
  26
     There are also other programs that regionally operate in different states. REAG/GARP is the leading
program recognized for assisted return of refugees and asylum seekers in Germany. Among other criteria the
provision of these benefits depends on the nationality of the asylum seekers.
  27
     Data on the number of departures under assisted return programs and related costs are not public.
However, some figures can be extracted from the BAMF publications.
  28
     The share of voluntary leavers to which these transfer payments apply fluctuates between about 10%
and 40% with an average of 33% for 2000-2018.



                                                   31
demographic scenario we feed into the model the observed data on G     t
                                                                      Yt
                                                                         until 2012 and hold
it constant thereafter. The consumption tax rate is set to the current level of  c = 19% in
the steady state and adjusted along the transition to clear the government budget. Capital
income taxes are held constant at tk = 25%, in line with current legislation. In the two
alternative migration scenarios, our benchmark results are based on the assumption that
spending Gt is held constant at the path implied by the baseline demographic model. Of
course, the migration-induced government outlays on refugees Et adjust to the elevated
immigration flows. In a model with purely wasteful government spending such as ours it is
a reasonable baseline to hold Gt constant because a migration-induced increase of Gt would
only lead to tax increases, but would not yield utility benefits from increased public goods
provision, neither for migrants nor the native population.

6.6.3       Pension System

To approximate the non-redistributive features of the German public pension system in our
model without an explicit notion of a pension entitlement, we link the population-group-
specific component of individual pension income to group-specific wages and to age produc-
tivity as p(s, i, j ) = wt (¯
                            j = 3, s, i) · (ja , s, i, g ). We base the calibration of the contribution
rate of the pension system on data up to 2012 and adjust the pension benefit level t to clear
the budget of the pension system. Thereafter, we apply the German pension adjustment
formula so that after 2012 the pension benefit level t evolves according to
                                                                           -p
                                            1 - t - tp             RQt
                                t = t-1 ·                ·                                        (45)
                                          1 - t-1 - tp-1          RQt-1

and is thus determined recursively by the change of taxes and the ratio of pensioners to
workers RQt . Together with the pension budget constraint, the benefit level t and the
contribution rate tp are thus determined jointly. p is a sensitivity parameter reducing the
pension benefit level t when the ratio of pensioners to workers RQt increases, and  captures
the share of private contributions from wages to a funded pillar of the system. In accordance
with legislation we set p = 0.25 and  = 0.04.29

6.6.4       Health Care System

We extract a relative age profile of health care expenditures from data by the German public
health insurance for years 2010 to 2017.30 We normalize this data by GDP taking out time
  29
       The formula is an approximation to actual legislation, see Ludwig and Reiter (2010).
  30
       We thank Friedrich Breyer for sending us the data.



                                                      32
effects and compute the average profile. Next, we hold constant these relative expenditure
profiles and feed into the model a time series of average health care contribution rates. For
years 1960 to 2012 (again prior to the start of our main experiment) we take the series of
contribution rates and the endogenously determined incomes to compute total contributions
to health insurance. For our predictions beyond year 2012 we hold constant the age profile of
expenditures of the health care system and adjust the contribution rate to clear the budget
of the health care system. The details are provided in Appendix C.4.


7      Quantitative Analysis of the Migration Wave
Recall from our description of the previous section that we take as given the exogenous
population dynamics. As our baseline we consider a counter-factual scenario where the high
migration inflow from nationality groups as and rw is absent. The second scenario is the high
refugee migration scenario which additionally adds to the demographic dynamics the immi-
gration wave of the years 2013-2018 by the population of asylum seekers. Finally, the high
migration scenario adds higher migration numbers from the rest of the world population in
the same years on top of the high refugee migration scenario. In all scenarios we assume
trend reversals of the migration numbers to their respective long-run averages by 2022.


7.1     Population Dynamics
Figure 4 shows in Panel (a) the sum of net immigration in our three demographic scenarios.31
At the peak of the refugee wave in 2015, aggregate migration increased to 1.2 Million in
the data (as well as in our high migration scenario). As a consequence of this inflow, the
German population increases to about 84 million in 2022 and then starts to decrease. In
our high migration scenario the population decreases to 77 million in 2070, and thus relative
to the baseline demographic model the size of the total population is about 6% higher. In
Appendix D, Figure 19, we further show the fraction of the population originating from
all four regions. By 2070 in the high migration scenario the fraction of natives decreases
from 88% in 2010 to 81% and the fraction of nationality ho increases from 9% to 13%.
Part of this increase is a consequence of our assumed assimilation from rw to ho, with an
assimilation speed of  rh of 6%. Correspondingly, the fraction from rw first increases, then
decreases. Finally, the fraction of asylum seekers in the population increases from 2% to 5%.
  31
    In the baseline scenario, net immigration to Germany is negative in 2016. The reason is an exceptionally
high net emigration of German natives. The long-run average emigration of natives is small, around -23,000.
In our projections, we abstract from emigration of all groups.




                                                    33
                             Figure 4: Migration & Total population
              (a) Total Net Migration                               (b) Total population




Notes: Panel (a): Total net immigration; Panel (b): total German population in three migration scenarios.



    Figure 5 plots the working age to population ratio, the fraction of the population aged ja =
17 to jrl - 1 = 66 to the total population, as well as the old-age dependency ratio, defined as
the fraction of the population aged jrl = 66 to J = 100 to the working-age population. These
plots underscore that our analysis of the migration wave occurs against the backdrop of a
massively aging population. In the baseline demographic scenario, the old-age dependency
ratio increases from 30% in 2010 to 50% by 2050, and the working-age to population ratio
falls from 65% to 55%. The inflow of young immigrants has substantial effects, in particular
on the old-age dependency ratio. It decreases by 1.5% until 2040 in the high migration sce-
nario. The figure also shows the effects of the boom-bust nature of our migration experiment.
Towards 2050-60 the young migrants of the 2015's start to retire, which then decreases the
working age to population ratio sand increases the old-age dependency ratio.


7.2     Macroeconomic and Welfare Effects
As our baseline we study a closed economy population in which aging and the inflow of
migrants affect not only relative prices of labor of different population groups, but also
total factor prices as in the simple model of Section 4. Since Germany is by no means a
completely closed economy, in Section 7.3 we also report results for a small open economy
version of the model. For each of the three population scenarios, we hold constant government
expenditures per refugee, and government consumption expenditures are held constant at
the path computed in the baseline demographic model. The government budget is cleared
through adjusting consumption taxes.


                                                   34
                                  Figure 5: Dependency Ratios
                    (a) WAPR                                     (b) %p-Change of WAPR




                    (c) OADR                                     (d) %p-Change of OADR




Notes: Panel (a): working age to population ratio, Panel (b): percentage point change of working age
to population ratio; Panel (c): old-age dependency ratio; Panel (d): percentage point change of old-age
dependency ratio.


7.2.1    Social Security System

The fiscal consequences of the migration flow on the pension system are shown in Figure 6.
As a consequence of population aging the contribution rate in the pension system increases
from 20% in 2010 to 25% by 2040. Correspondingly, the benefit level falls by 4 percentage
points. The migration inflow leads, in the high migration scenario, to a reduction of the
contribution rate by up to 0.2%p and an increase of the benefit rate also by about 0.2%p in
2030. As for the working age to population and the old-age dependency ratios, the figure
shows the reversal of these changes after 2060 when the young migrants retire. Appendix D.2
complements these findings by displaying expenditures of the health care system.



                                                  35
                          Figure 6: Contribution & Replacement Level
             (a) Contribution Rate tp                       (b) %p-Change of Contribution Rate




                (c) Benefit Rate p
                                 t                             (d) %p-Change of Benefit Rate




Notes: Panel (a): contribution rate to pension system, Panel (b): percentage point change of contribution
rate to pension system; Panel (c): benefit rate of pension system; Panel (d): percentage point change of
benefit rate of pension system.


7.2.2    Government Expenditures and Consumption Taxes

Because of the administrative outlays on refugees, the total government expenditure to GDP
ratio increases after the migration shock, see Appendix D.2. In the long-run, however, since
general government consumption expenditures Gt do not adjust to the flow of incoming
people and GDP increases due to the increasing workforce, the ratio of total government
expenditures to GDP decreases. Consumption taxes shown in Figure 7 adjust to clear
the government budget. In the baseline demographic model, as a consequence of the lower
workforce which shrinks the tax base and the constant government consumption expenditures
as a share of GDP, the consumption tax rate needs to increase by almost 8%p along the
transition. Financing administrative expenses for the incoming refugees leads to an initial


                                                   36
spike in the consumption tax rate (in the refugee migration scenario). Over time, however,
consumption taxes decrease in the two migration scenarios because of the enlarged tax base.

                                   Figure 7: Consumption Taxes
           (a) Consumption Tax Rate tc                       (b) %p-Change of Cons. Tax Rate




Notes: Panel (a): consumption tax rate, Panel (b): percentage point change of consumption tax rate.



7.2.3    Macroeconomic Aggregates

We de-trend per capita GDP and per capita consumption by the technology level in order
to isolate the effects of demographic changes. Thus if these variables decline, this means
they fall relative to a constant trend growth. In the baseline, detrended per capita GDP
and consumption decrease along the transition of the economy as shown in Figure 23 of
Appendix D. The immigration of mainly low-skilled individuals leads to a drop in both
variables because they add little to output, relative to their head count. However, to draw
conclusions about the welfare consequences of such an inflow for those who live along the
transition, in addition to analyzing its fiscal consequences we have to study the impact on
rates of return and wages as the relevant ingredients for household life-cycle decisions and
utility.32 We turn to this analysis next.

7.2.4    Wages

Marginal Product of Labor. Figure 8 shows the marginal product of labor wt . In
the baseline scenario, the marginal product of labor increases between 2013 and 2035 by
almost 3% on account of the aging population and associated decline in labor relative to
  32
   Krueger and Ludwig (2007) make the related point that for evaluating the welfare consequences of
demographic change the time paths of per capita consumption and output alone are not fully informative.



                                                  37
capital, and then swings back.33 Comparing now the baseline and the high migration sce-
narios, as a consequence of the inflow of immigrants the marginal product of labor drops
on impact by more than 0.4 percent. In our model, low skilled immigrants arrive without
any assets and thus the per capita capital stock declines. At the same time aggregate labor
increases mildly. Both forces reduce the capital stock per labor efficiency unit and thus the
marginal product of labor, while raising the rate of return to capital. The reduction of the
marginal product of labor has adverse welfare consequences for young agents, the increase
of the rate of return in contrast is beneficial for medium- and old-aged native households
alive in 2013 who have substantial asset holdings. Importantly, after the initial drop the gap
between the marginal product of labor in the high refugee migration and the high migration
scenarios gradually closes until 2035 as the young immigrants accumulate wealth so that the
capital-labor ratio (capital intensity) kt increases.

                                Figure 8: Marginal Product of Labor
                      (a) MPL                                         (b) %-Change of MPL




Notes: Panel (a): marginal product of labor, Panel (b): percent change of marginal product of labor.



Wages of Low-Skilled Natives. We now focus on low-skilled natives who make up 7.4%
of the native working age population in 2013.34 Figure 9 shows the percent changes of
aggregate gross and net wages of low-skilled natives in the first age (experience) group ¯
                                                                                         j = 1,
wt (¯
    j = 1, s, i) for s = lo, i = na, whereas the corresponding levels are shown in Figure 25
in Appendix D.35 The migration inflow reduces gross wages of low-skilled natives by 1.5%
in 2040 in the high migration scenario, and throughout the entire projection window the
  33
     The return on capital rt displays the opposite movement, shown in Figure 24 in Appendix D: it decreases
by about 0.5%p, until 2035, consistent with previous studies for Germany, e.g., B¨ orsch-Supan et al. (2006).
  34
     Computed as the weighted (by gender) share of natives with a low education, see Table 3.
  35
     Results for other experience groups are similar.


                                                     38
gross wage effect is negative. The net wage reduction is smaller initially in both migration
scenarios since pension contribution rates decline, but becomes stronger over time as pension
contributions increase with the gradual retirement of the migrant wave.

    Figure 9: %-Changes of Gross & Net Wages, Low-Skilled Natives, Age Group ¯
                                                                             j=1
          (a) %-Change of Gross Wages                                   (b) %-Change of Net Wages




Notes: Panel (a): percent change of gross wages, Panel (b): percent change of net wages of low-skilled
natives in age group ¯
                     j = 1.



Decomposition of Gross Wages of Low-Skilled Natives. To interpret the change in
gross wages we decompose them into the marginal product of labor and additional terms that
reflect the relative scarcity of skills and of native workers, exactly as in the simple model
of Section 4. After substitution of the different components of the aggregate production
function, and again focusing on wages of low-skilled natives we obtain:
                                                                                            1
                                                               1                      1
                                                   1-               1-                    lmh -1
           wt (¯
               j = 1, lo, na) = wt · 1 + t (me, lo) lmh + t (hi, lo) lmh                           ·
                                                                     s (lo)
                                                                   =Wt
                                                                           1
                                                                1-  1     nf -1
                                      1 + t (1, f o, na | lo)        nf                                (46)
                                                     fn
                                                   =Wt  (lo)


                    Lt (s)
where t (s, lo) =   Lt (lo)
                              for s  {me, hi} is the ratio of the CES aggregates of workers with
                                                                              Lt (1,lo,f o)  ~
skill s to the CES aggregate of low-skilled workers and t (1, f o, na | lo) = Lt (1,lo,na)
                                                                                            is the
ratio of the CES aggregate of foreign to the CES aggregate of low-skilled native workers
in the youngest age group. These terms measure the relative scarcity of the respective
productivity-weighted labor aggregates. They in turn enter into expressions for the relative


                                                   39
wage effects. We refer to Wts (s) as the relative scarcity wage effect of skill group s, and
to Wtf n (s) as the relative scarcity wage effect of foreign workers of skill group s.
    Our estimates of the substitution elasticities 1 < lmh <  and 1 < nf <  from
Section 6 suggest that workers with different education levels and of different nationalities
are imperfect substitutes. Then three effects from an inflow of low skilled immigrants on
low-skilled natives' wages are at work, as in the simple model of Section 4. First, an inflow
of workers with zero assets decreases the capital stock per capita and increases aggregate
labor supply, thus reducing the capital intensity kt which decreases gross wages wt . Second,
an inflow of low-skilled foreign workers makes low-skilled natives scarcer, i.e. it increases
the skill ratio t (1, f o, na | lo), which increases gross wages of native low skilled workers.
Third, an increase of low-skilled workers increases the relative scarcity of medium and high
skilled workers relative to low skilled workers, i.e., it decreases the skill ratios t (s, lo),
for s  {me, hi}, which decreases wages of (native) low skilled workers.
    Figure 26 in Appendix D displays the changes in the skill ratios t (·). Due to the
inflow of relatively low-skilled workers, high- and medium-skilled workers become relatively
scarce. Since the skill decomposition of refugees and of foreigners from RW features stronger
differences to natives in the medium skill group than among the high-skilled, this scarcity
effect is more pronounced for t (me, lo) than for t (hi, lo). This increase of the relative
abundance of low skilled workers contributes to a reduction of gross wages. The effect is
stronger than the increase of the relative scarcity of natives to foreigners of low skill, shown
by term t (f o, na | lo).
    How these relative scarcities of workers translate into wage effects also depends on the
respective substitution elasticities. The total effect is measured by the relative scarcity
terms Wts (lo) and Wtf n (lo); their changes are shown in Figure 10. As a consequence of the
strong changes of the skill ratios shown in Figure 26 and of the low estimate of the elasticity
of substitution across skill groups, the wage effect due to the relative abundance of low skilled
workers is substantially more negative than the positive effect from the relative scarcity of
native workers. This, in combination with the reduction of the marginal product of labor
shown in Figure 8 explains the reduction of gross wages shown in Figure 9.

7.2.5   Distribution of Welfare Changes

To analyze the welfare consequences of the different population scenarios we compute con-
sumption equivalent variation (CEV) between the high refugee migration scenario and the
baseline scenario, as well as between the high migration scenario and the baseline scenario.
The CEV is computed as the percent change in consumption over the life-cycle required as
compensation in the baseline scenario for individuals to be indifferent to the respective mi-

                                               40
          Figure 10: Change of Wage Terms, Low-Skilled Natives, Age Group ¯
                                                                          j=1
                     s       s                                           fn       fn
                (a) Wt (lo)/Wt (lo)                                 (b) Wt  (lo)/Wt  (lo)




Notes: Decomposition of wages according to equation (46). Panel (a): relative scarcity wage effect of skill
group lo, Panel (b): relative scarcity wage effect of foreign workers of skill group lo.


gration scenario. Thus, positive numbers indicate welfare gains from a migration scenario.
For every cohort that lives at any point in time during the studied period, we calculate
the CEV based on discounted life-time utility. Thus, in 2013 we compute the CEV for all
ages j = 0, . . . , J , reflecting all cohorts alive in 2013. For all cohorts born after 2013 we
calculate it at the initial condition (j = 0, a = 0) of the newborns. For each cohort, we
calculate CEVs separately by skill group s and nationality i.
    Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 11 show the CEV of native cohorts alive in 2013 for all skill
groups. In the refugee migration scenario, the medium- and high-skilled gain whereas the low
skilled lose from the migration inflow. The highest gains of 0.2% of consumption equivalent
variation are obtained by medium and high skilled natives at labor market entry, and highest
losses of -0.2% accrue to low-skilled natives of about age 35. As Panels (c) and (d) show,
in contrast to the very mild initial welfare losses faced by low-skilled natives, future cohorts
increasingly gain from the in-migration of low-skilled refugees because the positive effects
from the relatively young age distribution dominate the negative wage effects.36 Uncovering
this heterogeneity in the welfare consequences is an important advantage of our dynamic
analysis, relative to static investigations that focus on the very short-run or the long-run
steady state.
    Since low-skilled natives only make up 7.4% of the native population, and since the high
and medium skilled are winners from the inflow of predominantly low-skilled migrants--
both in the 2013 cross-section as well as for newborns in many years along the transition,
  36
     The    mild   losses  for   newborn    low  skilled  natives        are    in   2013-2107,     respec-
tively, -0.0568%, -0.0464%, -0.0365%, -0.0267% and -0.0145%.


                                                    41
           Figure 11: Consumption Equivalent Variation (CEV) for Natives [in %]
 (a) Generations Alive in 2013, Refugee Migration        (b) Generations Alive in 2013, High Migration




 (c) By Birth Cohort over Time, Refugee Migration        (d) By Birth Cohort over Time, High Migration




Notes: Panel (a): consumption equivalent variation (CEV) of natives alive in 2013 over age in refugee
migration scenario, Panel (b): CEV of natives alive in 2013 over age in high migration scenario, Panel (c):
CEV of economically newborns over time in refugee migration scenario, Panel (d): CEV of economically
newborns over time in high migration scenario.


as shown in Figure 11--, the fraction of winners by far exceeds the fraction of losers among
the natives. The larger fraction of winners is also income and consumption richer than the
losers. Even though the gains expressed in terms of a consumption equivalent variation of
the winners are mostly smaller than the losses of the natives, the higher overall economic
weight of the winners suggests that there is room for a cross-sectional redistribution scheme
within the native population to compensate the losers.
    To see the potential for such a cross-sectional redistribution scheme in each year, we
compute the aggregate gains (or losses) based on the CEVs of all households alive in a given
year t. For this calculation, we first translate the CEV's into year t consumption units for


                                                    42
all population groups alive in that year. Aggregation then gives a measure of total gains (or
losses) in the year t cross-section, which we relate to year t aggregate private consumption in
                                       c
the baseline. Concretely, denote by gt  -j (s, i) the education s, nationality i, and cohort (t - j )
specific CEV and by ct (j, s, i) the respective average consumption (averaged across endoge-
nous asset and employment distributions and the exogenous gender distribution) in the
baseline scenario. The period t net gain of group j, s, i = na is determined as

                                                        c
               Xt (j, s, i = na) = Nt (j, s, i = na) · gt -j (s, i = na) · ct (j, s, i = na),          (47)

where Nt (j, s, i = na) is the size of the age j , education s native population in year t. Next,
for each year t we sum up the obtained gains and losses for the cross-section of all natives
living in a given year to obtain the net gain expressed in units of consumption of that year.
We then express these net gains as a fraction of aggregate private consumption of natives in
the baseline scenario:
                                        J
                                        j =0   s{lo,me,hi}   Xt (j, s, i = na)
                              Xt =                                               .                     (48)
                                                   Ct (i = na)

In the cross-section of households alive in 2013 the net gain ratio in the refugee migration
scenario is small but positive: it stands at 0.087%. In the high migration scenario it is 0.51%.
Figure 12 displays the net gain ratio for years 2013-2070. In the refugee migration scenario
while the net gain ratio is initially small it increases over time and reaches 0.6% by 2070.

                                  Figure 12: Net Gain Ratio [in %]




Notes: Net gain ratio for the cross-section of a given period as defined in equation (48) over time.




                                                     43
   Overall, in the refugee migration scenario the aggregate welfare consequences and effects
summarized in the net gain ratio are relatively small initially, partially due to the fact
that the inflows are not massive, relative to the size of the native workforce. However,
they increase over time and the aggregate perspective masks the distributional implications
highlighted above, with currently alive low-skilled natives experiencing losses whereas native
medium- and high-skilled households experience substantial welfare gains from the inflow,
which overall nets to a small but positive number in 2013 in the aggregate.


7.3    Sensitivity Analyses
We investigate the sensitivity of our results by analyzing how the CEV of low-skilled native
newborns in 2013 and the net gain ratio in the 2013 cross-section are affected by changes
in the economic environment. The results are summarized in Table 4. First, and motivated
by our simple model of Section 4 we assume a small open economy. In our experiment, we
hold interest rates constant from year 2013 onwards, effectively assuming that the economy
opens up to international capital flows from then on, modeled as a zero probability event in
all migration scenarios. As a consequence and in line with the predictions from the simple
model of Section 4, the CEV of economic newborns improves relative to the closed economy
model; it is now approximately zero in the refugee migration scenario. Likewise, the net
gain ratio increases. Given that the German economy is a medium sized open economy
our baseline results for the closed economy may therefore overstate the welfare losses from
low-skilled immigration for low-skilled natives.
    Next, we investigate sensitivity with respect to some key parameter estimates. We con-
sider an increase of the assimilation probability of asylum seekers from  ar = 0.008 to the
speed at which migrants from rw assimilate to ho of  rh = 0.06. We view the assimilation
speed to some degree as a policy parameter that may be changed by relaxing labor market
frictions or labor market training for asylum seekers. There are two countervailing mecha-
nisms. On the one hand, a higher assimilation speed increases the labor market competition
for low skilled natives. On the other hand, a higher assimilation speed increases the overall
economic benefits from low-skilled immigration, enlarging the tax base, which has positive
welfare effects also for low skilled natives. In the refugee migration scenario the net effect
leads to slightly higher welfare losses for low-skilled natives. In the high migration scenario,
the gains dominate for this group. In both scenarios the net gain ratio increases.
    Finally, we evaluate the sensitivity with respect to our parameter estimates of the sub-
stitution elasticities in production. Specifically, we explore a perfect substitution elasticity
(PSE) within foreigners and between foreigners and natives by setting hr = nf = ,


                                              44
labeled as "Nationality-PSE". This increases labor market competition from the inflow of
low-skilled workers for low-skilled natives and for all other native workers. Accordingly, the
CEV of low skilled natives is more strongly negative than in the baseline model, and the
net gain ratio decreases. Related, we also analyze the effects of a perfect substitution across
skill groups by setting lmh = , labelled as "Skills-PSE". In this scenario, labor market
competition from the inflow of low-skilled migrants for low-skilled natives is less severe, but
for the medium and high skilled it increases. Accordingly, the CEV for the low-skilled na-
tives increases substantially and turns positive in the refugee migration scenario. The net
gain ratio decreases mildly because of the intensified labor market competition for medium
and high skilled natives.

    Table 4: CEV of Low-Skilled Native Newborns in 2013 and 2013 Net Gain Ratio [in %]

                         CEV 2013 Newborns [in %]                 2013 Net Gain Ratio [in %]
         Variant         Ref Scen High Mig Scen                   Ref Scen High Mig Scen
         Baseline        -0.0568      0.2628                       0.0868       0.5093
         SOE              0.0001      0.4805                       0.1281       0.6901
          ar = 0.06      -0.0595      0.3173                       0.2288       0.6636
         Nationality-PSE -0.2316       -0.05                       0.0806       0.4844
         Skills-PSE       0.2959      0.8533                       0.0764       0.4955
Notes: CEV of low-skilled natives economically born in 2013 and net gain ratio for the 2013 cross-section as
defined in equation (48).




8      Conclusion
To study the macroeconomic and distributional consequences of the recent migration wave
to Germany we have constructed a quantitative overlapping generations economy with skill
heterogeneity among the German population. We found that net wages of unskilled natives
deteriorate in the short run as an increased number of unskilled refugees compete with
these natives on the labor market and as administrative expenses on (mainly) low skilled
immigration increase. We also document that these welfare losses are dominated by the
gains for other population groups. Our results point to general lessons that apply beyond
the German experience. First, for the wage and welfare consequences of different groups
it is crucial what skill segment the migrants belong to and compete with, and the binary
distinction between college and non-college educated workers might not be granular enough
in many countries. Related, the relative magnitude of the substitution elasticities across
worker skill types, and across regions of origin of workers are crucial determinants in the

                                                    45
wage- and thus welfare consequences for natives of large migration flows. Third, the welfare
consequences of migration for natives are not only heterogeneous by education and wealth
(highlighting the potential importance of endogenous interest movements in the presence of
massive shifts in the supply of labor), but vary substantially over time and across cohorts,
requiring the type of dynamic transition analysis in the context of an OLG model presented
here. Fourth, even though the aggregate welfare consequences of these migration waves might
be small, at least initially, they mask very sizeable redistribution across groups exactly along
the dimensions discussed above, with substantial transfers required to compensate the losers.
And finally, over time, welfare effects become more and more positive to the effect that also
low skilled native newborns benefit from the inflow of low skilled workers, because in an
aging society the favorable (relatively young) age distribution of the immigrants dominate
the relatively low productivity effects eventually.
    We have abstracted from a number of aspects when modeling migrant inflow and be-
haviour that might be quantitatively important for our conclusions. First, by assuming a
constant returns to scale production function we abstract from the existence of fixed factors
such as land or housing and the associated negative congestion effects induced by increased
migration. Second, by focusing on formal labor market outcomes we likely have underesti-
mated the economic contributions of migrant labor to the German economy, for example,
when migrants engage in black market activities or contribute (unmeasured) labor to busi-
nesses in their social networks. Finally, even though we have modelled skill assimilation
of migrants, this was not driven by choice (conscious human capital accumulation), but by
chance. Similarly, although we have considered the possibility of return migration as an
exogenous stochastic event, especially economic migrants and successful asylum seekers face
a choice of whether to remain in Germany, and if so, how long. Although our focus has been
on the outcome for native Germans, an equally important question concerns the economic
consequences for the migrants themselves, conditional on the assumption that the decision
to leave their home countries was driven by exogenous shocks (in the case of Syrian refugees,
the civil war). However, addressing this question would require modeling the economic fu-
ture of the migrants' home country, which is a daunting task especially in the case of the
current refugees. We therefore leave this question to future research.




                                              46
References
 Auerbach, A. J. and L. J. Kotlikoff (1987). Dynamic Fiscal Policy. Cambridge, MA: Cam-
   bridge University Press.
 Battisti, M., G. Felbermayr, G. Peri, and P. Poutvaara (2017, 11). Immigration, Search and
    Redistribution: A Quantitative Assessment of Native Welfare. Journal of the European
    Economic Association 16 (4), 1137­1188.
 Ben-Gad, M. (2004, July). The Economic Effects of Immigration­a dynamic Analysis.
    Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 28 (9), 1825­1845.
 Ben-Gad, M. (2008, April). Capital-Skill Complementarity and the Immigration Surplus.
    Review of Economic Dynamics 11 (2), 335­365.
 Benabou, R. (2002). Tax and Education Policy in a Heterogeneous-Agent Economy: What
    Levels of Redistribution Maximize Growth and Efficiency? Econometrica 70 (2), 481­
    517.
 Borjas, G. (1985). Assimilation, Changes in Cohort Quality, and the Earnings of Immi-
    grants. Journal of Labor Economics 3 (4), 463­489.
 Borjas, G. J. (1999). The Economic Analysis of Immigration. In O. Ashenfelter and
    D. Card (Eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3A, Chapter 28, pp. 1679­
    1760. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
 Borjas, G. J. (2003). The Labor Demand Curve is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the
    Impact of Immigration on the Labor Market. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4),
    1335­1374.
 B¨
  orsch-Supan, A., A. Ludwig, and J. Winter (2006). Aging, Pension Reform and Capital
    Flows: A Multi-Country Simulation Model. Economica 73, 625­658.
 Brell, C., C. Dustmann, and I. Preston (2020). The Labor Market Immigration of Refugee
    Migrants in High-Income Countries. CReAM Discussion Paper Series (01/20).
 Br¨
   ucker, H. and E. J. Jahn (2011). Migration and Wage-setting: Reassessing the Labor
    Market Effects of Migration. The Scandinavian Journal of Economics 113 (2), 286­317.
 Burstein, A., G. Hanson, L. Tian, and J. Vogel (2017). Tradability and the Labor-Market
    Impact of Immigration: Theory and Evidence from the U.S. NBER Working Paper .
 Chassamboulli, A. and T. Palivos (2014). A Search-Equilibrium Approach to the Effects
   of Immigration on Labor Market Outcomes. International Economic Review 55 (1),
   111­129.


                                           47
Chojnicki, X., F. Docquier, and L. Ragot (2011). Should the US Have Locked Heaven's
  Door? Journal of Population Economics 24 (1), 317­359.
Colas, M. (2019). Dynamic Responses to Immigration. Opportunity and Inclusive Growth
   Institute .
Czerny, L. (2019). Essays on Migration, Public Spending and Local Fiscal Multipliers.
   Dissertation, Goethe University Frankfurt.
D'Amuri, F., G. I. Ottaviano, and G. Peri (2010, May). The Labor Market Impact of
   Immigration in Western Germany in the 1990s. European Economic Review 54 (4),
   550­570.
d'Artis Kancs and P. Lecca (2018). Long-term Social, Economic and Fiscal Effects of
   Immigration into the EU: The Role of the Integration Policy. World Economy .
Diamond, P. A. (1965). National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model. American Eco-
   nomic Review 55, 1126­1150.
Dustmann, C. and I. Preston (2012, 02). Comment: Estimating The Effect of Immigration
  on Wages.
Dustmann, C., U. Schonberg, and J. Stuhler (2016). The Impact of Immigration: Why do
  Studies reach such different Results? Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 (4), 31­56.
Eckstein, Z. and Y. Weiss (2004). On the Wage Growth of Immigrants: Israel, 1990-2000.
   Journal of the European Economic Association 2 (4), 665­695.
Felbermayr, G., W. Geis-Th¨
                          one, and W. K. Kohler (2010). Restrictive Immigration Policy
   in Germany: Pains and Gains foregone? Review of World Economics 146 (1), 1­21.
Glorius, B. (2010). Go West: Internal Migration in Germany After Reunification. Revue
   belge de g´
             eographie (December 2012), 0­14.
Guerreiro, J., S. Rebelo, and P. Teles (2019, August). What is the Optimal Immigration
  Policy? Migration, Jobs and Welfare. (26154).
Heise, S. and T. Porzio (2019). Spatial Wage Gaps and Frictional Labor Markets. Working
   Paper.
Holter, H. A., D. Krueger, and S. Stepanchuk (2019). How Do Tax Progressivity and
   Household Heterogeneity Affect Laffer Curves? forthcoming: Quantitative Economics.
Iftikhar, Z. and A. Zaharieva (2019). General Equilibrium Effects of Immigration in Ger-
    many: Search and Matching Approach. Review of Economic Dynamics , 245­276.



                                         48
Imrohoroglu, S., S. Kitao, and T. Yamada (2017). Can Guest Workers Solve Japan's Fiscal
   Problems? Economic Inquiry .
Iskhakov, F., T. H. Jørgensen, J. Rust, and B. Schjerning (2017). The Endogenous Grid
   Method for Discrete-Continuous Dynamic Choice Models with (or without) Taste
   Shocks. Quantitative Economics 8, 317­365.
Katz, L. F. and K. M. Murphy (1992). Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply
   and Demand Factors. Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(1), 35­78.
Kirdar, M. G. (2012). Estimating the Impact of Immigrants on the Host Country So-
   cial Security System when Return Migration is an endogenous Choice. International
   Economic Review 53 (2), 453­486.
Krueger, D. and A. Ludwig (2007). On the Consequences of Demographic Change for
   Rates of Returns to Capital, and the Distribution of Wealth and Welfare. Journal of
   Monetary Economics 54 (1), 49 ­ 87.
Lagakos, D., B. Moll, N. Qian, and T. Schoellman (2018). Life-Cycle Human Capital
   Accumulation across Countries : Lessons from US Immigrants. Journal of Human
   Capital 12 (2), 305­342.
Lee, R. D. and L. Carter (1992). Modeling and Forecasting U.S. Mortality. Journal of the
   American Statistical Association 87 (419), 659­671.
Lessem, R. and C. Sanders (2019). Immigrant Wage Assimilation in the United States:
   The Role of Occupational Upgrading. Working Paper.
Llull, J. (2018). Immigration, Wages, and Education: A Labour Market Equilibrium Struc-
   tural Model. Review of Economic Studies .
Ludwig, A. and M. Reiter (2010). Sharing Demographic Risk - Who is Afraid of the Baby
   Bust? American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2(4), 83­118.
McFadden, D. (1973). Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior.
Moreno-Galbis, E. and A. Tritah (2016). The Effects of Immigration in Frictional Labor
  Markets: Theory and Empirical Evidence from EU Countries. European Economic
  Review 84 (C), 76­98.
Nanos, P. and C. Schluter (2014). The Composition of Wage Differentials between Mi-
  grants and Natives. European Economic Review 65, 23 ­ 44.
Ottaviano, G. I. P. and G. Peri (2008, jul). Immigration and National Wages: Clarify-
   ing the Theory and the Empirics. NBER Working Papers 14188, National Bureau of
   Economic Research, Inc.

                                          49
Ottaviano, G. I. P. and G. Peri (2012). Rethinking the effect of immigration on wages.
   Volume 10, pp. 152­197. Oxford University Press.
Scharfbillig, M. and M. Weissler (2019). Heterogeneous Displacement Effects of Migrant
   Labor Supply - Experimental Evidence From Germany. SSRN Electronic Journal .
St¨
  ahler, N. (2017). A Model-Based Analysis of the Macroeconomic Impact of the Refugee
    Migration to Germany. Discussion Papers .
Storesletten, K. C. (2000). Sustaining Fiscal Policy Through Immigration. Journal of
   Political Economy 108, 300­323.
Weiss, Y., R. M. Sauer, and M. Gotlibovski (2003). Immigration, Search, and Loss of Skill.
  Journal of Labor Economics 21 (3), 557­591.




                                          50
Online Appendix
A      Details and Proofs for the Simple Model
A.1     Definition of Equilibrium
Definition 1. Given an initial capital stock K0 , an exogenous population {Nt (0, s, i), Nt (1, s, i)}
and government policy {t } an equilibrium is a sequence of allocations and prices such that

  1. Given wages wt (s, i), interest rates Rt+1 and policies t , bt+1 (s, i) for each t and each
     type (s, i) the allocation ct (0, s, i), ct+1 (1, s, i), at+1 (s, i) maximizes lifetime utility (6)
     subject to the budget constraints (5).

  2. Interest rates and wages (Rt , wt ) satisfy the marginal product pricing equations (11)
     and (11), and type-specific wages are given by (13).

  3. Government policies satisfy the budget constraint (10).

  4. Markets clear:

       (a) Labor Markets

                              Lt (hi) = Nt (0, hi, na)                                             (49)
                            Lt (lo, i) =     (lo, i)Nt (0, lo, i)   for i  {na, f o}               (50)

       (b) Capital Market
                                                 Kt+1 = st wt Lt                                   (51)

       (c) Goods Market
                                                               -
                                             Ct + Kt+1 = Kt L1
                                                             t                                     (52)

     Equilibrium in the small open economy is defined in a similar fashion, but the capital
market clearing condition is replaced by the condition that the real interest rate Rt = R
is fixed by the world capital market, which then from the firm's optimality conditions pins
down the constant wage wt = w(R) and capital-labor ratio kt = k (R).




                                                   1
A.2     Relative Wages as Functions of Demographics
We summarize wages as functions of demographic variables as:
                                                            1
                        1- 1                   1- 1       1- 1
                                                                                                          1
                 Lt (lo)      lh   + Lt (hi)       lh         lh                           1- 1         1- 1
     Lt                                                                          Lt (lo)      lh            lh
           =                                                           =                           +1
   Lt (hi)                         Lt (hi)                                       Lt (hi)
                                                   1
                               1- 1              1- 1
    Lt              Lt (hi)          lh              lh
           =                              +1
   Lt (lo)          Lt (lo)
                                                                                                           1
                                                                              n            1-  1        1-  1
   Lt (lo)    Lt (lo)       Lt (lo, f o)                     (lo, na)(1 -  )t                 nf             nf       (lo, f o)µt
           =              ·              =                                                         +1             ·         n
   Lt (hi)   Lt (lo, f o)    Lt (hi)                              (lo, f o)µt                                           t
                                                                                                          -1
                                                                              n            1-  1        1-  1               n
   Lt (hi)    Lt (hi)       Lt (lo, f o)                     (lo, na)(1 -  )t                 nf           nf           t
           =              ·              =                                                         +1             ·
   Lt (lo)   Lt (lo, f o)    Lt (lo)                              (lo, f o)µt                                         (lo, f o)µt
                                                                              1
                              1-  1                          1-  1         1-  1
 Lt (lo)         Lt (lo, na)        nf    + Lt (lo, f o)          nf            nf

             =
Lt (lo, f o)                          Lt (lo, na)
                                                                          1
                                            n     1-  1                1-  1
                     (lo, na)(1 -          )t           nf                  nf
            =                                                 +1
                          (lo, f o)µt
                                                                              1
                              1-  1                          1-  1         1-  1
 Lt (lo)         Lt (lo, na)        nf    + Lt (lo, f o)          nf            nf

            =
Lt (lo, na)                           Lt (lo, na)
                                                                          1
                                                  1-  1                1-  1
                          (lo, f o)µt                   nf                  nf
            =                         n
                                                              +1
                     (lo, na)(1 -  )t




                                                              2
                                                                                            1
                                                                                           lh
                                1
                                                                      1- 1                1- 1
                       Lt       lh                      Lt (lo)          lh                   lh
   wt (hi) = wt ·                    = wt ·                                     +1
                     Lt (hi)                            Lt (hi)
                                                                                                                                     1
                     
                                                                                     1                              1- 1       
                                                                                                                                    lh -1
                                                n                1-  1            1-  1
                                                                                                                        lh
                               (lo, na)(1 -  )t                     nf               nf            (lo, f o)µt 
            = wt ·                                                       +1                   ·                              + 1
                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                         n
                                    (lo, f o)µt                                                      t
                                                                                                                                             1
                   
                                                                                                                    1   1- 1          
                                                                                                                                            lh -1
                                                         1-  1                                      1-  1      1-  1
                                                                                                                              lh
                               (lo, na)(1 -  )              nf                 (lo, f o)µt             nf         nf
            = wt ·                                                   +                                                  ·          + 1
                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                     n
                                                                                 t
                            n
            = wt · Whi (µt /t )
                                              1                                 1
                                   Lt         lh              Lt (lo)           nf
wt (lo, na) = wt · (lo, na) ·                       ·
                                  Lt (lo)                    Lt (lo, na)
            = wt · (lo, na)
                                                                                                                                     1
               
                                                                                                              -1    1- 1           
                                                                                                                                    lh -1
                                                   1-  1                                      1-  1         1-  1
                                                                                                                        lh
                           (lo, na)(1 -  )            nf                 (lo, f o)µt             nf            nf
                ·                                                +                                                           + 1
                                                                                                                                
                                                                               n
                                                                           t
                                                                       1
                                              1-  1                   nf -1
                            (lo, f o)µt                 nf
                ·                       n
                                                              +1
                       (lo, na)(1 -  )t
                          n              n
            = wt Wlo (µt /t ) · Wna (µt /t )

                                                   n             n                                  n
It follows from direct inspection that Whi (µt /t    ), Wna (µt /t ) are strictly increasing in µt /t
               n                                 n
and Wlo (µt /t   ) is strictly decreasing in µt /t .


A.3     Proof of Lemma 1 and Theorem 1
                                                    L                                     Lt+1
For lemma 1, we want to arrive at an expression for t +1 =                                 Lt
                                                                                               .     Recall from (3) and (4)
that
                                                                                   1
                                            1- 1                      1- 1       1- 1
                           Lt = Lt (lo)        lh   + Lt (hi)             lh         lh

                                                                                                     1
                                               1-  1                              1-  1           1-  1
                       Lt (lo) = Lt (lo, na)             nf      + Lt (lo, f o)          nf            nf




                                                             3
Work on (4):
                                                                                                         1
                                            1-  1                                         1-  1       1-  1
      Lt (lo) = ( (lo, na)Nt (0, lo, na))         nf   + ( (lo, f o)Nt (0, lo, f o))             nf        nf


                                                                                                                   1
                                   n          1- 1                              n          1- 1                 1-  1
              = ( (lo, na)(1 -    )t Nt-1 (0)) nf             +(    (lo, f o)µt t Nt-1 (0)) nf                       nf


                                                                                          1
                                 n     1-  1                      n          1-  1     1-  1
              = ( (lo, na)(1 -  )t )         nf   + ( (lo, f o)µt t )           nf          nf   Nt-1 (0)
                 n
              = (t , µt )Nt-1 (0) = t Nt-1 (0)

Use this in (3) to get
                                                                                           1
                                             1- 1             n          1- 1            1- 1
                     Lt = ((·)Nt-1 (0))             lh   +   (t Nt-1 (0)) lh                 lh

                                                                     1
                                    1- 1       n         1- 1      1- 1
                         = ((·))       lh   + (t )            lh       lh   Nt-1 (0)
                             n         n                    n
                         = ((t , µt ), t )Nt-1 (0) = t (t , t )Nt-1 (0).

Thus we get
                                     n               n
                           L     ((t +1 , µt+1 ), t+1 )Nt (0)
                           t +1 =      n         n
                                 ((t     , µt ), t )Nt-1 (0)
                                     n               n
                                 ((t+1 , µt+1 ), t   +1 )
                               =         n         n
                                                          t
                                  ((t , µt ), t )
                                     n               n
                                 ((t +1 , µt+1 ), t+1 )     n
                               =         n         n
                                                          (t  + µt )
                                  ((t , µt ), t )
                                 t+1 n
                               =    (t + µt )
                                 t
                                 n         n      n
                               = t + µt if t +1 = t , and µt+1 = µt


We make the following:

Observation 1.     1. Fix  n and consider a permanent change of µt from µl > 0 to µh > µl
                                                              L             n     l
    in period t. Since t+1 = t we have t+1 = t and thus t     +1 jumps to  + µ .


  2. Fix µ and consider a permanent change of  n from  nl > 0 to  nh >  nl in period t.
     Since t+1 = t and t+1 (t+1 ,  nh ) = t (t ,  nh ) we have that t
                                                                    L
                                                                      +1 jumps to 
                                                                                   nh
                                                                                      + µ.




                                                         4
   The proof of theorem 1 then follows directly from lemma 1 as well as propositions 2 and
3. The only non-trivial part is to sign the general equilibrium effect. For this note that

                                                            -1
(1 +  ) ln(wt ) +  ln(Rt+1 ) = (1 +  ) ln((1 - )kt ) +  ln(kt +1 )

                              =  + (1 +  ) ln(kt ) - (1 - ) ln(kt+1 )
                                                                                    L
                              =  + (1 +  ) ln(kt ) - (1 - ) ln(st ) +  ln(kt ) - ln(t +1 )
                                                                         L
                              =  + (1 +  ) ln(kt ) - (1 - ) ln(st ) - ln(t +1 )

                              =  + (1 +  ) ln(Kt ) - (1 - ) ln(st )
                              - [(1 +  ) + (1 - ) ] ln(Lt ) + (1 - ) ln(Lt+1 ).

where  is a constant. The period t capital stock Kt is pre-determined. The saving rate
st increases with the per-capita immigration cost t+1 which in turn rises as more migrants
come in, increasing the capital-labor ratio in period t + 1 and thus reducing the real interest
rate. This is the first negative general equilibrium effect (which would be absent if there
are no resource costs for the newley arriving migrants, i.e. if t+1 = 0). Second, both Lt as
          L
well as t +1 = Lt+1 /Lt increase when µt increases permanently. As long as  is sufficiently
large (trivially, if  = 1), or as long as  ln(
                                            µ
                                               Lt )
                                                      ln(
                                                        µ
                                                          Lt+1 )
                                                                 (both of these terms only depend
on model-exogenous variables) the general equilibrium effect of a permanent increase in
migration flows is negative.
Remark 1. Also note that in the absence of a resource cost (t+1 = 0) the saving rate is
invariant to demographics, and an increase in migration triggers a decline in the current
capital-labor ratio kt and a further decline in future capita-labor ratios kt+s through the
                                                   L
permanent increase in the growth rate of labor t   +s . In the long-run the GE effect of these
declines is negative as long as the economy remains dynamically efficient. To see this, observe
that for all t  1 the welfare difference along the transition is

  [(1 +  ) ln(wt ) +  ln(Rt+1 )] = (1 +  ) (ln(wt ) - w0 ) +  (ln(Rt+1 ) - R0 )
                                 = (1 +  ) (ln(kt ) - ln(k0 )) - (1 - ) (ln(kt+1 ) - ln(k0 )) .

For t   this term is negative if

                                              
                                           >    .
                                        1-   1+

It is straightforward to verify from the corresponding social planner's problem that this is the
condition for dynamic efficiency of the economy. In the short run, for the period t = 1 old
generation the effect is positive because the wage effect is absent. For all newborn generations

                                               5
along the transition, the effect is negative if the capital share  is sufficiently large--notice
that dynamic efficiency is thus only a necessary condition for the effect to be negative for all
newborns along the transition--, because for all t  1 the welfare change is negative if

                     (1 +  ) |(ln(kt ) - ln(k0 ))| - (1 - ) |(ln(kt+1 ) - ln(k0 ))| > 0
                           |(ln(kt ) - ln(k0 ))|     
                                                  >    .
                     1 -  |(ln(kt+1 ) - ln(k0 ))|   1+

                                                                            |(ln(kt )-ln(k0 ))|
and by the monotonic decline of the capital stock we know that            |(ln(kt+1 )-ln(k0 ))|
                                                                                                  < 1.


B      Quantitative Model Appendix
B.1      Assimilation Flows
We construct net migration numbers at the net addition to the population stock from migra-
tion flows in the next period, Mt+1 (j + 1, i, g ), from which we then compute the migration
rates µt (j, as, g ) = MtN
                         +1 (j +1,i,g )
                          t (j,i,g )
                                        . Denoting by Mtf+1 (j + 1, as, g ) the inflow from foreign coun-
tries to the group of asylum seekers, the net immigration flow to group as is

      Mt+1 (j + 1, as, g ) = Mtf+1 (j + 1, as, g ) -  l + (1 -  l ) ar Nt (j, as, g )t (j, as, g )

and therefore

                    µt (j, as, g ) = µf               l       l
                                      t (j, as, g ) -  + (1 -  )
                                                                 ar
                                                                    t (j, as, g ).

   Denoting by Mtf+1 (j + 1, rw, g ) the inflow from foreign countries to population group rw,
the net inflow to the population group rw is

  Mt+1 (j + 1, rw, g ) = Mtf+1 (j + 1, rw, g ) + (1 -  l ) ar t (j, as, g )Nt (j, as, g )
                                                                        -  rh t (j, rw, g )Nt (j, rw, g )

and thus

                                                                 Nt (j, as, g )
       µt (j, rw, g ) = µf                    l ar
                         t (j, rw, g ) + (1 -  ) t (j, as, g )                  -  rh t (j, rw, g ).
                                                                 Nt (j, rw, g )




                                                    6
Correspondingly, denoting by Mtf+1 (j + 1, ho, g ) the inflow from foreign countries to popula-
tion group ho, the total inflow to population group ho is

             Mt+1 (j + 1, ho, g ) = Mtf+1 (j + 1, ho, g ) +  rh t (j, rw, g )Nt (j, rw, g )

and thus

                                                                               Nt (j, rw, g )
                     µt (j, ho, g ) = µf               rh
                                       t (j, ho, g ) +  t (j, rw, g )                         .
                                                                               Nt (j, ho, g )

B.2     First-Order Conditions of Firm Problem
Denote by kt = AK  t
                 t Lt
                      the "capital intensity", respectively the capital stock per efficiency unit
of labor. Then, the first-order conditions of the static firm problem are given by
                                                                 1
                                                                 
                               -1     1- 1                      1- 1
                       rt =   kt     kt        + (1 - )            
                                                                       -                                (53a)
                                                                        1
                                                                        
                                              1- 1                     1- 1
                      wt = At (1 - )         kt      + (1 - )             
                                                                                                        (53b)
                                              1
                                   Lt        lmh
                  wt (s) = wt                                                                           (53c)
                                  Lt (s)
                wt (¯
                    j, s) = wt (s)                                                                      (53d)
                                                           1
                                           Lt (¯j, s)      nf
           wt (¯
               j, s, na) = wt (¯
                               j, s)          ¯                  ,                                      (53e)
                                         Lt (j, s, na)
                                                           1
                                           Lt (¯j, s)      nf
            ~t (¯
            w   j, s, f o) = wt (¯
                                 j, s)                          ,                                       (53f)
                                         ~ t (¯
                                         L    j, s, f o)
                                                                 1
                                              ~ t (¯
                                              L    j, s, f o)
                                                                 hr

            wt (¯           ~t (¯
                j, s, ho) = w   j, s, f o)         ¯                                                    (53g)
                                              Lt (j, s, ho)
                                                                              1
                                                    ~ t (¯
                                                    L    j, s, f o)
                                                                              hr

             wt (¯          ~t (¯
                 j, s, o) = w   j, s, f o)                                         , for o  {rw, as}.   (53h)
                                                   o{rw,as} Lt (s, o)


We then get the age j , skill s, nationality i-specific aggregate wage component wt (j, s, i) =
wt (¯
    j, s, i) if j  [jl (¯
                        j ), . . . , jh (¯
                                         j )].


B.3     Annuity Income Stream of Leavers
Total wealth of a leaver includes the value of assets at the end of period t at age j net of
fraction  c of confiscated assets by the government of the country the leaver remigrates to,


                                                       7
a one time lump-sum payment by the German government bl         t , and the discounted value of
future labor income. We assume that in the country a household remigrates to it works
full-time, l = ln , does not pay or receive any transfers from a social insurance institution,
and retires exogenously at age jr . Accidental bequests are taxed at a confiscatory rate. We
compute the continuation value in a partial equilibrium, taking the current period wage wt
and the interest rate in the period of leaving rt as given.
    Denote by at the savings of a leaver during the leaving period, i.e, in the last period in
Germany. Initial assets after confiscation at the beginning of period t + 1 in the country
the leaver migrates to are at+1 = (1 -  c )at . Total wealth of a leaver with education s and
gender g in period t + 1, age j + 1, is accordingly given by

                                                            jr -1              p-(j +1)
                                                                       1
    Wt+1 (j + 1, s, g ) = at+1 (1 + rt ) +      bl
                                                 t   +·                                   (p, s, i, g )wt (p, s, g )ln
                                                           p=j +1
                                                                     1 + rt

where   (0, 1) is a productivity scaling parameter, reflecting lower productivity in the
respective country as well as linear labor income taxes. The according annuity stream is

                        a                  rt     (1 + rt )J -j
                       yt +1 (s, g ) =                            Wt+1 (j + 1, s, g ).                               (54)
                                         1 + rt (1 + rt )J -j - 1

B.4     Gains and Loss Term
For consumption equivalent variation of a cohort born in period t - j for period t state vari-
                                                                                   c
ables age j , education s, nationality i, gender g , asset holdings a, denoted by gt -j (j, s, i, g, a)
and corresponding cross-sectional t (j, s, i, g, a) in the baseline demographic scenario, we
compute the average consumption equivalent variation

                         c                            c
                        gt -j (j, s, i, g ) =        gt -j (j, s, i, g, a)t (j, s, i, g, da).                        (55)

For period 2013 we compute the above CEV for all cohorts t - j , ages j = 0, . . . , J , and
consider the actual asset position and employment state in period 2013. For cohorts born
after 2013 we evaluate the CEV at j = 0, a = 0, only. The period t consumption of
the respective group given the consumption policy function in the baseline demographic
scenario ct (j, s, i, g, a) in turn is

                          ct (j, s, i, g ) =         ct (j, s, i, g, a)t (j, s, i, g, da).                           (56)

These objects form the basis of the computation of the net gain term in equation (47).


                                                           8
B.5      Recursive Household Problem
State Variables. We collect state variables as follows, also see Table 1: age j  {ja , . . . , J },
education s  {lo, me, hi}, economic nationality i  {na, ho, rw, as}, gender g  {f e, ma},
employment status e  {em, re}, and assets a  A.
    For asylum seekers the problem is slightly more complex because of the leaving shock
and the assimilation shock. Also, immigrants from the rest of the world face an assimilation
shock. We therefore first describe the problems of groups i  {na, ho} and then turn to
relevant extensions for the remaining two population groups.

Dynamic Problem of Retired Households, j  {jr , . . . , J }, i  {na, ho}, e = re. Re-
tired agents solve37

                                              c
         Vt (j, s, i, g, e, a) = max U           , 1 + t (j, i, g )Vt+1 (j + 1, s, i, g, e, a )
                               c,a         1 + n

subject to

                                                      p                      p
                  a = (a + trt )(1 + rt (1 - tk )) + yt - (c(1 + tc ) + Tt (yt ))  0
                   p
                  yt = (1 - th )bp
                                 t (s, i, g ).



Dynamic Problem of Working Households in Last Working Period, j = jr - 1, i 
{na, ho}, e = em. In the last period of work, jr - 1, the value function is the expected value
of the maximized value functions of the discrete choice specific value functions J (·, li ) from
working li  {l1 , . . . , ln } hours, which is, given the Gumbel distributed taste shocks  with
scale parameter  ,

                                                              n
                                                                           Jt (·, lk )
                        Vt (j, s, i, g, e = em, a) =  log          exp
                                                             k=1
                                                                               

with according choice probabilities for alternative k

                                                                         Jt (·,l=lk )
                                                                  exp          
                      t (j, s, i, g, e = em, a, l = lk ) =                                   .
                                                               n              Jt (·,l=lm )
                                                               m=1   exp            

  37
    Recall that t J, i, g = 0 so that terminal (and trivial) decision problem of singles and couples at age J
are nested in this description.




                                                     9
where Jt (·, lk ) is the choice specific value function for working lk  {l1 , . . . , ln } hours

  Jt (j, s, i, g, e = em, a, l = lk ) =
                                     max {U (c, 1 - lk ) + t (j, i, g )Vt+1 (j + 1, s, i, g, e = re, a )}
                                      c,a


subject to

                    a = (a + trt )(1 + rt (1 - tk )) + yt - c(1 + tc ) - Tt (yt )  0
                    yt = (1 - tp - th )wt (j, s, i) (j, s, i, g )lk

Dynamic Problem of Working Households in Working Period j  {js , . . . , jr -2}, i 
{n, h, r}, e = em. The structure is the same as previously, where continuation values at t, j
are the value functions Vt+1 (j + 1, s, i, g, e = em, a ).

Dynamic Problem of Households i  {na, ho}, j  {ja , . . . , js }, e = em. The dynamic
problem is the same as described above, but the current period labor productivity is further
shifted by factor (s)  (0, 1).

Modifications for Asylees, i = as. Due to differences in access to the social insurance
system and transfer payments to asylees as well as labor market restrictions, the problem of
asylees in the first year of entry is different from other years, which we store in indicator 1a .
At the end of each period conditional on surviving asylum seekers face the risk of having to
leave with respective probability  l and, conditional on not leaving, they may assimilate to
population group rw with probability  ar , thus the unconditional probability of assimilating
to group rw is (1 -  l ) ar and the unconditional probability of staying in population group as
is (1 -  l )(1 -  ar ). For the remainder of the description we focus on asylum seekers during the
working period and spell out later the adjustments needed for other stages of the life-cycle.
    First, we compute the continuation value in case of leaving. An asylee being forced to
leave at age j + 1 receives in each period a permanent income stream y a (s, g ), which we
compute for both partners in a couple according to equation (54). The household enjoys
flow utility from consumption of the annuity in each period and is assumed to work full-
time, U (y a (s, g ), 1 - ln ), and thus the value function in case of being forced to leave can be




                                                      10
computed recursively as

 V l (j + 1, s, i = as, a ) =
                                   y a (s, g )
                          U                    , 1 - ln + t+1 (j + 1, as, g )V l (j + 2, s, i = as, a )
                                 1 + n + 

subject to

                   a = a (1 + r) + 1j jr -1 ·  · wt (j + 1, s, as, g )ln - y a (s, g )

where indicator 1j jr -1 is equal to one if the household is of working age j  jr - 1, r
is the return on assets in the period of leaving the country, and the initial asset position
is (1 -  c )¯          ¯t are savings during the leaving period.
            at , where a

Problem of Asylum Seekers at Age j  {js , . . . , jr - 2}. The problem of an asylum
seeker in the working period is

                                              c
 Vt (j, s, as, e = em, a) = max U                  , 1 - 1a la - (1 - 1a )¯
                                                                          la
                                c,a       1 + n + 
     t (j, i, g )  l Vtl+1 (j + 1, s, as, a ) + (1 -  l ) ( ar Vt+1 (j + 1, s, i = rw, e = em, a )
                                                   +(1 -  ar )Vt+1 (j + 1, s, i = as, e = em, a )))}

subject to

             a = (a + trt )(1 + rt (1 - tk )) + yt + ba                   c
                                                           t (n) - (c(1 + t ) + Tt (yt ))  0

             yt = wt (s, j, as, g ) (s, j, as, g ) 1a la + (1 - 1a )¯
                                                                    la .

Immigrants from Other Population Groups. Unlike asylum seekers groups rw, ho
have full access to the labor market and to the German social insurance system in the first
period after arrival. Immigrants from group rw face in each period the probability  rh to
assimilate to group ho, which they take into account in their continuation values.


C     Calibration Appendix
Table 5 summarizes the exogenously calibrated and Table 6 the endogenously calibrated
parameters of the model.



                                                    11
                        Table 5: Exogenous Calibration Parameters

Parameter         Interpretation                                                 Value
                                          Population
Nt (j, i)         Population Stock Data                                       Section 6.2
ja                Age at labor market entrance                                     17
jl                Age of education completion low-skilled                          16
jm                Age of education completion middle-skilled                       20
jh                Age of education completion high-skilled                         24
jf                Fertility Age                                                    15
jc                Age of completing fertility                                      50
jr                Statutory Retirement Age                                         66
J                 Max. Lifetime                                                   100
{t (j, i, g )}    Survival rates                                              Section 6.2
                  Fraction of baby girls                                          0.48
{t (j, i)}        Fertility rates                                             Section 6.2
l                 Leaving probability                                             0.06
 ar               Assimilation probability as  rw                                0.008
 rh               Assimilation probability rw  hi                                0.060
(s, i)            Fraction of skill s among population i                       Table 3
                                          Endowments
 (j, s, i)        Age Profile                                                  Figure 16
 (g )             Productivity Shifter by Gender                               [0.8074,1]
{l1 , ..., ln }   Discrete labor supply levels                             {0.036, 0.18, 0.36}
{la , ¯
      la }        Fraction of full-time work of group as                     {0.109, 0.369}
                  Relative productivity of leavers                                0.45
 (s)              Productivity loss in education                                   0.5
c                 Confiscation rate of assets for leaving asylum seekers            1
                                           Preferences
                  Relative risk aversion parameter                                 1
                  Scale parameter of taste shocks                                 0.1




                                               12
                                                  Production
                         Capital share                                                   0.33
                         Depreciation rate                                               0.05
                         Rate of technological progress                                  0.015
                         Elast. of substitution b/w capital and labor                      1
             lmh         Elast. of substitution b/w labor of different skill levels      3.05
             nf          Elast. of substitution b/w f o and na                           13.22
             hr          Elast. of substitution b/w ho and rw                            22.61
                                                 Government
             p           Sensitivity parameter in the pension formula                   0 (0.25)
             p           Pension contribution rate                                     Figure 17
             h           Health system contribution rate                               Figure 17
                         Private contribution factor                                    0 (0.04)
             ba          Transfer payments to asylum seekers                          Section 6.6.1
             {bh (j )}   Health insurance payments                                     Figure 18
             c           Consumption tax rate (in steady-state)                           19%
             k           Capital income tax rate                                          25%
             {G/Yt }     Government consumption to GDP ratio                          Section 6.6.2
Notes: Exogenous calibration parameters from various source described in Section 6.



                               Table 6: Endogenous Calibration Parameters

 Parameter          Interpretation              Value                  Target                    Target Value
                   Discount Factor             0.9827                   K/Y                           3.66
 (g )                Util. Wgths.           [2.846,1.227]   Uncond. Hours/Full-Time Hours        [0.475,0.815]
 0             Level Param. Tax Func.          0.8416                   G/Y                         19.12%
Notes: Parameters calibrated endogenously by matching 2010 auxiliary steady state moments.




                                                       13
C.1      Population Model
Population data is from the German Federal Statistical Office (Statistisches Bundesamt
/Destatis; HMD) and from the Central Foreign Population Registry (Ausl¨   anderzentralstatistik,
AZR). In this data foreigners include all persons who do not have German citizenship, and
we have explicit information on the stock of first and second generation foreigners. A first
generation foreigner is a person that was born outside Germany, whereas a second generation
foreigner in the data is born in Germany but holds foreign nationality. By our economic
perspective we consider second generation foreigners as natives irrespective of their legal cit-
izenship, cf. equation (30), and accordingly assign them to population group with "national-
ity" na. With this assumption, we first construct the age-specific population stock Nt (j, i, g )
for groups i  {na, ho, rw, as} for the years 2008 - 2019.
    Next, we impute from this data the implied net addition to the population stock Mt (j, i, g )
from the law of motion of the population in equation (29), taking into account the adjust-
ments of the dynamics that are implied by the assimilation probability  ar and the leave
probability  l . We refer to the net change of the stock also as the migration flow.38
    To compute this net flow from (29) we also need data on age, group, and time specific
mortality rates. We take those from the Human Mortality Database (HMD) for years 1960-
2017 and, since we lack data on group specific mortality rates, we assume that all immigrants
immediately after entry have the same mortality process as the average German population
and thus set t (j, i, g ) = t (j, g ) i.
    For the predictions of the population beyond 2019 we make the following assumptions:

   1. For all groups {na, rw, ho, as} we compute the average age distribution of constructed
      net migration numbers M   ¯ (j, i, g ) over the years 2007-2018. We assume that aggre-
      gate migration in each group reverts to a long-run average until 2022. This reversal
      takes place according to the timing assumptions for each scenario described in Sec-
      tion 6.1. To compute long-run average migration in each group we assume--consistent
      with conventional assumptions by the German Federal Statistical Office (Statistisches
      Bundesamt)--that total migration over all groups is 200, 000 annually and then dis-
      tribute this total migration to the three groups ho, rw, as according to the relative
      shares during the years 2008-2012.
  38
    The advantage of constructing the flow data from the information on the population stock is that we
can meaningfully measure the net addition to the stock caused by migration. Also, direct information on
flows features statistical inaccuracies because of double counting of multiple within year migration. The
disadvantage is that we do have to make assumptions on mortality and survival rates for all population
groups. However, mortality is relevant only at higher ages at which migration numbers are close to zero.




                                                   14
  2. Age and group specific fertility distributions are constant at their respective age spe-
     cific averages taken over the years 2007-2018 until year 2100. Thereafter, fertility rates
     adjust such that the number of newborns is constant in each period. With this as-
     sumption (and with the assumption of constant survival rates and constant migration
     numbers) the population will reach a stationary distribution with constant population
     growth by about year 2200.

  3. Survival rates increase according to the predictions from the Lee-Carter model until
     year 2100 and are constant thereafter.

   During the phase-in period from 1960 to 2012 we have the exact data on the population
stocks only from 2008 onwards. Leading towards 2008 we forward shoot on the population
dynamics using data on the annual flow of migration and distribute those across the four
groups such that we minimize the distance between the model implied population stocks in
the four groups in 2008 and the respective actual population stock.
   The next subsections contain a more detailed description of the construction of fertility
rates, mortality rates and migration numbers.

C.1.1    Fertility Rates

In the data the number of newborns is
                                               jc
                              Nt+1 (0, i) =           ft (j, i)Nt (j, i, f e)
                                              j =jf


where ft j, i is the group i age j and time t specific fertility rate. Since we lack information
on ft (j, i) and on the number of newborns for all population groups , we construct fertility
rate as follows. We take time and age specific fertility rates of the average German population
from the Federal Statistical Office and on the number of birth from the Human Mortality
Database, separately for East and West Germany. Based on the stock of the population in
both regions, we next adjust the age- and time-specific fertility rates such that the fertil-
ity distribution is consistent with the number of newborns. We then take the population
weighted average of the East and West German constructed data.

C.1.2    Mortality Rates

We take a time series of gender specific mortality rates for 1950 to 2017 from the Human
Mortality Database, computed as the weighted average of East and West German mortality



                                                    15
rates, and decompose mortality rates as

                               ln(1 - t (j, g )) = a(j, g ) + b(j, g )dt (g )

where t (j, g ) is the survival rate applying the Lee-Carter procedure (Lee and Carter 1992).
Next, we assume that the estimated time specific factor d  ^t (g ) obeys a unit root process

                                  ^t+1 (g ) = (g ) + d
                                  d                  ^t (g ) +    t+1 (g ).


                                              J
                       ^(j, g ), ^
Based on the estimates a         b(j, g )             ^t (g ), 
                                                     ,d        ^ (g ) we predict (future) survival rates by
                                              j =0
                                                                                      ^
                                                                                      ^0 (g ) =
setting to zero the innovation terms ^t (g ) and initialize the process assuming that d
^0 (g ).
d
    After construction of the population numbers (and the migration flows, see next sub-
section) we take population weighted average survival rates and recompute the population
dynamics.

C.1.3     Migration Numbers

We construct the net addition to the respective population stock in group i by backing out
the net flow from equation (29):39 Since we lack data on group specific mortality rates, we
assume that all immigrants immediately after entry have the same mortality process as the
average German population and thus set t (j, i, g ) = t (j, g ) i.
    Figure 13 summarizes the constructed migration flows in the three groups of the foreign
population {ho, rw, as}, Figure 14 contains the according age distribution of the migration
flow, and Figure 15 shows the resulting age distribution of the population in groups i 
{na, ho, rw, as}.


C.2      Age Wage Profiles
Figure 16 displays the age wage profiles for natives and for foreigners from group rw. Age
wage profiles for foreigners from groups ho are similar to those of natives.




  39
    In the data, the population stock is reported at the end of a given calendar year which we accordingly
interpret as the beginning of the next calendar year. Thus the population stock reported in the data at the
end of calendar year 2007 is taken to be the population stock at the beginning of year 2008.


                                                      16
                                 Figure 13: Net Migration Flows
                  (a) Group ho                                    (b) Group rw




                  (c) Group as                                      (d) Total




Notes: Annual aggregate net migration numbers from 2008 to 2018 by nationality group. Panel (a):
HIOECD, Panel (b): RW, Panel (c): AS, Panel (d): total. Source: Own calculations based on Central
Foreign Population Registry (Ausl¨
                                 anderzentralstatistik, AZR).




                                               17
                          Figure 14: Age Distribution of Net Migration
                    (a) Group ho                                        (b) Group rw




                    (c) Group as                                          (d) Total




Notes: Age distribution of net migration, average of years 2008 to 2018. Panel (a): HIOECD, Panel (b): RW,
Panel (c): AS, Panel (d): total. Source: Own calculations based on Central Foreign Population Registry
(Ausl¨
     anderzentralstatistik, AZR).




                                                   18
                        Figure 15: Age Distribution of Population Stock
                   (a) Group na                                        (b) Group ho




                   (c) Group rw                                         (d) Group as




Notes: Age distribution of population stock by years 2008 to 2018. Panel (a): Natives, Panel (b): HIOECD,
Panel (c): RW, Panel (d): AS. Source: Own calculations based on Central Foreign Population Registry
(Ausl¨
     anderzentralstatistik, AZR) and German Federal Statistical Office (Statistisches Bundesamt).




                                                   19
                                  Figure 16: Age Wage Profiles
                    (a) Natives                                (b) Foreigners from group rw




Notes: Predicted age wage profiles for natives and foreigners from RW for the three skill categories s 
{lo, me, hi}. Source: Own calculations based on SOEP.




                                                  20
C.3      Technology
For the estimation of the substitution elasticities in production, we exploit the homogeneity
of the production function in each nest and add productivity parameters ~(·) at each nest,
which are normalized to one. Thus, at the estimation, we write labor at each nest as
                                                                     1
                                                                  1-  1
                                                           1         lmh
              Lt =                           ~ t (s)1- lmh 
                                         ~(s)L
                           s{lo,me,hi}
                        n¯
                         j

           ~ t (s) =
           L                   ~(¯    ~ t (¯
                                 j, s)L    j, s)
                        ¯
                        j =1
                                                                                          1
                                                1- 1              ~                1- 1     1-  1
        L~ t (¯
              j, s) = ~(¯
                        j, s, na)L~ t (¯
                                       j, s, na) nf + ~
                                                      ~(¯         ~ t (¯
                                                        j, s, f o)L    j, s, f o) nf           nf


                                                                                            1- 1  1- 1 1
                                                                                                  hr  hr

   ~
   ~ t (¯
   L    j, s, f o) = ~(¯
                                  ~ t (¯
                         j, s, ho)L
                                                1 - 1
                                       j, s, ho) hr +             ~(¯ j, s, i)L~ t (¯
                                                                                    j, s, i)
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
                                                                       i{rw,as}

      ~ t (¯
      L    j, s, i) =                ~(¯
                                       j, s, i, g )Lt (¯
                                                       j, s, i, g ),
                        g {f e,ma}


and we assume that ~(¯        j, s, i, g ) = ~(¯
                                               j, s, i)~(g ). Given the homogoeneity of the production
function, it is straightforward to show that the productivity scaling parameters ~(·) can be
mapped into labor productivity (¯            j, s, i) (g ), where (g ) = ~(g ), and (¯
                                                                                     j, s, i) is an average
over j  [jl (¯
             j, s), . . . , jh (¯
                                j, s)] of the (s, i)-specific productivity profile (j, s, i).
    We estimate the elastiticities of substitution at the different nests jointly with the produc-
tivity parameters following the standard approach in the literature (cf., e.g., Borjas 2003).
For example, at the level of immigrant groups, we translate the first order conditions into
estimation equations and identify the relative productivity parameters and the elasticity of
substitution across immigrant groups using variation over time in the relative labor supply
(hours worked) and the relative wages. We then use these estimates to obtain the CES
aggregator of labor supply of immigrants, and the implied wage aggregate. We use this
together with labor supply and wages of natives to estimate the next layer of the CES, and
then move up nest by nest in the same fashion. At each nest, we use the population size
of a given group as an instrument for the labor supply in order to address a potential en-
dogeneity problem of the estimation equations. At the highest nest, we allow the education
group specific productivity components to follow quadratic time trends in order to accomo-
date the possibility of skill-biased technological change in the estimation. We implement the
estimator using SOEP data from 1984-2015. For each year, group specific hours worked are


                                                                21
aggregate hours worked by individuals up to age 60 of a given group, and the group specific
wage rate is estimated using workers up to age 60 who work at least 520 hours.


C.4     Social Insurance
Figure 17 shows the contribution rates to the German PAYG pension system and to the
public health insurance system (including long-term care insurance).

           Figure 17: Contribution Rates to Social Security & Health Insurance




Notes: Data on contribution rates to social security and health insurance.   Source:   http://www.
sozialpolitik-aktuell.de.


   Our data on health expenditures cover ages 0-99 for years 2010-2017. We normalize
these expenditures by nominal GDP data (which leads to almost identical profiles for all
years pointing to strong time effects) and take the average across these years. Figure 18
shows the age profile for females and males.


D      Appendix: Further Results
D.1     Population Shares by Groups
Figures 19 and 20 shows the population shares by nationality and their changes relative to
the baseline scenario.




                                               22
       Figure 18: Health Expenditures over the Life-Cycle [Index, centralized data]




Notes: Data on age-specific health expenditures.   Source:   Federal Insurance Office (Bundesver-
sicherungsamt).


D.2     The Fiscal Side
Figure 21 shows the health contribution rate (and its change). In the refugee migration
scenario the health contribution rate increases slightly; refugee immigrants receive the same
age contingent lump-sum payments but contribute little to the system. In the high migra-
tion scenario the contribution rate initially increases when the effect of young in-migration
dominates.
    Figure 22 shows total government expenditures as the sum of government consumption Gt
and all outlays to finance incoming and leaving refugees Et . In the migration scenarios we ob-
serve the initial blip due to the incoming wave of migrants, but overtime overall expenditures
decrease slightly relative to GDP because GDP increases.


D.3     Per Capita GDP and Consumption
Figure 23 de-trended per capita GDP and consumption, where de-trending is by the tech-
nology level At .




                                              23
                       Figure 19: Population Shares by Region of Origin I
                   (a) Group na                                      (b) %-Change roup na




                   (c) Group ho                                     (d) %-Change group ho




Notes: Fractions as a share of total population and respective percentage changes. Panels (a)-(b): Natives,
Panels (c)-(d): HIOECD.


D.4      Rate of Return & Wages
Figure 24 shows the rate of return to capital and its change to the baseline demographic
model. Figure 25 shows gross and net wages of low skilled natives as weighted averages of
the three age groups.


D.5      Wage Changes
Figure 26 displays the change of the skill ratios for the low-skilled natives.




                                                    24
                     Figure 20: Population Shares by Region of Origin II
                  (a) Group rw                                   (b) %-Change group rw




                   (c) Group as                                  (d) %-Change group as




Notes: Fractions as a share of total population and respective percentage changes. Panels (a)-(b): RW,
Panels (c)-(d): AS.




                                                 25
                              Figure 21: Health Contribution Rate

           (a) Health Contr. Rate (th )                (b) %p-Change of Total Health Contr. Rate




Notes: Panel (a): contribution rate to health insurance system, Panel (b): percentage point change of
contribution rate to health insurance system.




                          Figure 22: Total Government Expenditures
    (a) Total Gov. Exp. to GDP (Gt + Et )/Yt           (b) %p-Change of Total Gov. Exp. to GDP




Notes: Panel (a): ratio of total government expenditures to GDP, Panel (b): percentage point change of
ratio of total government expenditures to GDP.




                                                 26
               Figure 23: Detrended Per Capita GDP & Consumption [Index]

               (a) Per Capita GDP                               (b) %-Change of P.C.GDP




           (c) Per Capita Consumption                       (d) %-Change of P.C.Consumption




Notes: Panel (a): de-trended per capita GDP (Index, 2013=100), Panel (b): percent change of per capita
GDP; Panel (c): de-trended per capita consumption (Index, 2013=100), Panel (d): percent change of per
capita consumption.




                                                 27
                                      Figure 24: Rate of Return
                 (a) Rate of Return                             (b) %p-Change of Rate of Return




Notes: Panel (a): rate of return, Panel (b): percentage point change of rate of return.




            Figure 25: Gross & Net Wages, Low-Skilled Natives, Age-Group ¯
                                                                         j=1
                  (a) Gross Wages                                         (b) Net Wages




Notes: Panel (a): gross wages, Panel (b): net wages of low skilled natives in age group ¯
                                                                                        j = 1.




                                                    28
          Figure 26: Change of Skill Ratios, Low-Skilled Natives, Age Group ¯
                                                                            j=1
         (a) t (me, lo)                        (b) t (hi, lo)                    (c) t (f o, na | lo)




Notes: Change of skill ratios as defined in equation (46) for low skilled natives in age group ¯
                                                                                               j = 1.




                                                     29
