                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       EVERY DAY IS EARTH DAY:
     EVIDENCE ON THE LONG-TERM IMPACT OF ENVIRONMENTAL ACTIVISM

                                     Daniel M. Hungerman
                                      Vivek S. Moorthy

                                      Working Paper 26979
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26979


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




We thank Frank Passic, Walt Pomeroy, Jim Seidel, Larry Taylor, Mark Wilhelm, and audiences
at the SPI Conference at the University of Chicago, at the H2D2 Conference at the University of
Michigan, Notre Dame, and at the ASSA Conference. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Daniel M. Hungerman and Vivek S. Moorthy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Every Day is Earth Day: Evidence on the Long-term Impact of Environmental Activism
Daniel M. Hungerman and Vivek S. Moorthy
NBER Working Paper No. 26979
April 2020, Revised June 2020
JEL No. H4,I1,Q10,Z10

                                          ABSTRACT

We explore the importance of activism in the context of Earth Day. We use variation in weather
to study the long-term effects of the original Earth Day on attitudes, environmental outcomes, and
children's health. Unusually bad weather in a community on April 22, 1970, is associated 10 to 20
years later with weaker support for the environment, particularly among those who were school-
aged in 1970. Bad weather on Earth Day is also associated with higher levels of carbon monoxide
in the air and greater risk of congenital abnormalities in infants born in the following decades.
These results indicate a long-lasting and localized effect of Earth Day, and show that there can be
benefits to voluntary activity that would be impossible to identify until years after the
volunteering occurs.


Daniel M. Hungerman
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
3056 Jenkins-Nanovic Halls
Notre Dame, IN 46556-5602
and NBER
dhungerm@nd.edu
Vivek S. Moorthy
vmoorthy@nd.edu
1. Introduction

   In recent decades, ordinary people have frequently taken action to address social prob-
lems, but it is not always clear what is gained by their doing so. For example, in September
2019, millions of students across the world participated in strikes intended to draw attention
to the environmental problem of climate change (Sengupta, 2019). This was lauded by many
observers, but also criticized by both policy makers (Watts, 2019; and Australian AP, 2018)
and by observers in the popular press (e.g., Freeman, 2020; Caldwell, 2019; see also Heglar,
2018; Lukacs, 2018; Geiling, 2018; Matthews, 2017). Many critiques questioned whether
the actions of individuals matter. In the words of prominent activist Greta Thunberg, "the
favorite argument here in Sweden, and everywhere else, is that it doesn't matter what we do
because we are all too small to make a difference" (Carrington, 2019).
   This climate-strike response reflects a broader uncertainty over the benefits of voluntary
actions. Scholars have recognized many challenges in evaluating voluntarism (e.g., Adreoni,
2006). Brown (1999), in discussing these challenges, notes that "environmental activism [is
a] form of volunteering in which it is much harder to quantify benefits" than other types of
voluntarism since there is no designated recipient. This type of uncertainty may carry real
consequences: a body of research has found that low levels of environmental activism often
stem not from doubt over the importance of environmental problems, but from doubt that
one's actions can make a difference (Akpan, 2019; Salomon, Preston, Tannenbaum, 2017;
Semenza et al., 2008; Huebnerand Lipsey, 1981; Xu, Chi and Zhu, 2017; Rankin, 1969). If
this type of doubt is justified, then a low level of activism could be useful, as it would direct
individuals away from taking costly actions of no benefit. But if this doubt is misplaced, the
cost of directing efforts away from beneficial actions could be extremely high.
   The goal of this paper is to provide new evidence on the impact of activism, and in par-
ticular environmental activism, by considering the original Earth Day, April 22, 1970. On
this day, tens of millions of people came together to participate in gatherings ranging from
teach-ins and clean-ups to protests and marches in an effort to alter the the values, envi-


                                               1
ronmental quality, and health of their communities. We explore whether the circumstances
in a community on the original Earth Day relate to outcomes in that community over the
next 20 years. We thus circumvent/embrace the challenge noted by Brown in that we adopt
communities, rather than individuals or nonprofits, as the unit of observation.
   We first investigate whether Earth Day had long-term impacts on environmental attitudes
in communities. Such a study runs the danger of reverse causation: places that had successful
Earth Day celebrations might be places with strong pro-environmental attitudes, and it is the
enduring attitudes that lead to a successful Earth Day rather than the other way around.
We address this concern by exploiting variation in the weather on Earth Day, comparing
places that had unusually good or unusually bad weather on the exact date in question. Our
key assumption is that unexpectedly good/bad weather on this date should not be related to
confounders like underlying community attitudes about the environment. If this assumption
is correct, we can interpret a strong relation between weather shocks on April 22, 1970 and
outcomes many years later as evidence for the importance of Earth Day.
   Using data from the 1977-1993 waves of the General Social Survey, we find that weather
on Earth Day has a statistically significant effect on attitudes: individuals in places with
bad weather on Earth Day express less support for environmental spending 10 to 20 years
afterwards. This result is observed in particular for those who were under age 20 at the time
of Earth Day. For this group, a one-standard-deviation increase in precipitation corresponds
to a 0.08 standard-deviation increase in opposition to environmental spending. Weather
shocks on other days from that April generally have no effect.
   We next see if weather on Earth Day is subsequently related to the quality of the en-
vironment. To measure local environmental quality, we use data on air pollution. We find
that bad weather on Earth Day is associated years later with higher levels of air pollution,
specifically carbon monoxide (CO). A one-standard deviation increase in precipitation leads
to a 0.086 standard-deviation increase in average CO over the next 20 years. When we look
at other non-localized types of air pollution, such as ozone, we find no effect.


                                              2
    Finally, following a large empirical literature that relates environmental quality to infant
health (e.g., Zivin and Neidell, 2013), we find evidence connecting the original Earth Day
to the health of newborns. A one-standard deviation increase in precipitation on Earth Day
is associated 10 to 20 years later with a 0.13 standard-deviation increase in the fraction of
births with a congenital abnormality. The evidence is suggestive that this result is stronger
for children born to low SES women.
    Prior work, notably Madestam, Shoag, Veuger, and Yanagizawa-Drott (2013), has studied
large-scale instances of social activism and shown that conditions during gatherings such
as political rallies can affect outcomes such as voting in following elections.1 Our work
is distinct in several important ways. First, rather than political activism we focus on
environmental activism, which, as noted above, is a type of voluntarism whose efficacy has
been particularly questioned and with unique societal implications. Second, we consider
social outcomes concerning pollution and infant health, and provide direct evidence of Earth
Day's influence on these outcomes. We do not know of prior work that attempts to relate the
effects of a social gathering on measures of social wellbeing such as these. Third, our time
horizon is much longer, as we focus on the decades following our event. This is especially
noteworthy as the long-term effects for many environmental issues are potentially the ones
of greatest consequence.
    These novel features yield several implications. First, our results provide novel evidence
that ordinary people's voluntary environmental actions do matter and that environmental
activism warrants study as a mediator of environmental outcomes. An existing literature
has considered the causes and importance of environmental activism; Price (2014) gives
an overview. But this area of work is relatively small compared to work on government
programs and policies to improve the environment. To our knowledge, work in this litera-
ture has not considered Earth Day nor even the types of activities featured on Earth Day
(gatherings, demonstrations, and community events), despite the fact that many millions of
   1
     See also (e.g.) Becker, Fetzer, Novy (2017) and Fujiwara, Meng, Vogl (2020). There is also work relating
social events to riots and mob violence (e.g., Iyer and Shrivastava, 2018; Anderson, Johnson, Koyama, 2017).


                                                     3
individuals have participated in such events. And we do not know of any work on any type
of environmental activism that presents large-scale and long-term evidence of benefits as we
do here.
   Second, our findings have implications for research on activism and evaluating the benefits
of voluntary activity generally. Work here has noted that the estimated value of volunteering
time is often surprisingly small (e.g., Brown, Meer, Williams, 2019, Lilley and Slonim, 2014).
While several factors may drive this result, our work provides evidence on the potential im-
portance of dynamic effects (cf. Scharf, Smith, and Wilhelm, 2017), as all of the outcomes
we consider happen years after Earth Day. Moreover, looking over time, we find that our
results on CO, which is our most consistently available outcome during the period of our
study, only become significant in the mid 1970s, several years after Earth Day. Contempo-
raneous estimates of voluntarism here would underestimate, potentially by a large amount,
the value of actions on Earth Day. Our results show that there can be benefits to voluntary
activity that would be impossible to identify until years after the volunteering occurs. This
conclusion is made feasible by our study's focus on community outcomes over decades, rather
than over months or a few years.
   Third, prior work has explored how environmental quality can effect health in the long
run (e.g., Isen, Rossin-Slater, Walker, 2017). Work of this kind generally relies on a fetal-
origins style argument (cf Almond and Currie, 2011). Rather than following that approach
and connecting the well-being of adults to the policy circumstances of their births, we instead
focus on a short-term event and observe how this event affects infants born after the event
ends. These two (not mutually exclusive) mechanisms for dynamic effects would differ,
for example, in predicting which cohorts are affected by temporary environmental events or
retrenched environmental policies. Our work indicates that long-run effects of environmental
events may be driven by other channels in addition to fetal-origins-based effects.
   Next, our work changes the interpretation of Earth Day itself. The importance of Earth
Day in the history of the environmental movement is widely acknowledged, with Earth Day


                                              4
having played a role in the adoption of important laws such as the Clean Air, Clean Water,
and Endangered Species Acts. But accounts of Earth Day typically do not consider effects
beyond these changes in federal policy and further conclude that the effects of Earth Day
on environmental attitudes were short lived (cf. Fried, 1998; Shabecoff, chapter 5, 1993;
Dunlap, 1992). O'Riordan et al. (1995) write that Earth Day "rapidly faded from public
view" and, in an influential article, Downs (1972) uses concern about the environment in the
early 1970s as a canonical example of an issue which "gradually fades from public attention."
Our results indicate the opposite, and more generally emphasize the highly-local and long-
lasting benefits of Earth Day. We know of no work in any discipline that documents benefits
of this nature for this day.
   This however raises a final and more pessimistic implication of our study. April 2020
was the 50th anniversary of Earth Day, which had the potential to be a widely observed
and celebrated day the world over. But the salience of this day was out of necessity greatly
diminished in the face of the coronavirus pandemic. The results of this paper do not gainsay
the wisdom of social distancing in the face of a pandemic. But they suggest that in addition
to the short term damage created by the pandemic, the absence of social gatherings on this
day could potentially lead to worse social outcomes decades from now.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows: We briefly overview Earth Day next. We
then discuss data and methodology, present results, and conclude.


2. A Brief Overview of the Original Earth Day

   Here we provide background on the first Earth Day. Rome (2013) is a good starting point
for those wanting to learn more. Earth Day was conceived by US Senator Gaylord Nelson
in 1969. Its purpose was, according to Nelson, to "force the issue [of the environment] into
the political dialogue of the country" (Lewis, 1990). Nelson originally planned for a national
"teach in" day, but his team helped morph the notion into a much broader day. Between
20 and 25 million individuals­roughly one out of every 10 Americans­participated. At the


                                              5
time, Earth Day was the largest organized demonstration in human history (Hayes, 1988).
    April 22, 1970, which was a Wednesday, was selected as Earth Day because it was a
day without other major competing events. It was also late enough in the spring that the
weather would likely be good. The organizers further felt that students would be especially
important for Earth Day, and for most students April 22 would fall after spring break but
before the end of the school year. Schools and students did play an important part in Earth
Day; roughly 1,500 colleges and 10,000 schools held teach-in events (Rome, 2013). In an
important sense, Earth Day was disorganized. Major environmental groups did not play a
large role in promotion of Earth Day (Shabecoff, 1993). The central organizing committee
provided information and materials when asked, but ultimately many communities took an
ad-hoc approach, offering a variety of events for individuals of different ages and interests.
    To illustrate different Earth-Day events and their potential for lasting effects, consider
the community of Albion, MI. On Earth Day, a group of Albion citizens gathered to clean
up a section of the Kalamazoo River. They were led by an Albion College geology major
named Walt Pomeroy. Next, students came together at Albion College and engaged in a
mass can-smashing event. Aluminum cans were sold to a scrap facility (curbside recycling
was unknown at this time) and non-aluminum cans were returned to their manufacturers to
encourage them to change to a reusable material. Students in nearby schools also picked up
litter.
    The city of Albion had asked students to clean up a section of the river so that it could be
turned into a park, and that park is still in operation today. The city also established a recy-
cling center after Earth Day. For the student organizer Walt Pomeroy, participation in Earth
Day was "the beginning of a lifelong dedication to environmental causes" (Albion, 2016).
Pomeroy created the Michigan Student Environmental Confederation, a group that came
to represent over 100 local student environmental organizations, while working with local
and federal government officials to improve environmental policy (U.S. government printing
office, 1971). He subsequently became a regional vice president of the National Audobon


                                               6
Society (Dempsey, 2019). He credits Earth Day for helping to promote important local out-
comes such as greater availability of returnable cans & bottles, and lowered phosphate levels
in detergents (Smith, 2012).
      These anecdotes indicate how Earth Day could have lasting effects by changing the in-
frastructure, leadership, and regulatory environment of communities. However, many com-
munities made steps to improve the environment in the early 1970s, and the case of Albion
could conflate Earth Day's effects with broader trends. Albion could be a case of reverse
causation: community engagement was high because community leaders were perceived to
be receptive to voluntarism. Similarly, for individuals like Walt Pomeroy, actions on Earth
Day could reflect an underlying taste for environmental voluntarism; he might have pursued
a similar career even without Earth Day. The story of one community also says little about
the overall effect of Earth Day. We turn to a broader analysis that addresses these concerns
next.


3. Empirical Approach

      Our approach will exploit variation in the weather on Earth Day. The original Earth
Day was conceived as a one-time event; there was not a widespread recognition of Earth Day
again until 1990. We thus focus on the interim period of the 1970s and 1980s, and relate
outcomes from this period to weather conditions on the original Earth Day. Our weather
data come from US Historical Climatology Network (USHCN).2 Our unit of analysis from
this data is the county and our measure of weather will be precipitation (cf. Madestam et
al., 2013). For simplicity we will refer to this as rainfall as almost all precipitation observed
on the original Earth Day was rain. However, in general precipitation can include (e.g.)
snow. Precipitation is measured in 0.1 mm.
      Figure 1 shows precipitation on Earth Day. Counties shaded black do not have available
  2
    The USHCN is a designated subset of weather observations from the of the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration Cooperative Observer Program (COOP) Network with sites selected according
to their spatial coverage, record length, data completeness, and historical stability.



                                                 7
data, but the vast majority of counties are included. The scale in the picture is in tenths of a
millimeter, so that the darkest grey areas received over 60 tenths of a millimeter (roughly .236
inches) of rain. April 22, 1970 was a day with good weather in much of the country, but there
was widespread variation with virtually every state having at least some precipitation. The
northeast and northern plains states received relatively more rain, and there are scattered
instances of precipitation across the west coast.3
       It is intuitive that weather on Earth Day would affect participation, and many contempo-
raneous accounts of Earth Day mention the benefits of good weather (e.g., Titusville Herald,
1970; Danville Bee, 1970). Beyond affecting the number of participants, good weather could
have improved the length and quality of participation, and could have improved local media
coverage of events. There is also anecdotal evidence from communities with activities marred
by inclement weather (e.g., Brainerd Daily Dispatch, 1970; Oelwein Daily Register, 1970;
Ogden Standard-Examiner, 1970). For a more quantitative estimate of weather's effect on
participation, one would need information on participation that included a high level of geo-
graphic detail and covered a wide range of areas. With this in mind, we can provide evidence
on rain and Earth-Day participation from two different data sources. The first source is the
1973 Youth Socialization Survey, which asked a national sample of 1,300 young adults about
participation in demonstrations and protests and included responses on participation in 1970
and other prior years. Second, we can use the much larger samples from the 2002-2014 waves
of the Current Population Survey, which explicitly asked about environmental voluntarism.
The first sample is small and asks a retrospective question, and the second covers more re-
cent Earth Days. We report estimates from both these samples in detail in Section 1 of the
Appendix & Appendix Tables A1 and A2 and Figures A1 and A2. Under most specifications
both samples indicate that, as one would expect, rain on Earth Day lowers participation.
Results from the Youth Survey sample typically show that a 1 standard-deviation increase in
   3
    One might wonder whether the actual weather patterns on Earth Day were close to the forecast patterns,
as the weather forecast may have mattered as well. We consulted national weather forecasts from April 21st,
and confirmed that in general the realized weather on Earth Day was close to the forecast.



                                                    8
rain causes about a 1 percentage-point decline in participation. The CPS estimates, which
are from later years and for a different sample of respondents, produce point estimates that
are smaller in magnitude but still show that bad weather lowers participation. Overall, both
anecdotal and quantitative evidence confirm the intuition that weather on Earth Day affects
participation, and the estimates below are compatible with changes in participation that are
moderately-sized.
   When comparing places with precipitation on Earth Day to other places, we will include
a number of control variables, many taken from the 1970 US Decennial Census. This census'
timing, information on communities, and geographic detail are fortuitous for our study. A
list of the variables is given in Panel A of Table 1, along with means and standard deviations.
This Panel in Table 1 also reports (a) a coefficient regressing each variable individually on
precipitation and (b) a balance test of whether these variables are significantly related to
precipitation. The results of Table 1 indicate that precipitation on Earth Day does not
appear to be significantly related to community observables.
   We can explore this issue further in our empirical work. When looking at a particular
outcome y in community c in year t, our specification will be:


                                 yct =  + rc  + Xct  + ect                                 (1)

where rc , which is not indexed by t, is precipitation on April 22, 1970, and Xct is a set of
controls. The scalar  and vector  are to be estimated, and ect is noise. In our estimates
we will vary the set of controls to explore whether they affect estimates of . Further, we
can explore a stronger specification where we control for rain on other days on April 1970.
If Earth Day stands out in its relation to later outcomes, this is strong evidence that it
is Earth Day, rather than other unobserved elements that vary with weather, which drives
our results. Finally, we can also consider results that use deviations from standard weather
in our estimates. That is, we calculate the average precipitation on April 22 from 1970
                   ¯c . Then in equation (1) we can replace rc with (rc - r
to 1990; call this r                                                      ¯c ). This then

                                              9
identifies the deviation from standard weather on Earth Day, capturing the extent to which
the weather was unusually good or bad. We can further combine both of these extensions,
running regressions on the deviation-from-normal precipitation for various days in April,
1970, and relating them to outcomes years later. Several other comments are in order for
the specifications used for each dataset and we discuss them next.


3.1 GSS

    As Dunlap (1992) observes, there is little data that allows study of opinions about envi-
ronmental issues over time during the period of our study. We need such data to be (a) large
in size (b) covering much of the nation and (c) providing reasonably precise information on
one's local community. We know of one dataset fulfilling these criteria: the General Social
Survey, or GSS. The GSS is a long running, roughly biennial survey that is nationally repre-
sentative. In every survey from 1977 to 1993, respondents were asked whether the amount
of money that we are spending "improving and protecting the environment" was too little,
about right, or too much. We take these responses and use them to estimate equation (1).
First, we simply construct an index, where 3 corresponds with too much being spent, 2
corresponds with about-right spending and 1 corresponds with too little. The overall mean
sample of the index is 1.5 (sd = 0.65). We also construct a dummy that equals unity if a
respondent says we spend "too little" on the environment. The overall mean of this dummy
is 0.62 (0.49). These means, and means for our other dependent variables, are given in panel
B of Table 1. We also include a set of individual controls in our GSS specification.4 GSS
data from this period use Primary Sampling Units (PSUs) as the geographic identifier, which
is often similar to a metropolitan statistical area. We discuss our use of the PSU identifier
and our construction of the GSS data more in the Appendix Section 2.
   4
     These are controls for age, dummies for high school and more-than high school education, gender, race,
year of survey, and a dummy for which survey form was used to conduct the survey.




                                                    10
3.2 Carbon Monoxide

    Following many studies (e.g., Currie, Neidell, and Schmieder, 2009, Currie and Neidel,
2005), we consider air pollution as a key measure of environmental quality in the 1970s and
1980s. This choice reflects data availability rather than a belief that Earth Day particularly
affected this type of pollution. We focus on carbon monoxide (CO), as it is a pollutant
proven to be related to both health outcomes and local activity of individuals.5
    Following Chay and Greenstone (2003), we obtain annual monitor level CO data from
the EPA Air Quality System (AQS).6 Our data go from 1970 to 1988 and measurements are
defined as average parts per million measured over a calendar year. The unit of analysis is the
county. In most years we have between 200 and a little over 300 counties with CO readings,
but these counties cover over half of the United States population in most of these years.
We limit our sample to measurements from monitors that produce at least 15 observations
in a year, although this does not substantively affect our results.
    We also estimated the results of Earth Day on other pollutants, including nitrogen dioxide
(NO2), sulfur dioxide (SO2), TSP, and ozone.7 Importantly, these sources of air pollution can
be driven by non-local sources or by activities that would likely not be affected by changes
in individuals' voluntary behaviors. For instance, the EPA reports that NO2 and ozone are
capable of traveling several hundreds of miles due to wind and other factors (EPA Technical
Bulletin, 1999). Likewise, S02 emissions form compounds and fine particle pollutants (TSPs)
which can travel hundreds of miles, making it difficult for downwind states to meet air quality
standards (EPA, Clean Air Markets, 2019; EPA, What is Interstate Air, 2019).8 Given this,
we expect (and find) that Earth Day should be less-related/unrelated to the presence of
   5
     CO is a colorless, odorless gas that enters the atmosphere when something is burned. Key sources of
CO in outdoor air include cars, trucks and machines that burn fossil fuels (cf. Knittel, Miller, and Sanders,
2016).
   6
     Specifically, we query the AQS API where pollutants and other substances are labeled as parameters.
The associated parameter for CO is 42101.
   7
     AQS API parameter codes 42602, 42401, 11101, and 44201, respectively.
   8
     Additionally, see https://www.epa.gov/sips/basic-information-air-quality-sips for information on how all
these pollutants enter the air.




                                                     11
these pollutants in the atmosphere.


3.3 Infant Health

       Our data here come from the Natality Detail Files prepared by the Division of Health
Statistics of the National Center for Health Statistics. These data include essentially all
births in the United States, about 4 million births per year.9 Our key measure of infant
health is congenital abnormalities, which is unavailable before 1979. Coding of this variable
changed in 1989, for this reason (and noting as discussed earlier the resumption of celebrating
Earth Day in 1990) we use the years 1980 to 1988. We also discuss results using fetal deaths,
compiled by the Centers for Disease Control. Our geographic identifier for both the CDC
mortality data and the vital statistics data is the county.
       In both datasets, we will separate out our samples by socioeconomic status (SES) using
information on birth certificates. We define births/fetal deaths to low SES mothers as
occurring to women who are one of the following (a) teenaged (b) unmarried (c) nonwhite.
High SES women are all others. The (weighted) fraction of congenital abnormalities for all
women, high SES women, and low SES are each 0.01; the means and standard deviations
are in Table 1.


4. Earth Day and Long-Run Environmental Attitudes

       Figure 2 shows the results of regressing our anti-environment index from the GSS on the
deviation-from-historical-precipitation (rc - r
                                              ¯c ) for each day in April 1970. Coefficients are
multiplied by 100 for readability. The figures show coefficients and 95 percent confidence
intervals for the days of April 17 through April 28. The full set of coefficients for all days is
given in Appendix Figure A3. Panel A restricts the sample to those under age 20 on Earth
Day and panel B includes all respondents.
   9
   For several states and years a 50% sample is provided; in this case we weight these states so that their
sample reflects all births.




                                                    12
   Panel A shows a large and statistically significant effect for rainfall on one day, Earth
Day. Precipitation on this day is related to greater opposition to environmental spending
by respondents 7 to 23 years later. The coefficient in Panel B is smaller and marginally
significant, showing that the effect of good weather on Earth Day is stronger for those under
age 20. We take up the differential effects of Earth Day by age in more detail momentarily.
   The multiplied-by-100 coefficient in panel A is about 0.13, and as noted earlier the mean
of the index variable is 1.5 with standard deviation .65. For increased rainfall on Earth Day
of 100 tenths of a milliliter, or 0.39 inches, the average change in this index would be an
increase of about 0.13, or one tenth of the mean. Put differently, a one-standard-deviation
increase in precipitation ( 40 tenths of a millimeter) corresponds to roughly a 0.08 standard-
deviation increase in opposition to environmental spending. Alternately, in the Appendix
(Appendix Table A3) we show that being older at the time of the survey leads to more
anti-environmental attitudes, and the effect of a one-millimeter increase in precipitation on
Earth Day is similar to the effect of aging one year. These different interpretations suggest
that the effect of Earth Day is modestly sized but nontrivial.
   Table 2 shows results from estimating equation (1) under a number of alternate spec-
ifications, measures of environmental support, and samples. In the first two columns, the
dependent variable is a dummy for whether people say that we are spending too little on
the environment. The last two columns use the overall opposition index used in Figure 2.
Coefficients are again multiplied by 100 for readability. The first row presents results using
deviation-from-historical-norm precipitation which for brevity the table simply calls "rain."
Unlike the estimates in Figure 1, here only weather on April 22 is included. The second
row redoes the baseline specification but uses simple precipitation rc rather than its devia-
tion from the historical mean. The third row redoes the baseline estimation but adds extra
control variables (coefficients for controls are reported in Table A3). Row 4 uses winsorized
deviation-from-historical-average rain using the 5% and 95% values for winsorizing, and also
includes extra RHS controls. By using winsorized rainfall, the results investigate whether the


                                             13
effect of Earth Day is driven by outliers that received far-from-normal weather, or by more
general patterns. The last row uses a logistic regression for the GSS survey responses for the
first two columns and an ordered-logit regression in the last-two columns. These coefficients
are the changes in log odds (again times 100). Log-odds ratios for the under-age-20 logistic
estimations are given under the table.
   The table consistently shows a strong effect for those under age 20 on the original Earth
Day, where higher precipitation leads to lower support for environmental spending later.
Winsorizing the data makes the results stronger, suggesting our estimates are not driven by
a small set of extreme values. But clearly the results are driven by those who were under
age 20 on Earth Day. The implication is that Earth Day's power to generate variation in
environmental opinion (or at least relative variation within a year of the survey) based on
weather exposure seems strongest for those who were school-aged at the time Earth Day was
observed.
   Figure 3 explores the effects of age on Earth Day further. In this figure, we restrict the
sample to those at least age 5 on Earth Day (results for those between ages 0 and 5 on Earth
Day are typically imprecise) and then adjust the maximum age-at-Earth-Day in the sample
one year at a time. The specification matches the one with extra controls used in row 3 of
Table 1, and the dependent variable is the overall anti-environment index. 95% confidence
intervals are shown around each coefficient. The picture shows that the effects are strongest
for school-aged children, and starting around age 15 begin a gradual decline. Given our
methodology, these results cannot rule out that Earth Day permanently affected attitudes
for all cohorts. However Earth Day's power to generate relative variation in environmental
opinion within a cohort here seems limited to those who were school aged at the time.
   In the Appendix we present further evidence on Earth Day and environmental opinion.
First, Appendix Figure A3 presents results from the first panel of Figure 2 showing all days in
April 1970 as well as presenting results for our other outcome variables that we discuss next.
Second, Figure A4 presents nonparametric estimation of rainfall and environmental support,


                                              14
relaxing the assumption that this relationship is linear. The estimates are qualitatively
similar to those shown here.
       Lastly, Appendix Section 3 describes alternate estimates of Earth Day and preferences
using data on donations to the League of Conservation Voters. The data is limited to large
donations reported to the government, and these results can be imprecise and sensitive to
specification. But the point estimates suggest that good weather on Earth Day increases
donations to the LCV in the following decades. Altogether, Earth Day had long lasting
effects on individuals' opinions. We turn next to our estimates on air pollution and child
health.


5. Earth Day, Air Pollution, and Child Health

       Figure 4 shows the day-by-day effect of Earth Day and other days from April 1970
on carbon monoxide levels.10 The figure is constructed analogously to Figure 2, showing
coefficients for deviation-from-historical-average precipitation ("rain" for short) for various
days in April 1970 and parts-per-million of CO in the atmosphere from 1970 to 1988.
       As before, one days stands out, Earth Day. Communities that saw greater-than-average
rainfall on Earth Day see more carbon monoxide in their air over the next 20 years. In
this regression sample (limited to counties with CO data) a standard-deviation increase in
precipitation is  25 tenths of a millimeter, suggesting a one-standard-deviation increase in
rain is associated with an increase in CO in the atmosphere of 25 × .0046 = .115 parts per
million, which is .086 standard deviations of CO. During the period of the sample, average
CO in the atmosphere declined by about 3 parts per million; the standard-deviation-in-rain
effect is about one thirtieth this general decline in CO. As before, the effect is modest in size
but not negligibly small.
       We return to results on CO momentarily but first consider Figure 5, with day-by-day
results on congenital malformations. The results show that bad weather on Earth Day is
  10
     Appendix Table A4 shows results on other air pollution but as noted earlier, and as expected, we see no
effect.

                                                    15
associated with more congenital abnormalities 10 to 20 years later. The coefficients are
multiplied by 100, so that an increase of 100 tenths of a millimeter in rain on Earth Day
increases the probability that a child is born with a congenital abnormality by 0.003. The
effect of a one-standard-deviation increase in rain is roughly one-tenth the size of the effect
from living near a landfill as estimated in Elliott et al. (2001). Alternately, a 1 s.d. increase
in rain increases the fraction born with congenital abnormalities by 0.13 standard deviations.
   Table 3 presents results on CO and congenital abnormalities akin to Table 1. Residuals
are clustered by state. The first column looks at CO levels, and finds consistent evidence that
across our measures of precipitation there is a relationship between more rain on April 22,
1970, and more CO in the air in the next 20 years. As before, the magnitudes are slightly
smaller than in the day-by-day figure: controlling for other rainfall makes the coefficient
slightly larger than the more conservative numbers here.
   The last three columns report regressions with congenital abnormalities as the dependent
variable and break the results out by SES of the mother. We find consistent effects of
precipitation on the original Earth Day on the risk of congenital abnormalities 10 to 20
years later. This represents a novel example of how the benefits of environmental action
can endure absent a fetal-origins type of argument; the cohorts here were of course not
even alive on the first Earth Day. Looking at the last two columns, most of the estimates
give larger point estimates to low SES groups. One might wonder whether this indicates a
proportional difference in abnormalities by SES, but as noted under the table, the incidence
of abnormalities is similar for the two groups, so that the proportional effects are similar
or perhaps slightly higher for low SES women. The results are similar using rain in levels
instead of residualized deviation-from-mean rainfall in row 2, using extra controls in row 3,
using weights (population weights for CO and total births for congenital abnormalities) in
row 4, or when using winsorized rainfall in row 5.
   The Appendix provides several extensions to these results. In Table 3 we have finer
(county) level data than with the GSS, but we cluster our standard errors by state, allowing


                                               16
for residuals within states and over time to be related arbitrarily. We report county-clustered
standard errors in Appendix Table A5. The CO errors are similar from both approaches but
the county-clustered SEs are somewhat smaller for the congenital abnormalities results, thus
the results shown in Table 3 are more conservative. In Appendix Table A6, we report
estimates on fetal deaths. These results are similar and suggest that bad weather on Earth
Day is associated with more fetal deaths 10 to 20 years later, but these estimates are more
sensitive to our choice of clustering method.11 One might also wonder whether the imposition
of a linear relationship between weather and outcomes is appropriate. The winsorization
results in Tables 2 and 3 touch on this issue, but as mentioned earlier Appendix Figure A4
presents nonparametric estimates and those estimates are qualitatively similar to the results
here.
       Our results show a long term effect from Earth Day. Can we characterize the dynamics
of this effect? Of the outcomes discussed, our CO data is available consistently over our
entire period, so here we investigate whether and how our CO estimates change over time.
Figure 6 shows the results from regressing carbon monoxide (CO) levels on deviation-from-
historical-norm precipitation on the original Earth Day. Each coefficient is from a separate
regression analogous to the regression in column 1, row 1, of Table 2, except that in each
regression here we limit the sample to a single year. We omit the years before 1973 as their
confidence intervals are extremely imprecise and affect the scale of the picture (but these
intervals are given under the table).
       Figure 6 shows point estimates that gradually decline in the late 1970s and then moderate
in the 1980s. Notably, however, the effects only become statistically significant starting
several years after Earth Day. This suggests that studies of the efficacy of voluntary action
  11
    We also considered low birthweight as an outcome, but these estimates are often insignificant, small,
and/or "wrong-signed". For example, doing our main specification in Table 3 with all controls (as in row 3)
on the fraction born weighing less than 1500 grams produces coefficients (multiplied by 100) of .00023 (se
= .00020), -.00052 (.00040), and .00002 (.00014) for all, high SES, and low SES women respectively. This
may be driven by a harvesting effect since we have some evidence of an increase in fetal deaths. These null
findings are similar to some but not all of those in prior work on the environment and child health, e.g.,
Currie and Neidell (2005) find a significant relationship between CO pollution and infant mortality but find
no effect of CO on birthweight. Overall, we do not have robust evidence relating Earth Day to birthweight.


                                                    17
should consider carefully the potential for mid- or long-term effects even when there are no
significant short-term effects. One explanation for this result is that those whose opinions
changed the most from Earth Day (students) needed time to reach an age where their
decisions (e.g., driving) are consequential for CO.12 Also, for individuals of any age there
are likely frictions that could introduce some time lag in making decisions that matter for
air pollution. Dynamics could also be influenced by individuals responding differently to
technological changes, such as the introduction of the catalytic converter.13 But a critical
takeaway is that the effects of voluntary activity may be very long lasting, and further may
become visible only several years after the activity takes place.


Conclusion

       In this paper we show that ordinary people, taking purely voluntary actions, can on a
single day come together to collectively alter the the values, cleanliness, and health of their
communities for years to come. We show that this happened on April 22, 1970. The effects
of this activism were long-lasting and in some cases (such as for air pollution) only became
statistically significant after several years.
       Prior work has shown long term effects of environmental policy on health and well being,
but as noted earlier this is typically done through a fetal-origins argument. Our focus,
showing a hysteresis-style effect wherein a temporary event affects cohorts born later, is
different. If such effects apply to other temporary events (e.g., retrenched environmental
policies), an implication would be that pre-post comparisons of cohorts born before and
after an event or policy ends could produce biased estimates (likely biased towards zero, as
"control groups" in the post period would still reflect the treatment), although we do not
test for that possibility here.
       These results also change the story of Earth Day itself, showing that Earth Day had
  12
     This explanation would suggest that the dynamics for other outcomes, such as pro-environmental views,
could be different, but as our GSS data begins in 1977 we cannot test that possibility here.
  13
     The catalytic converter was an emission control technology which reduced CO emissions from automobiles
and became widely available starting with model-year 1975 vehicles in the US.

                                                    18
previously-unnoticed, highly-local, enduring impacts. These results however do not refute
the importance of Earth Day in promoting national change through (e.g.) the adoption of
federal policy such as the passage of Endangered Species Act. Accounting for these national
benefits, which are likely independent of local rainfall and which our estimates thus do not
include, would make the social benefits of Earth Day greater still. Whether these results will
hold for other mass demonstrations, we cannot say. Applying the approach here to other
large scale voluntary events represents an excellent idea for future research.



References
 [1] Albion College 2016. Robert E. horton Geology Aluni Speaker:       Walter
     Pomeroy, `70. University Announcement, Septmber 20, 2016. Accessed online
     at     https://www.albion.edu/news-and-events/events/859-albion-college-
     events/867-lecture-guest-speaker/7234-robert-e-horton-geology-alumni-
     speaker-walt-pomeroy-70

 [2] Almond, Doug, and Janet Currie. 2011. "Killing me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypoth-
     esis" Journal of Economic Literature 25(3), 153-72.

 [3] Akpan, Nsikan. 2019. "How your Brain Stops you from Taking Climate Change
     Seriously" article accessed at https://www.pbs.org/newshour/science/how-your-
     brain-stops-you-from-taking-climate-change-seriously

 [4] Anderson, Robert Warren, Noel Johnson, and Mark Koyama. 2017. "Jewish Persecu-
     tions and Weather Shocks: 1100­1800" The Economic Journal 127, 924-958.

 [5] Andreoni, James. "Philanthropy", in Handbook of the Economics of Giving, Altruism
     and Reciprocity, Volume 2, 2006, El Sevier, 1201-1269.

 [6] Australian Associated Press. 2018. "Scott Morrison Tells Students Strik-
     ing over Climate Change to be `Less Activist"' Article accessed at https:
     //www.theguardian.com/environment/2018/nov/26/scott-morrison-tells-
     students-striking-over-climate-change-to-be-less-activist

 [7] Becker, Sascha, Thiemo Fetzer, Dennis Novy. "Who Voted for Brexit?" Economic Policy
     32, 601-650.


                                              19
 [8] Brainerd Daily Dispatch. "Backus Resets Earth Day for This Wednesday", p.2. (1970,
     April 27). Article accessed at https://newspaperarchive.com/

 [9] Brown, Eleanor. 1999. "Assessing the Value of Volunteer Activity" Nonprofit and Vol-
     untary Sector Quarterly, 28(1), 3-17.

[10] Brown, Alexander, Jonathan Meer, and J. Forrest Williams. 2019. "Why do People
     Volunteer? An Experimental Analysis of Preferences for Time Donations" Management
     Science 65(4), 1455-1468.

[11] Carrington, Damian. 2019. "School Climate Strikes: 1.4 Million Took Part, Say Cam-
     paigners" The Guardian, March 19.

[12] Caldwell, Christopher. "The Problem with Greta Thunberg's Climate Activism." New
     York Times, August 4.

[13] Chay, Kenneth Y., and Greenstone, Michael. 2003. "The Impact of Air Pollution on
     Infant Mortality: Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by
     a Recession" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1121-1167

[14] Currie, Janet, and Neidell, Matthew . 2005. "Air Pollution and infant Health: What
     Can We Learn from California's Recent Experience?" Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     1003-1029.

[15] Currie, Janet, Neidell, Matthew , and Schmieder, Johannes. 2009. "Air Pollution and
     Infant Health: Lessons from New Jersey" Journal of Health Economics 28, 688-703.

[16] Dempsey, Dave. "Reflecting on Earth Day 1970 in Michigan and the Origin of hte State's
     Environmental Movement." Article published by For Love of Water, 2019. Accessed on-
     line at http://flowforwater.org/reflecting-earth-day-1970-michigan-origin-
     states-environmental-movement/

[17] Dempsey, Dave. Ruin Recovery: Michigan's Rise as a Conservation Leader. University
     of Michigan Press, 2001.

[18] Downs, Anthony. 1991. "Up and Down with Ecology: The `Issue Attention Cycle' " In:
     David protess & Maxwell McCombs (eds.) Agenda Setting: Redaings on Media, Public
     Opinion, and Policy Making. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

[19] Dunlap, Riley. 1992. "Trends in Public Opinion Toward Environmental Issues: 1965-
     1990" in Riley Dunlap and Angela Mertig (eds.) American Environmentalism: the U.S.
     Environmental Movement 1970-1990. Philadelphia: Taylor & Francis.

                                            20
[20] Elliott, Paul, David Briggs, Sara Morris, Cornelis de Hoogh, Christopher Hurt, Tina
     Jensen, Ian Maitland, Sylvia Richarsdon, Jon Wakefield,Lars Jarup. 2001. "Risk of
     Adverse Birth Outcomes in Populations Living Near Landfill Sites" BMJ August, 363-
     368.

[21] EPA, Clean Air Markets - Environmental Issues. 2019. Accessed online at https://
     www.epa.gov/airmarkets/clean-air-markets-environmental-issues

[22] EPA, What is Interstate Air Pollution Transport? 2019. Accessed online at
     https://www.epa.gov/interstate-air-pollution-transport/what-interstate-
     air-pollution-transport

[23] "EPA Technical Bulletin: Nitrogen Oxides (NOx), Why and How They are Controlled"
     1999. Accessed online at https://www3.epa.gov/ttncatc1/dir1/fnoxdoc.pdf

[24] Fridays for the Future. 2020. "FridaysForFuture Events Worldwide," statistical table
     accessed onine at From:https://www.fridaysforfuture.org/statistics/graph

[25] Freeman, James. 2020. "Greta Thunberg and the Case of the Muddy Carbon Footprints"
     The Wall Street Journal, March 2.

[26] Fried, Amy. 1998. "US Environmental Interest Groups and the Promotion of Envi-
     ronmental Values: The Resounding Success and Failure of Earth Day" Environmental
     Politics 7(4), 1-22.

[27] Fujiwara, Thomas, Kyle Meng, Tom Vogl. 2016. "Habit Formation in Voting: Evidence
     from Rainy Elections" American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8(4), 160-188.

[28] Geiling, Natasha. 2018. "The Only Individual Action that Matters is Voting
     for People who Care About Climate Change" article accessed online at https:
     //theoutline.com/post/6388/the-only-individual-action-that-matters-is-
     voting-for-people-who-care-about-climate-change?zd=1&zi=jn7wv2lx

[29] Geschwind, Sandra, Jan Stolwijk, Michael Bracken, Edward Fitzgerald, Alice Stark,
     Carolyn Olsen, and James Melius. 1992. "Risk of Congenital Malformations Associated
     iwth Proximity to Hazardous Waste Sites" American Journal of Epidemiology 135(11),
     1197-1207.

[30] Gore, Al. Earth in the Balance: Ecology and the Human Spirit. Boston: Houghton
     Mifflin Company.


                                           21
[31] Hayes, Denis. 1988. "Proposing a global Priority: Earth Day, 1990" EPA Journal 34,
     34-37

[32] Heglar, Mary Annaise. 2018. "The Big Lie We're Told about Climate Change is that
     It's Our Own Fault" article accessed at https://www.vox.com/first-person/2018/
     10/11/17963772/climate-change-global-warming-natural-disasters

[33] Huebner, Robert, and Mark Lipsey. 1981. "The Relationship of Three Measures of Locus
     of Control to Environmental Activism" Basic and Applied Social Psychology 2(1): 45-
     58.

[34] Isen, Adam, Maya Rossin-Slater, and W. Reed Walker. 2017. "Every Breath You Take­
     Every Dollar You'll Make: The Long-Term Consequences of the Clean Air Act of 1970"
     Journal of Political Economy 125(3), 848-901.

[35] Iyer, Sryia, Anand Shrivastava. 2018. "Religious Riots and Electoral Politics in India"
     Journal of Development Economics 131, 104-122.

[36] Jennings, M. Kent and Richard Niami. 1978. "The Persistence of Political Orientations:
     An Over-Time Analysis of Two Generations" British Journal of Political Science 8(3):
     333-363.

[37] Knittel, Christopher, Douglas Miller, and Nicholas Sanders. 2016. "Caution Drivers!
     Children Present: Traffic, Pollution, and Infant Health" Review of Economics and
     Statistics 98(2): 350-366.

[38] Lewis, Jack. 1990. "The Spirit of the First Earth Day" EPA Journal 8, 8-12.

[39] Lilley, Andrew, and Robert Slonim. 2014. "The Price of Warm Glow." Journal of Public
     Economics 114, 58-74.

[40] Lukacs, Martin. 2018. "Neoliberalism has conned us into fighting climate
     change as individuals" article in the Guardian accessed online at https:
     //www.theguardian.com/environment/true-north/2017/jul/17/neoliberalism-
     has-conned-us-into-fighting-climate-change-as-individuals

[41] Madestam, Adreas, Daniel Shoag, Stan Veuger, and David Yanagizawa-Drott. 2013.
     "Do Political Protests Matter? Evidence from the Tea Party Movement" Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 1633-1685.




                                            22
[42] Matthews, Susan. 2017. "Alarmism is the Argument We Need to Fight Climate Change"
     article accessed at https://slate.com/technology/2017/07/we-are-not-alarmed-
     enough-about-climate-change.html

[43] Menne, Matthew, Imke Durre, Russell Vose, Byron Gleason, and Tamara Houston. 2012.
     "An Overview of the Global Historical Climatology Network-Daily Database" Journal
     of Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology 29, 897-910.

[44] Oelwein Daily Register. "West Central students hold E-Day cleanup", p. 1. (1970, April
     24). Article accessed at https://newspaperarchive.com/

[45] Ogden Standard-Examiner. "Rampton Talk Highlights 2-County Earth Day Rite", p.17
     (1970, April 23). Article accessed at https://newspaperarchive.com/

[46] O'Riordan, Timothy, William Clark, Robert Kates, and Alan McGowan. 1995. "The
     Legacy of Earth Day: Reflections at a Turning Point" Environment: Science and Policy
     for Sustainable Development 37(3), 7-37.

[47] Price, Michael. "Using Field Experiments to Address Environmental Externalities
     and Resource Scarcity: Major Lessons Learned and New Directions for Future Re-
     search"Oxford Review of Economic Policy 30(4), 621-638.

[48] Rankin, Robert. 1969. "Air Pollution Control and Public Apathy" Journal of the Air
     Pollution Control Association Volume 19(8): 565-569.

[49] Ritz, Beate, Scott Fruin, Guadalupe Chapa, Gary Shaw, and John Harris. 2002. "Am-
     bient Air Pollution and Risk of Birth Defects in Southern California" American Journal
     of Epidemiology 155(1), 17-25.

[50] Rome, Adam. 2013. The Genius of Earth Day: How a 1970 Teach-in Unexpectedly Made
     the First Green Generation. New York: Hill and Wang.

[51] Salomon, Erika, Jesse Preston, and Melanie Tannenbaum. "Climate change helpless-
     ness and the (de)moralization of individual energy behavior." Journal of Experimental
     Psychology: Applied 23(1):15-28.

[52] Scharf, Kimberley, Sarah Smith, and Mark Wilhelm. 2017. "Lift and Shift: The Effect
     of Fundraising Interventions in Charity Space and Time" CEPR Discussion Paper No.
     DP12338.




                                            23
[53] Semenza, Jan, David Hall, Daniel Wilson, Brian Bontempo, David Sailor, and Linda
     George. 2008. "Public Perception of Climate Change: Voluntary Mitigation and Barriers
     to Behavior Change" Behavioral and Public Communication 35: 479-487.

[54] Sengupta, Somini. 2019. "Protesting Climate Change, Young People Take to Streets in
     a Global Strike." New York Times, September 20. Accessed online at https://www.
     nytimes.com/2019/09/20/climate/global-climate-strike.html

[55] Shabecoff, Philip. 1993. A Fierce Green Fire: The American Environmental Movement.
     New York: Hill and Wang.

[56] Smith, Leane. 2012. "Peak Through Time: Albion Takes Center Stage in CBS
     News Special on First Earth Day." News article published April 20, 2012, ac-
     cessed online at https://www.mlive.com/news/jackson/2012/04/peek_through_
     time_albion_takes.html

[57] The Danville Bee. "DuVal Asks Pollution Board Head to Resign" (1970, April 23), p.
     16. Article accessed at https://newspaperarchive.com/

[58] The Titusville Herald. "Thousands Over U.S. Join Demonstrations Marking Earth
     Day",p. 1. (1970, April 18) Article accessed at https://newspaperarchive.com/

[59] U.S. Government Printing Office. 1971. "Hearings Before the Subcommittee on Fisheries
     and Wildlife Conservation of the Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries," Serial
     No. 92-23, page 305.

[60] U.S.      Historical       Climatology      Network.    Data      accessed        at
     https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/data-access/land-based-station-data/land-based-
     datasets/us-historical-climatology-network-ushcn

[61] Watts, Joe. 2019. "Theresa May Criticises Schoolchildren Protesting Against
     Looming Climate Disaster for Wasting Lesson Time" article accessed at
     https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/theresa-may-climate-
     change-school-pupils-protest-lesson-time-teachers-a8781046.html

[62] Xu, Jianhua, Cheryl Chi, and Kejun Zhu. 2017. "Concern or Apathy: the Attitude of
     the Public Toward Urban Air Pollution" Journal of Risk Research 20(4): 482-498.

[63] Zivin, Joshua and Matthew Neidell. 2013. "Environment, Health, and Human Capital"
     Journal of Economic Literature 51(3), 689-730.


                                           24
Appendix

Section 1. Weather on Earth Day and Voluntarism

1a. 1973 Youth Socialization Survey

   The 1973 Youth Socialization Survey is the only study we know of which directly asks a
national sample of young adults (or other adults) about voluntarism in 1970. This survey
is from the Youth-Parent Socialization Panel Study, 1965-1973. These data are taken from
the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research(ICPSR).
   Students were chosen in 1965 from a national probability sample of ninety-seven sec-
ondary schools (including 11 non-public schools). Within each school, 15-21 randomly-
designated seniors were interviewed. The sample is thus nationally representative for high-
school seniors in 1965. A total of 1348 (80.8 percent of the original sample) were re-
interviewed in 1973 (one part of the data documentation says that the followup instead
occurred in 1975, we believe this to be erroneous, cf. Jennings and Niemi, 1978). The sam-
ple is unweighted. Respondents were asked, "Have you ever taken part in a demonstration,
protest, march or sit-in" and if they answered yes were asked to give examples. The dataset
includes the time period of each of the first two examples named. The survey also asks about
type of activity but we found this hard to parse given many categories and the holistic nature
of many Earth Day events; we viewed time as cleaner. If respondents named participation
in other non-Earth-Day events from 1970 and the tendency to do this was unrelated to the
weather, it would likely bias us towards zero.
   We take as our dependent variable a dummy that equals unity if a respondent reports
participating in a demonstration/protest in 1970 and zero otherwise. A total of 48 respon-
dents report participating in a 1970 event. We might expect more to have participated in
Earth Day as other estimates say 10 percent of the population participated; that percent
was likely higher for the age group in this survey. The low number reported could be driven
by people instead reporting events in other years (a total of 159 respondents list partici-

                                             25
pation in events in other years but not 1970). If people participated in Earth Day but do
not recall doing so for this question (e.g., they do not consider their participation to have
been a demonstration or protest) that will bias estimates towards zero if such non-recall is
unrelated to the weather. If people who participated in Earth Day events during bad weather
are especially likely to recall this when answering this retrospective question, that bias will
work against our results.14
       For location, we use the Primary Sampling Unit of respondents in the 1965 wave of the
survey. PSUs are coded as SMAS or counties (the only exception is Toledo, Ohio, which we
code as Lancaster county). For SMSAs, we make population-weighted averages of rainfall
and our other county-level controls as we do for our GSS estimates (as discussed in more
detail in Appendix Section 2). We also include a dummy for gender, a dummy for whether
a respondent is white, the respondent's age, and a dummy for attending some college (it
appears that the 1973 survey does not ask about high school completion, perhaps assuming
that all seniors interviewed in 1965 graduated).
       Table A1 reports estimates from regressing the likelihood of participating in a 1970
demonstration/protest on rainfall on Earth Day. Coefficients are multiplied by 100 for read-
ability; the logistic coefficient is a log-odds coefficient. The first row is the baseline estimate of
participation on deviation-from-mean rainfall and individual controls. The second row uses
simple precipitation rather than deviation-from-mean. The third row redoes the baseline es-
timation with extra control variables (those in Table 1), row 4 uses winsorized precipitation.
Row 5 uses a logit on the baseline specification. The last row redoes the baseline but now
the dependent variable is participation in years other than 1970.
       Most coefficients are negative and significant, indicating that that rain on April 22, 1970
is subsequently negatively associated with individuals reporting participation in a demon-
stration or event that year. Noting that the coefficients are times 100, the magnitude suggests
  14
    Similarly, if volunteering on Earth Day led to volunteering in following years, and these more recent
volunteering episodes were mentioned on the survey, they could "crowd out" the mention of the original
volunteering on Earth Day, which would also bias the estimates towards zero.



                                                   26
that a 40-tenths-of-a-millimeter increase in rain lowers reported participation by a little un-
der 1 percentage point. If one assumed that that participation in Earth Day for this group
was (e.g.) twice that for the average member of the population, the implied effect would
be 5 percent of the mean (.01/.2=.05). The logit regression similarly suggests that such an
                                                                               × -.00974)
increase in rain would lower the odds of participation by about e(40                         .65, an effect
off of a base of about .03 to .03 × .65  .019. In contrast, rain on that day increases the
likelihood that a person reports participating in an event some other year; this coefficient
is large but less precise than some of the main results. We take the results of this table as
suggestive, since (a) the table shows that the estimate is sensitive to specification and (b)
the data come from a small sample. But the results indicate that, as one would expect, bad
weather on Earth Day is associated with lower participation. In the next subsection we turn
to the CPS, which uses a much larger sample.


1b. CPS Volunteer Supplement

    Large-sample measures of voluntarism are available from the CPS Volunteer Supplement
from 2002-2014 administered in September of each year by the US Census Bureau. We
obtain these data from the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research
(ICPSR).The survey asks questions regarding participation in volunteer activities, defined
as unpaid activities through or for an organization at any point in the previous year. They
specifically word the question: "Since September 1st of the Last Year, have you done any
volunteer activities through or for an organization?" If the participant answers yes, they
are asked a series of questions about the type and amount of time spent on activities they
engaged in.15 Respondents were allowed to list up to seven organizations and could list the
same type of organization more than once. The organization type of interest is classified as
  15
     Note that there is also a second question regarding whether or not a respondent has volunteered, as some
people may not think what they did counted as volunteer activity. The second question asks: "Sometimes
people don't think of activities they do infrequently or activities they do for children's schools or youth
organizations as volunteer activities. Since September 1st of last year, have you done any of these types of
volunteer activities?" This second question may contain responses when the main voluntarism question of
interest is answered as no or missing, and is used when constructing our measures of voluntarism.


                                                     27
"Environmental or Animal Care Organization." This coding, and the large size of the CPS,
allow us to focus on environmental voluntarism specifically.
   We use two questions specifically to measure environmental voluntarism. First, we con-
struct a binary yes/no variable for whether they volunteered for an environmental organiza-
tion. About .9 percent of respondents across all survey years report having volunteered for
such organizations. Second, for those who volunteered for an environmental organization,
we use the question: "How many hours did you do volunteer activities for [an environmen-
tal or animal care organization] in the last year?" to construct our measure of total hours
spent volunteering. In constructing the hours spent volunteering variable, there are a few
considerations.
   People who reported yes to volunteering for an environmental organization but were
missing for how many hours (e.g. not knowing or refusing to answer) are counted as missing,
as they presumably spent a non-zero amount of time on environmental volunteering. These
amount to about 2% of the observations used in estimation. Moreover, those who reported
volunteering but did not list an environmental organization and those who did not volunteer
at all were recorded as zeros. Observations are missing if they are "not in universe" or
missing for all of the volunteer questions.
   There is another question regarding hours volunteering in the volunteer supplement as
well. Respondents provided how many weeks they volunteered for the organization they
listed, and then were asked how many hours per week they volunteered. The results using
this measure of hours are consistent with the previous measure.
   Included in baseline regressions are controls for gender, marital status, race, whether
the respondent is college educated, whether the respondent belongs to a family with income
above the median income in their state for the year of the survey, and year fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered at the county level. The main regressions are weighted by the
"Final weight", which adjusts for geographic and demographic subgroups of the population.
Results are robust to using the volunteer supplement non-response weight instead.


                                              28
   Figures A1 and A2 show day-by-day results of regressing hours of environmental volun-
teering on Earth Day rainfall (Figure A1) and a dummy for any environmental volunteering
at all (Figure A2). These have a sample size of 422,172 and 425,692, respectively. Unlike
the figures in the main text, here the relevant Earth Day rainfall is from Earth Day of the
year a respondent was surveyed (in September). The coefficients are multiplied by 100.
   Both pictures show that rain on Earth Day is associated with lower levels of voluntarism,
while other days in April generally are not. The coefficient in Figure A1 suggests that an
increase in 100 tenths of millimeters of rain is associated with a decline of .0134 hours in
average volunteering, which would be a decline of about 1,300 hours in total in a community
of 100,000 people. Figure A2 indicates that this increase in rain would lower the probability
that someone reports being a volunteer by close to .1%, or about 78 people in a town of
100,000. Together both pictures indicate that rainfall on recent Earth Days is associated
with lower reports of environmental voluntarism, at both the extensive and intensive margins,
when people are surveyed six months later.
   Table A2 reports estimates from regressing whether an individual volunteered for an
environmental organization on rainfall on the Earth day of the same year of the survey.
Coefficients are multiplied by 100 for readability. The first column uses the indicator for
whether an individual volunteered at all for an environmental (or animal care) organization
and the second column uses the total number of hours spent volunteering for those organi-
zations in the past year. The first row uses deviation-from-mean rainfall and includes the
same contemporaneous individual controls and year fixed effects used for Figure A1 and A2.
The second row uses simple precipitation, the third row redoes the first row with additional
contemporaneous county level controls. The last row uses winsorized precipitation.
   The county level controls in row 3 include the proportion of the county that is black,
white, female, high school graduated, married, and the fraction employed in manufacturing
from the CPS survey of the concurrent year. These controls are created differently than
those of other specifications, as these regressions relate rain on the Earth Day of each survey


                                              29
year to reported voluntarism during that same year. Specifically, we collapse data from the
CPS surveys themselves to the county level using the final weight mentioned above. As with
the main results, these controls have a negligible effect on the point estimates.
       The coefficients in the first column are mostly marginally significant, and suggest that
more rain on Earth Day in a given year lowers the probability of having volunteered for an
environmental or animal care organization in that same year. Row 3 suggests that an 100
tenths of a millimeter increase in rainfall leads to a decrease in the probability of volunteering
by about .04 percentage points, which is about a 4.3 percent decrease over the mean.
       The point estimates in the second column are all negative and mostly significant. The
baseline estimates with individual and county level controls (row 3) suggest that an increase
in 100 tenths of millimeters of rain decrease the average hours volunteered by .0086 hours,
or a decline in a about 860 hours in a town of 100,000 people. There are many zeroes in
the dependent variable, which may bias OLS downwards. Using the coefficients from the
Tobit specification, to adjust for this bias, shows that an increase in 100 tenths of millimeters
of rain from average rainfall decreases the average annual hours volunteered by about .85
hours.16 This is about 2 percent of the mean among those who report nonzero environmental
voluntarism. Overall, then, both results from the Youth Survey and from the CPS data
confirm the intuitive result that bad weather lowers participation on Earth Day. The results
are larger for the Youth Survey data, but suggest the potential for economically significant
responses in both cases.


Section 2. Additional Information on the GSS

       For the General Social Survey, restricted-use Primary Sampling Unit information is avail-
able for the samples from 1977 through 1993. We obtained information on the list of primary
sampling units from the NORC organization (which oversees the GSS). The documentation
provided lists Standard Metropolitan Statistical Areas for the 1970 sample frame (which
  16
    This is estimated by taking differences in the expected value of y--x conditional on y--x being greater
than 0, i.e. the truncated expectation x' + , where  is the inverse Mills ratio.

                                                    30
also includes several counties and county groups). The documentation for the 1980 frame is
worse, with several SMSAs misspelled and at least one PSU number apparently mislabeled.
      We used both the 1970 and 1980 frames, discarding the Black Sample frame. We matched
1970 information on SMSAs to county level information using SMSA to Census 1970 and
1980 information provided by the US Census. For 1980, we matched data using SMSA name,
and if there was no SMSA with a name we matched using the provided county name and
state. For both the 1970 and 1980 sampling frames, there are several multi-county groups
that are not SMSAs. We constructed SMSA-like groups of counties for these PSUs.
      Since our weather data is available at the county level, but SMSAs span counties, we
estimated daily precipitation in two ways. First, we used the recorded precipitation from the
county with the largest 1970 population in each SMSA. Second, we took a 1970-population-
weighted average of precipitation from counties in each SMSAs; the results reported in the
paper use this latter measure. However, the correlation in April 22, 1970 precipitation with
these two measures was close to 0.99, and results were generally quite similar regardless of
which measure we used.


Section 3. Evidence from the Federal Election Commission

      We also look at data on individual contributions to the League of Conservation Voters
(LCV) from the Federal Election Commission (FEC) from 1978 to 1988.17 We choose 1978
as the start date as this is the first year of available data in the relevant time period. The
FEC reports all data on contributions over a threshold (for much of this period, $500)
and contains zip code level identifiers. We match zip codes to counties and use the total
individual contributions within a county as our outcome. We drop observations from zip
codes that cross county borders (i.e., not fully contained within a county) and have non-
zero contributions, as it is not clear which county generated that data. We have 27,654
observations in this sample.
 17
    Data available at: https://www.fec.gov/. We use committee ID C00094870, which is the LCV PAC
with data available over this time range.

                                              31
   Table A7 reports population weighted regressions of total contributions on rainfall on
Earth Day. Specifications are clustered in different ways. Results are not statistically sig-
nificant across all specifications; however, the results indicate that more rain on Earth Day
decreases individual contributions to the LCV. The mean and standard deviation of total
contributions are 39 and 626.3 dollars, respectively. The estimated coefficient on the speci-
fication with residual rain and controls then implies that a one standard-deviation increase
in residual rainfall on Earth Day leads to a 101 dollar, or .16 standard deviation, decrease
in contributions. Figure A5 presents day-by-day estimates as in the main text. Again, the
point estimates suggest that higher rain lowers donor support for the LCV, but the result
is not statistically significant, while a few of the other coefficients, spuriously, are. Overall,
we take Table A7 and Figure A5 as suggestive, but not conclusive, evidence that Earth Day
affected support for the LCV. However, the results here are necessarily limited to only the
largest donations, as only large donations are reported to the FEC.




                                               32
                                Figure 1: Precipitation on April 22, 1970




Rainfall is measured in .1mm.
           Figure 2: Opposition to Environmental Spending in the 1970s and 1980s and April 1970 Rainfall
   0.275
             Panel A: Under Age 20 on Earth day

   0.225




   0.175




   0.125




   0.075




   0.025


              17         18          19         20          21          22         23          24         25          26          27         28
  -0.025



                                                                                                               Day of the Month
  -0.075




  -0.125



   0.225
             Panel B: All Ages


   0.175




   0.125




   0.075




   0.025



              17         18          19         20          21          22         23          24         25          26          27         28
  -0.025




  -0.075                                                                                                       Day of the Month




  -0.125

Each picture shows coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a regression on agreement with the statement "we're spending too much money"
on improving & protecting the environment on a set of covariates for rainfall on days in April, 1970. Responses are taken from the 1977 through 1993
waves of the General Social Survey. Coefficients are multiplied by 100 for readability. The estimation is based off of the baseline specification in
Table 1. The full set of results is given in the appendix. 95% confidence intervals are shown around each coefficient.
                                                   Figure 3: Environemtnal Attitudes and Rain on Earth Day:
                                                        Adjusting the Sample by Age on April 20, 1970




The figure shows the results from 45 estimated regressions. Each regression regresses stated opposition to environmental spending on original-Earth-Day rainfall and a set of controls.
The regressions limit the sample by age on earthday to individuals between age 5 and the given age on the x axis. (Results including just those under age 5 are typically imprecise). The
black line shows the coefficient estimate, and the grey area shows the 95 percent confidence interval as progressively older ages are included in the sample.
                                             Figure 4: Earth Day and Air Pollution
Mean CO Readings and April 1970 Rainfall



 0.0085




 0.0065




 0.0045




 0.0025




 0.0005

              17         18          19         20          21         22          23          24         25          26           27         28


 -0.0015




 -0.0035


                                                                                                                           Day of the Month
 -0.0055


This picture shows coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a regression of annual CO levels (1970-1988) on a set of covariates for rainfall on
days in April, 1970.
                                            Figure 5: Earth Day and Infant Health

April, 1970 Rainfall and Congenital Malformations


  0.00400



  0.00300



  0.00200



  0.00100



  0.00000
               17         18         19         20         21          22         23         24         25          26          27          28


 -0.00100



 -0.00200



 -0.00300



 -0.00400

                                                                                                                         Day of the Month
 -0.00500

This picture shows coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a regression of births with congenital malformations, from 1980-1988, on a set of
covariates for rainfall on days in April, 1970. Coefficients are multiplied by 100 for readability.
                                    Figure 6: The Effect of Earth Day on CO Over Time


  0.0125




  0.0075




  0.0025



            1973   1974    1975    1976   1977    1978    1979    1980    1981   1982    1983    1984    1985    1986    1987   1988

  -0.0025




  -0.0075

The figure shows coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from regressing carbon monoxide (CO) levels on deviation-from-historical-
norm precipitation on the original Earth Day. Each coefficient is from a separate regression analagous to the regression in column 1, row
1, of Table 2, except that in each regression here we limit the sample to a single year. The years before 1973 are omitted as their
confidence intervals are large and distort the axis (the 1970 CI is {-0.067, 0.013}, for 1971 it is {-0.012, 0.021}, and for 1972 it is {-
.0046, 0.016}).
                                                                                                Table 1: Variables
Panel A: Control variables                                                                                                                                              Panel B: Precipitation & Dependent Variables
                                           Variable        Regression on                                                        Variable       Regression on                                                      Variable
                                          mean, [s.d.]     Rainfall , (s.e.)                                                   mean, [s.d.]    Rainfall , (s.e.)                                                 mean, [s.d.]
Per capita income in 1969                   20957                24             Fraction in manufacturing, 1970                   0.068            0.00058              GSS Anti-Environmental Spending            1.50
                                            [4958]              (179)                                                            [0.057]          (0.00202)               Index                                    [0.65]
Per capita state unemployment                  82               2.596           Fraction in mining, 1970                          0.008            -0.00109
 insurance transfers in 1970                  [58]             (3.122)                                                           [0.021]          (0.00079)
                                                                                                                                                                        GSS "Spend too Little" Dummy                0.62
Fraction population employed, 1970           0.409             0.00260          Fraction black, 1970                              0.082            -0.00197                                                         [0.49]
                                             [.100]           (0.00440)                                                          [0.139]          (0.00179)
Fraction population in poverty, 1970          0.164            -0.00473         Fraction other race in 1970                       0.011          -0.007327**            Carbon Monoxide                             1.76
                                             [0.095]          (0.00399)                                                          [0.043]          (0.00361)                                                         [1.34]
Average # of air quality monitors             2.89             -0.18602         First population quantile                          0.21            -0.02519             Congenital Abnormalities                    0.01
                                             [2.97]           (0.11546)                                                           [0.41]          (0.02323)                                                        [0.009]
Fraction under age 18, 1970                   0.350            0.00036          Second population quantile                         0.25            0.00919              Abnormalities (High SES)                    0.01
                                             [0.040]          (0.00175)                                                           [0.43]          (0.02472)                                                        [0.008]
Fraction with HS education, 1970              0.263            0.00052          Third population quantile                          0.26            -0.00032             Abnormalities (Low SES)                     0.01
                                             [0.053]          (0.00230)                                                           [0.44]          (0.01913)                                                        [0.011]
Fraction married, 1970                        0.637         0.005138***         Fourth population quantile                         0.28            0.01633              Precipitation                                13.4
                                             [0.044]         (0.00176)                                                            [0.45]          (0.01591)                                                          [39]
Fraction female, 1970                         0.508            0.00081          Log of 1970 population                            10.01            -0.04664
                                             [0.017]          (0.00078)                                                           [1.31]          (0.05403)
Observations: 2523. For each variable in Panel A, the left column shows the mean and standard deviation and the right column shows the coefficient and standard error of a regression of the variable on county-level
precipitation on April 22, 1970, in .1mm, per day. Each coefficient is from a separate regression. * = 10 percent significant, ** = 5 percent significant, *** = 1 percent significant. A joint test of the significance of the
association of all the above variables with precipitation on Earth Day yields F(17, 2522) = 1.12, p = 0.32. The mean quantiles for population do not all equal 0.25 since some counties with missing variables are omitted from
the sample and smaller counties are more likely to be omitted. The mean and standard deviation for precipitation is 13.4 [39].
                 Table 2: Rainfall on April 22, 1970, and Environmental Support in the 1970s and 1980s

                                                              Strongest Support for                             Opposition to Environment:
                                                             Environment Spending                                     Overall Index
                                                                               Under 20                                              Under 20
                                                           All Ages          on Earth Day                         All Ages         on Earth Day
                                                              (1)                 (2)                                (3)                (4)
Rain on Earth Day                                           -0.046*           -0.0854***                           0.0576            0.0976**
                                                          (0.000272)            (0.032)                           (0.036)             (0.042)

Rain on Earth Day (Levels)                                 -0.0572*            -0.0839**                           0.0617             0.0932**
                                                            (0.032)              (0.038)                           (0.043)             (0.047)

Rain on Earth Day (Extra Controls)                           0.0156            -0.0671**                           -0.0208             0.0757*
                                                             (0.024)             (0.032)                           (0.032)             (0.040)

Winzorized Rainfall                                          0.0155            -0.0828**                           -0.0264             0.0977*
                                                             (0.032)             (0.040)                           (0.044)             (0.051)

Logistic/Ordered Logistic                                   0.0637              -0.338**                           -0.0425             0.334**
                                                            (0.106)              (0.153)                           (0.103)             (0.154)
Each coefficient is from a separate regression. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered by primary sampling unit, in parentheses. The
data come from the General Social Survey from 1977 to 1993. Coefficients are multiplied by 100 for readability. In the first two columns the
dependent variable is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a respondent says "we're spending too little money" on improving and protecting the
environment. The last two columns index responses on the current level environmental spending from 1 to 3, where 3 = spending is "too high", 2 =
it is "about right", and 1 = "too little". For each dependent variable the first column shows all respondents and the second shows results for those
alive and under age 20 on the original Earth Day. There are 18,370 and 5,161 observations in the baseline regression in these respective columns.
The mean of the index is 1.5 (sd = 0.65) for the full sample and 1.3 (0.53) for the under 20 sample. The mean of the strongest support dummy is
0.62 (0.49) for the full sample and 0.74 (0.44) for the under 20 sample. All regressions include a set of individual controls (age, education, race,
survey form used, year of interview).

For all columns, the first row uses deviation-from-historical-average-precipitation on Earth Day; which for brevity we refer to as "rain on Earth
Day". The second row redoes the baseline specification but uses simple precipitation rather than its deviation from the historical mean. The third
row redoes the baseline estimation but adds extra control variables (listed in Table 1), row 4 uses winsorized deviation-from-historical-average rain
using the 5% and 95% values for winsorizing, and also includes extra RHS controls. The last row uses a logistic regression for the GSS survey
responses for the first two columns and an ordered-logit regression in the last-two columns. The logistic regressions are reported in log odds
(multiplied by 100 for readability). The corresponding, not-multiplied-by-100 odds ratio coefficients for columns 2 and 4 are .99662 (se = .0015) and
1.00335 (.0015). * = significant at the 10 percent level, ** = significant at the 5 percent level, *** = significant at the 1 percent level.
                                                    Table 3:
        Rainfall on April 22, 1970, and Carbon Monoxide & Congenital Abnormalities in the 1970s and 1980s
                                                                                                          Congenital Abnormalities
                                                                    Carbon                                           High SES      Low SES
                                                                   Monoxide                         All                Births        Births
                                                                       (1)                          (2)                 (3)            (4)
Rain on Earth Day                                                  0.00360**                   0.00514***           0.00525***    0.00515***
                                                                   (0.00158)                     (0.0011)            (0.0010)       (0.0012)

Rain on Earth Day (Levels)                                          0.00355*                    0.00408**            0.00348**       0.0028
                                                                    (0.00191)                    (0.0018)             (0.0016)      (0.0025)

Rain on Earth Day (Extra Controls)                                 0.00320**                   0.00368***           0.00326***    0.00438***
                                                                   (0.00145)                     (0.0012)            (0.0011)       (0.0012)

Rain on Earth Day (Extra Controls, Weighted)                        0.00347*                    0.00426**            0.00451**     0.00649**
                                                                    (0.00190)                    (0.0021)             (0.0018)      (0.0025)

Winzorized Rainfall                                                0.00390**                    0.00546*             0.00633**     0.00876**
                                                                   (0.00167)                    (0.0030)              (0.0027)      (0.0034)

   The coefficients and standard errors in columns 2, 3, and 4 are multiplied by 100 for readability.

Each coefficient is from a separate regression. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered by state, in parentheses. In column 1, the
dependent variable is mean annual carbon monoxide readings (in parts per million) in a county from 1970 to 1988 and the sample includes a total
of 3,823 observations. The mean of this variable is 1.757 (sd = 1.34). The specifications in each row follow Table 2. As in that table, we refer to
deviation-from-historical-average precipitation here as "rain on Earth Day" for brevity.

In columns 2, 3 and 4 the dependent variable is the fraction of children born with a congenital abnormality; these data are available from 1980 to
1988, with a total sample size of 25,691. Column 3 restricts the sample to births from high socioeconomic status (SES) mothers and column 4
restricts the sample to low SES mothers, where low SES women are one of the following (a) teenaged (b) unmarried (c) nonwhite, and high SES
mothers are all others. The (weighted) fraction of congenital abnormalities for all women, high SES women, and low SES respectively is 0.01 (sd
= 0.009), 0.01 (0.008), and 0.01 (0.011).

The first three rows use unweighted data. In the fourth row, we weight the estimates on carbon monoxide by the total population in a county, and
we weight the congenital abnormality regressions by the number of births. Row 5 includes the extra RHS controls and reports our preferred
specification for each dependent variable where carbon monoxide estimates are unweighted and congenital abnormalities are weighted by births;
changing the use of weights produces similar results.

* = significant at the 10 percent level, ** = significant at the 5 percent level, *** = significant at the 1 percent level.
                          Appendix Figure A1: Earth Day Rainfall and Environmental Voluntarism
 0.045



 0.035



 0.025



 0.015



 0.005


           17        18         19       20        21        22       23        24        25        26        27        28
-0.005



-0.015



-0.025

This picture shows coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a regression of annual hours spent volunteering for an
environmental (or animal care) organziation on a set of covariates for rainfall on days in April from 2002 to 2014. The
regression also includes a set of controls for gender, marital status, race, whether the respondent is college educated, whether
the respondent belongs to a family with income above the median income and year fixed effects. Coefficients are multiplied by
100.
                        Appendix Figure A2: Earth Day Rainfall and Environemtnal Voluntarism
     0.0025


      0.002


     0.0015


      0.001


     0.0005


          0
                17       18        19       20       21       22       23        24       25       26       27        28

     -0.0005


      -0.001


     -0.0015


      -0.002


This picture shows coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a regression of an indicator for volunteering for an
environmental (or animal care) organziations on a set of covariates for rainfall on days in April from 2002 to 2014. The
regression also includes a set of controls for gender, marital status, race, whether the respondent is college educated, whether
the respondent belongs to a family with income above the median income and year fixed effects. Coefficients are multiplied by
100.
              Appendix Figure A3: Daily Rainfall Estimates, All Days in April 1970


                   Pro-Environmental Values in GSS Under Age 20
   0.0025

   0.0015

   0.0005

  -0.0005    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30

  -0.0015

  -0.0025

  -0.0035

  -0.0045


                                      Carbon Monoxide
  0.0125


  0.0075


  0.0025


             1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
 -0.0025


 -0.0075


 -0.0125



                                 Congenital Malformations

   0.01100

   0.00900

   0.00700

   0.00500

   0.00300

   0.00100

  -0.00100    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
  -0.00300

  -0.00500


This figure depicts results from three regressions, one for each of the three panels. Each panel
shows the results of a regression on a given outcome on rain each day in April 1970. The panels
correspond to the figures in the main text.
Appendix Figure A4: Earth Day Rainfall and Later outcomes: Nonparametric Estimates




                 .2
                                Panel A: Opposition to Environmental Spending

    Oppositio

                 .1
                 0




                                                                                                   Rainfall
                 -.1




                          -40                  -20                   0              20    40                   60
                  .6




                                  Panel B: Carbon Monoxide
                  .4
                  .2
 Mean CO


                  0
                  -.2




                                                                                               Rainfall
                                  -40                -20                 0          20   40               60
                   .05




                                 Panel C: Congenital Abnormalities
 Abnormalities


                   0




                                                                                               Rainfall
                   -.05




                           -50                                                  0                              50


Each panel shows a local polynomial estimate, with 95% confidence intervals, of the relation between rainfall on
April 22, 1970, and (in panel A) opposition to environmental spending among those under 21 in the 1977
through 1993 General Social Surveys (in panel B) mean annual Carbon Dioxide levels in counties from 1970 to
1988 and (in panel C) logged congenital abnormalities from 1980 to 1988. In all panels both the dependent
variable and residual rainfall are residualed out from a set of observables, and then fifth-degree polynomials are
estimated at each 5th percentile of the sample using an optimal bandwidth that is separately determined in each
panel.
                    Appendix Figure A5: Earth Day Rainfall and Individual Contributions to the FEC
     3.000


     2.000


     1.000


     0.000
               17       18        19       20       21       22        23       24       25       26        27        28

     -1.000


     -2.000


     -3.000


     -4.000


     -5.000



This picture shows coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a regression of the total county level individual
contributions to the FEC on rainfall. The regression also includes a set of controls.
          Appendix Table A1: Earth Day Weather and Voluntarism:
             Evidence from the 1973 Youth Socialization Study
                                                                        Participated in
                                                                     Demonstration in 1970
 (1) Rain on Earth Day                                                         0.00214
                                                                               (0.0168)

 (2) Rain on Earth Day (Levels)                                               -0.0185*
                                                                              (0.0109)

 (3) Rain on Earth Day (Extra Controls)                                       -0.0208*
                                                                              (0.0108)

 (4) Winzorized Rainfall                                                        -0.0207
                                                                               (0.0219)

 (5) Logistic/Ordered Logistic                                                -0.974**
                                                                              (0.4200)

 (6) Demonstrated in Other Years                                               0.0566*
                                                                               (0.0289)
In all rows coefficients are multiplied by 100 for readability; the logistic regression reports log-
odds. Each coefficient is from a separate regression. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors,
clustered by primary sampling unit, in parentheses. The data come from the 1973 Youth
Socialization Study. There are 1313 respondents in the sample. In the first 5 rows the dependent
variable is a dummy that equals 1 if a respondent reports having ever participated in a
"demonstration, protest march, or sit-in" in 1970 (48 respondents report this, the mean is thus
0.0366). The last column is a dummy for whether a respondent reports participating in a
demonstration, protest march, or sit-in in other years (159 respondents report this).

The first row uses deviation-from-historical-average-precipitation on Earth Day; which for
brevity we refer to as "rain on Earth Day", and individual controls for age, education, and race.
The second row uses uses simple precipitation rather than its deviation from the historical mean.
The third row redoes the baseline estimation but adds extra control variables (listed in Table 1),
row 4 uses winsorized deviation-from-historical-average rain using the 5% and 95% values for
winsorizing, and also includes extra RHS controls. The fifth row redoes row 3 using a logit
regression rather than OLS. The last row uses the baseline specification from row 1. * =
significant at the 10 percent level, ** = significant at the 5 percent level, *** = significant at the
1 percent level.
                     Appendix Table A2: CPS Volunteer Survey


                                                   Volunteer               Annual Hours
                                                   (Binary)                Volunteered

(1)         Rain on Earth Day                     -0.000412*                 -0.00894**
                                                   (0.00024)                  (0.00434)

(2)         Rain on Earth Day (levels)             -0.000502                 -0.00932**
                                                   (0.00031)                  (0.00451)

(3)         Rain on Earth day (Controls)          -0.000406*                 -0.00864**
                                                  (0.000241)                  (0.00439)

(4)         Winzorized Rainfall                    -0.000256                   -0.0125
                                                  (0.000459)                  (0.00969)

(5)         Logit/Tobit                               -0.048                 -0.86381**
                                                     (0.0317)                  (0.402)
In all rows coefficients are multiplied by 100 for readability. Each coefficient is from a
separate regression. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered by county, are
in parentheses. The data come from the CPS Volunteer Supplement from 2002-2014
administered in September of each year by the US Census Bureau. All regressions are
weighted by the BLS Final Weight. In the first column the dependent variable is a
dummy that equals 1 if a respondent reports having volunteered for an 'Environmental
or Animal Care Organization'. The second column is a variable for the number of hours
spent volunteering for that organization in the past year. The means and standard
deviations for the dependent variable in each column are .009 (sd = .096) in column 1,
and .049 (sd = 3.46) in column 2. The mean number of hours of volunteering
conditional on having volunteered for a non-zero amount of hours is 54.52 hours.

The first row uses deviation-from-historical-average-precipitation on the Earth Day of
the year of the survey; which for brevity we refer to as "rain on Earth Day", and
includes individual controls for gender, marital status, race, whether the respondent is
college educated, whether the respondent belongs to a family with income above the
median income and year fixed effects. The second row uses uses simple precipitation
rather than its deviation from the historical mean. The third row redoes the baseline
estimation but adds additional county-level controls; row 4 uses winsorized deviation-
from-historical-average rain using the 5% and 95% values for winsorizing, and also
includes extra RHS controls. The final row for the column one redoes row 3 with a
logit regression, and for column 2, redoes row 3 using a tobit regression. For the tobit
regression, marginal effects evaluated at the means for the truncated expectation are
reported, and standard errors are estimated via the delta method. * = significant at the
10 percent level, ** = significant at the 5 percent level, *** = significant at the 1
percent level.
                                       Appendix Table A3: RHS Coefficients
                                                                                                  Congenital
                                       GSS All        GSS Under 20        Carbon Monoxide       Abnormalities
Rain on Earth Day                    -0.000208           0.000757*            0.00320**           4.26e-05**
                                    (0.000322)          (0.000396)             (0.00145)           (2.09e-05)
Age                                0.00772***          0.00735***                    -                   -
                                    (0.000332)           (0.00191)
High School Education               -0.0533***           -0.0480**                   -                   -
                                       (0.0127)            (0.0236)
Over-HS Education                   -0.0990***          -0.0881***                   -                   -
                                       (0.0142)            (0.0242)
Male Dummy                           0.0549***               0.0138                  -                   -
                                       (0.0100)            (0.0133)
White Dummy                              0.0163             -0.0345                  -                   -
                                       (0.0177)            (0.0258)
Fraction married 1970                   -0.0419             -0.0940               -2.105             -0.0123
                                        (0.280)             (0.363)              (1.860)            (0.0266)
Fraction Black 1970                      -0.141              0.0639               -0.163             0.00168
                                       (0.0965)             (0.139)              (0.820)           (0.00950)
Fraction Other Race 1970                  0.155              0.0939               -1.230            -0.00285
                                       (0.0954)             (0.131)              (1.160)            (0.0119)
UI Transfers in 1970                  -0.235**               -0.246             2.944**              -0.0198
                                        (0.113)             (0.186)              (1.194)            (0.0192)
Fraction Female 1970                     0.351                0.324              6.880*               0.0256
                                        (0.229)             (0.299)              (3.783)            (0.0228)
Fraction under 18 in 1970             0.925***             0.756**                 0.771              0.0165
                                        (0.262)             (0.320)              (2.204)            (0.0183)
Fraction HS 1970                         0.248                0.201               -0.815             0.0221
                                        (0.325)             (0.424)              (2.083)            (0.0266)
Fraction mining 1970                     0.772                0.583              0.0139              0.0268
                                        (0.746)             (0.912)              (5.013)            (0.0210)
Fraction manufactoring 1970          -0.488***               -0.291               -1.273            -0.00671
                                        (0.163)             (0.225)              (1.335)            (0.0148)
Fraction employed 1970                   0.159             -0.0220             1.860***           0.00668**
                                        (0.117)             (0.165)              (0.506)           (0.00319)
Fraction in poverty 1970                 -0.132              -0.107               -4.415             -0.0240
                                        (0.232)             (0.277)              (2.818)            (0.0165)
Percapita Income                      -6.04e-06           -4.55e-06             1.75e-06         -4.32e-07***
                                     (3.74e-06)          (4.03e-06)           (1.42e-05)           (1.27e-07)
Standard errors in parentheses. The first column matches the specification in column 3, row 2, of Table 2. The
second column here matches column 4 row 2 of Table 2. The third column here matches column 1 row 2 of
Table 3. The last column here matches column 2 row 2 of Table 3. The first five variables are individual-level
controls from the GSS.

 * = significant at the 10 percent level, ** = significant at the 5 percent level, *** = significant at the 1 percent
level.
                                                            Appendix Table A4:
                                     Rainfall on April 22, 1970, and Various Measures of Air Pollution
                                                                                                                                                 Carbon
                                                                      NO2                 Ozone                 TSP              SO             Monoxide
                                                                       (1)                  (2)                 (3)               (4)               (5)
Rain on Earth Day                                                    -0.0102             9.68e-06             -0.0314          0.00116          0.0036**
                                                                    (0.0148)            (8.94e-06)           (0.0250)         (0.00800)         (0.00158)

Observations                                                          3215                 5382                18772            4250                3823
Each coefficient is from a separate regression. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered by state, in parentheses. The means and standard errors in
each column are 17.2 (se = 9.5) in column 1, .025 (.008) in column 2, 60.6 (24.9) in column 3, 5.4 (7.1) in column 4, and 1.757 (se = 1.34) in column 5.

* = significant at the 10 percent level, ** = significant at the 5 percent level, *** = significant at the 1 percent level.
                                                Appendix Table A5:
                                             Alternate Standard Errors
                                                                                         Congenital Abnormalities
                                                            Carbon                            High SES Low SES
                                                           Monoxide                     All    Births   Births
                                                               (1)                      (2)      (3)      (4)
Rain on Earth Day                                            0.0036                   0.0051   0.0053   0.0052
(county cluster SEs)                                       (0.00140)                 (0.0005) (0.0006) (0.0006)
(state cluster SEs)                                        (0.00158)                 (0.0011) (0.0010) (0.0012)

Rain on Earth Day (levels)                                   0.00355                  0.0041         0.0035         0.0028
(county cluster SEs)                                        (0.00177)                (0.0010)       (0.0009)       (0.0014)
(state cluster SEs)                                         (0.00191)                (0.0018)       (0.0016)       (0.0025)

Rain on Earth Day (Extra Controls)                            0.0032                  0.0037         0.0033         0.0044
(county cluster SEs)                                        (0.00149)                (0.0006)       (0.0007)       (0.0008)
(state cluster SEs)                                         (0.00145)                (0.0012)       (0.0011)       (0.0012)

Rain on Earth Day (Extra Controls, weighted) 0.00347                                  0.0043         0.0045         0.0065
(county cluster SEs)                         (0.00180)                               (0.0009)       (0.0007)       (0.0011)
(state cluster SEs)                          (0.00190)                               (0.0021)       (0.0018)       (0.0025)

Winzorized Rainfall                                           0.0039                  0.0055         0.0063         0.0088
(county cluster SEs)                                        (0.00173)                (0.0012)       (0.0010)       (0.0016)
(state cluster SEs)                                         (0.00167)                (0.0030)       (0.0027)       (0.0034)

 The coefficients and standard errors in columns 2, 3, and 4 are multiplied by 100 for readability. Each coefficient is from a
separate regression. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered by either state or by county. Aside from the
alternate standard errors, the estimates are the same as those in Table 3; see Table 3 for more details.
                                           Appendix Table A6:
                   Rainfall on April 22, 1970, and Fetal Deaths in the 1970s and 1980s
                                                                All           High SES Births       Low SES Births
                                                                (1)                 (2)                   (3)
Rain on Earth Day                                            0.000127             0.00844              0.00726
(county cluster SEs)                                         (0.0005)            (0.0040)              (0.0025)
(state cluster SEs)                                          (0.0019)            (0.0091)              (0.0062)

Rain on Earth Day (levels)                                   -0.00418             -0.00246              -0.00209
(county cluster SEs)                                         (0.0022)             (0.0014)              (0.0014)
(state cluster SEs)                                          (0.0029)             (0.0019)              (0.0017)

Rain on Earth Day (Extra Controls)                           0.00299              0.00807                0.0072
(county cluster SEs)                                         (0.0007)             (0.0065)              (0.0038)
(state cluster SEs)                                          (0.0025)             (0.0093)              (0.0060)

Rain on Earth Day (Extra Controls, weighted)                 0.00257              0.00115               0.00491
(county cluster SEs)                                         (0.0020)             (0.0012)              (0.0014)
(state cluster SEs)                                          (0.0041)             (0.0022)              (0.0034)

Winzorized Rainfall                                          0.00414              0.00198               0.00694
(county cluster SEs)                                         (0.0029)             (0.0018)              (0.0019)
(state cluster SEs)                                          (0.0060)             (0.0033)              (0.0048)
Each coefficient is from a separate regression. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered by county, in
parentheses. The dependent variable in column 1 is the ratio of fetal deaths to births in a county each year; the years
covered include 1982 to 1988. There are 17659 observations in the sample. The specifications in each row and
column follow those used in table 3 in the text. Column 2 uses the fetal death ratio of high SES women and column
3 uses the fetal death ratio of low SES women. Low SES women include teenagers, unmarried women and
nonwhite women, and high SES women are all others. For each regerssion, results are weighted by the number of
births to mothers in the sample. The (weighted) fetal death ratio means for all women, high SES women, and low
SES women are respectively 0.0148 (se = 0.0207), 0.0137 (0.0194), and 0.0112 (0.0222).
             Appendix Table A7: Rainfall on
 April 22, 1970, and Individual Contributions to the LCV

                                                       Total
                                                    Contributions
Rain on Earth Day                                       -0.0750
(county cluster SEs)                                    (3.040)
(state cluster SEs)                                     (3.354)

Rain on Earth Day (levels)                               -2.009
(county cluster SEs)                                    (1.359)
(state cluster SEs)                                     (1.475)

Rain on Earth Day (Extra Controls)                       -2.524
(county cluster SEs)                                    (1.343)
(state cluster SEs)                                     (1.548)

Winsorized Rainfall                                      -3.15
(county cluster SEs)                                    (1.861)
(state cluster SEs)                                     (2.126)

Each coefficient is from a separate regression. Heteroskedasticity-
robust standard errors, clustered by county and state, are reported in
parentheses. The dependent variable is the total individual donations
to the League of Conservation Voters in a county in a year; the years
covered include 1978 to 1988. There are 27,654 observations in the
sample. The mean and standard deviation of the dependent variable
are 39 and 626.3, respectively. All regressions are weighted by the
population.
