                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE IMPLICATIONS OF HETEROGENEITY AND INEQUALITY FOR ASSET
                                PRICING

                                      Stavros Panageas

                                     Working Paper 26974
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26974


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2020




I am indebted to Julian Batista, Paymon Khorami, Venkat Anand Systla, Geoffrey Zheng and an
anonymous reviewer for their comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Stavros Panageas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Implications of Heterogeneity and Inequality for Asset Pricing
Stavros Panageas
NBER Working Paper No. 26974
April 2020
JEL No. E21,G12

                                            ABSTRACT

Does heterogeneity matter for asset pricing and in particular for risk premiums? Starting with an
irrelevance result, I classify the literature into two groups of papers taking different routes to link
investor heterogeneity and risk premiums. The first group contains models of investors who differ
in terms of their preferences, beliefs, or access to markets. Despite their differences, these models
have similar implications, and can be analyzed in a unified way. The second group of papers
consists of models where investors experience uninsurable income shocks. The goal of this
survey is to provide one unified framework to better understand this large literature, and
especially to reconcile several of the seemingly inconsistent results found in some seminal papers.


Stavros Panageas
Anderson School of Management
University of California, Los Angeles
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
stavros.panageas@anderson.ucla.edu
1         Introduction and Summary
Heterogeneity is all around us. Besides the obvious dimensions of heterogeneity (income
and wealth), people of similar wealth and income have different saving rates and attitudes
towards risk. While it is hard to argue with the existence of heterogeneity, this survey
asks a question with a less obvious answer: Does heterogeneity matter for asset pricing?
Specifically, does it matter for the market price of risk?
        Intuitively, it would seem that the answer should be a clear yes. The saving and portfolio
choices of the median retiree and a rich entrepreneur are likely to be very different. As a
result, the relative wealth share of these different groups of people should matter for both
interest rates and risk premiums.
        Yet, most leading asset pricing models tend to be "representative" agent models, i.e.,
models where the distribution of wealth, income, consumption and the associated dynamics of
these quantities are all irrelevant for asset pricing.1 One possible justification for abstracting
from all distributional considerations was given in a seminal paper by Grossman and Shiller
(1982). That paper revisited and substantially relaxed the assumptions of the Breeden
(1979) aggregate consumption CAPM. Specifically, Grossman and Shiller (1982) showed that
Breeden's aggregate-consumption-CAPM continues to determine risk premiums, even if risk
sharing is imperfect, so that each consumer experiences a different consumption growth.
        The argument is powerful and quite simple, since it essentially boils down to three equa-
tions. Specifically, Grossman and Shiller (1982) starts with the first order condition that if
agent i is trading without frictions in some asset with (random) gross return Rt+ between
                                                                       f
t and t +  and also in the riskless asset with (certain) gross return Rt + , then portfolio

optimality requires that

                               f
          Et u c i
                 t+     Rt+ - Rt +      = 0,                                                   (1)


where u ci
         t+ is the marginal utility of agent i. Assuming that the agent trades frequently,

    1
    Three leading such paradigms are Campbell and Cochrane (1999), Bansal and Yaron (2004), Barro
(2006).


                                                  2
so that  is small, and proceeding heuristically, a first order expansion of u ci          i
                                                                               t+ around ct

gives2

             u (ci
                 t)            f                                          f
         -       i
                     Et Rt+ - Rt +     Et        ci     i
                                                  t+ - ct          Rt+ - Rt +   .                    (2)
             u (ct )

Defining aggregate consumption as Ct                i
                                                        ci
                                                         t di, and integrating both sides of (2) across i

gives
                                                        -1
                      f                   u ci
                                             t                                       f
         Et Rt+ -    Rt +         -            di            × Et (Ct+ - Ct ) Rt+ - Rt +
                                      i   u ci
                                             t
                                                              -1
                                           u cit   ci
                                                    t                     Ct+ - Ct          f
                            =     -                    di          × Et              Rt+ - Rt +    . (3)
                                      i   ci
                                           t u c i C
                                                 t   t                       Ct

 Equation (3) is remarkably similar to Breeden's aggregate consumption CAPM. It states
that the excess return on an asset is given by the product of two terms. The first term
                                                                                 ci u (ci )
is a consumption-weighted3 "harmonic average" of the relative risk aversions - tu ci t of
                                                                                     ( t)
the different investors. The second term is the expected product of aggregate consumption
growth with the excess return.
       One immediate implication of (3) is that even in the presence of heterogeneity, the con-
ditional aggregate consumption CAPM continues to hold. Other than affecting the weights
in the harmonic average of relative risk aversion, heterogeneity in individual consumption
growth rates ­ whatever the reason for this heterogeneity ­ does not impact the risk pre-
mium. In particular, income risks that can cause idiosyncratic consumption fluctuations due
to imperfect risk sharing are irrelevant for risk premia. To exaggerate for the sake of clarity,
the risk premium in an economy with and without uninsurable idiosyncratic risks will be the
same as long as all agents have the same risk aversion.
       The Grossman and Shiller (1982) result relies on one approximation step (equation 2).
This approximation step is innocuous if asset prices and consumption growth are both dif-
   2
     A first order Taylor expansion implies that u cit+      u ci
                                                                t +u    ci
                                                                         t   ci     i
                                                                              t+ - ct . Substituting this
approximation inside (1) and re-arranging gives (2).
   3                                                                -1     -1
     The harmonic average of yi with weights xi is defined as i xi yi  di     .



                                                        3
fusions. Indeed, in the continuous time limit that they consider, the approximation becomes
exact, because of Ito's Lemma.
   Even though the Grossman and Shiller (1982) result would appear to indicate a dead end,
the almost forty years that followed its publication saw the development of a very active
literature on the interactions between heterogeneity and asset pricing. Indeed, it seems
that there is renewed interest in this question in recent years because of a broader trend in
macroeconomics and finance to understand the economic implications of rising income and
wealth inequality.
   As it always happens with irrelevance results in economics (e.g., Modigliani Miller The-
orem, Ricardian Equivalence, Revenue Equivalence, etc.), the Grossman and Shiller (1982)
result is a useful pedagogical framework to explain how different papers in the literature
"break" the irrelevance. With this in mind, in this survey I attempt a taxonomy of the dif-
ferent papers against the backdrop of Grossman and Shiller (1982). I classify the papers in
two broad categories. The first broad category contains three strands depending on whether
the source of heterogeneity is due to preferences, beliefs, or access to markets. The second
broad category comprises papers with income heterogeneity and incomplete risk sharing. In-
side this category there are again three main strands capturing models with (lack of) intra-
or inter-cohort risk sharing and models that assume recursive preferences in a framework of
imperfect risk sharing.
   The first strand of the first broad category (section 2.1) contains models of risk aversion
heterogeneity, typically in a framework where agents have expected utility preferences. These
models are not departures from Grossman and Shiller (1982), since equation (3) continues
to hold. Indeed, most of the papers in this literature assume that agents trade continuously
and therefore equation (3) is exact, not approximate. The key feature of these models is
the observation that if agents have different risk aversions then the consumption distribution
evolves dynamically, favoring the bold in good times and the meek in bad times.
   Specifically, the most interesting feature of these models is the countercyclicality of the
market price of risk, or "Sharpe ratio": Because the relatively less risk averse agents choose



                                              4
to be more exposed to aggregate shocks (as compared to the more risk averse agents), a
positive aggregate shock increases their wealth and consumption weight, driving down the
equilibrium Sharpe ratio. By contrast, a negative shock to aggregate consumption raises the
Sharpe ratio. This negative correlation between aggregate shocks and changes in the market
price of risk is a prediction that these models share with the Campbell and Cochrane (1999)
representative agent model. In both types of models the aggregate consumption CAPM holds
conditionally, but not unconditionally. The variations in "habits" that cause fluctuations in
risk aversion in the Campbell and Cochrane (1999) model resemble the variations in the
consumption weights of the heterogeneous agents in models of preference heterogeneity. As
section 2.3 shows, the counter-cyclicality of the Sharpe ratio is a remarkably robust result in
models of preference heterogeneity. These models also contain interesting implications on the
determination of equilibrium interest rates and bond risk premia, which are also discussed
in section 2.1.
   The second strand of the first broad category (section 2.2) comprises models of belief
heterogeneity. These models assume that some investors may have different beliefs than
others, possibly not resulting from superior information, but from different priors or plain
irrationality. In such models, equation (1) may not hold for some investors, as they use a
different expectation operator. In terms of asset pricing implications, however, models of
belief heterogeneity and preference heterogeneity are very closely related. In particular, the
Sharpe ratio with heterogeneous beliefs is a consumption-weighted average of the Sharpe
ratios that would obtain in homogeneous belief economies populated by only one of the con-
stituent groups. Just as luck favors the bold in models of preference heterogeneity (in terms
of increasing their wealth- consumption- share), luck favors the optimists in models of belief
heterogeneity. Section 2.2 presents the formal connections between belief and preference
heterogeneity.
   The third strand of the first broad category (section 2.4) are models where equation (1)
holds for some investors but not for others. For instance if investor i is not even participating
in the market for the risky asset, then equation (1) does not apply to her. The implication



                                               5
is that when aggregating across all agents to get from equation (2) to (3), one should only
aggregate across the subset of agents that participate in the risky market. As section 2.4
shows, models of this type closely resemble models of heterogeneous preferences, where non-
participants are viewed as investors with infinite risk aversion for the purposes of pricing the
risky assets.
   Overall, the three strands of the literature mentioned sofar belong to the same broad
category, since they share more similarities than differences. In this survey I present and
analyze them as part of a unified model in an effort to highlight these similarities. One could
even argue that these models do not invalidate the core of the Grossman and Shiller (1982)
result: While equation (1) may fail for some of the investors, at the end a conditional version
of the aggregate consumption CAPM continues to hold, with the consumption weights acting
as conditioning variables in the jargon used by finance econometricians.
   The next broad category of papers can again be split into three strands and comprises
models that assume identical investors experiencing idiosyncratic income and endowment
shocks that cannot be insured due to some market failure. The papers in this group collide
with a strong implication of Grossman and Shiller (1982), namely that in any model with
diffusive (i.e., continuous) consumption and asset processes, heterogeneity should not matter
in the continuous-time limit.
   To be specific and give an example of this tension, one of the most influential papers in
this literature is the paper by Constantinides and Duffie (1996). In a discrete time framework,
the paper shows that a judicious specification of cross sectional income heterogeneity allows
one to support any given stochastic discount factor (in a specific class) as an equilibrium
outcome. Moreover, this stochastic discount factor may differ from the one implied by the
aggregate consumption CAPM. Yet, the Grossman and Shiller (1982) result would seem to
allow only the stochastic discount factor implied by the aggregate consumption CAPM as
an equilibrium outcome, no matter what is assumed about income heterogeneity.
   It would be natural to conjecture that the discrepancy between the two papers lies in the
usage of discrete versus continuous time methods. If true, this would be a source of concern,



                                               6
since it would indicate that if one were to shrink the assumed time interval in Constantinides
and Duffie (1996) to zero, the results of the paper could be jeopardized.
   Section 3.1, which discusses the first strand of the second broad category of the literature,
reconciles the results of Constantinides and Duffie (1996) and Grossman and Shiller (1982).
Using a minor modification of Constantinides and Duffie (1996) that allows consideration
of the continuous time limit, this section shows that the key insight of Constantinides and
Duffie (1996) is invariant to the assumed decision interval. The results of Grossman and
Shiller (1982) do not apply because the continuous-time process is not a diffusion, but a
process with discontinuous sample paths. Because of this, equation (2) does not hold, even
in continuous time.
   Reconciling the results of Constantinides and Duffie (1996) and Grossman and Shiller
(1982) is not just a matter of resolving a mathematical conundrum. The discussion illumi-
nates that for income heterogeneity to matter, it has to affect the covariance between higher
order moments of individual consumption growth and asset returns. If consumption and
asset price processes are diffusions, these higher order moments don't matter in the continu-
ous time limit, since Ito's Lemma implies that the marginal utility of consumption behaves
(locally) like a linear function. If consumption is a discontinuous function of time, then this
locally linear relation fails and higher order moments start to matter.
   Section 3.2 discusses the second strand of the second broad category, namely models
where the risk sharing imperfection is not due to missing markets but rather due to missing
market participants. Specifically, rather than assuming that existing cohorts cannot trade
claims to their personal incomes with each other (which is the implicit market failure in
models such as Constantinides and Duffie (1996)), the models in section 3.2 assume that it
is impossible to trade with unborn agents. This results in a lack of inter-cohort risk sharing.
While starting from different assumptions and setups, the lack of inter- and intra-cohort risk
sharing imply identical stochastic discount factors.
   The reason for the similarity between the two types of models is quite intuitive. The
source of risk premia in models like Constantinides and Duffie (1996) is an agent's fear that



                                               7
if there is a large redistribution amongst the existing cohorts of agents, she might end up
being among the losers rather than the winners. Because of risk aversion, she overweights
the possibility of being among the losers and demands a risk premium for assets with bad
payoffs when redistribution is high. In models of imperfect inter-cohort risk sharing investors
fear that an incoming cohort of agents might introduce the next big company that will
displace the companies owned by current cohorts. Therefore any assets that are prone to
this displacement command a risk premium.
   Section 3.3 discusses the third strand of the second broad category. Models in this
strand make make endowment heterogeneity matter by using recursive preferences rather
than expected utility. In a seminal paper, Bansal and Yaron (2004) highlighted that if
agents are not neutral to the timing of the resolution of uncertainty, then expected returns
do not only reflect compensation for "short run" risk, but also for risks that are associated
with consumption growth over the "long run". Mathematically, this means that equation
(1) does not hold and the Grossman and Shiller (1982) argument fails at its origin.
   Recursive preferences alone could be an irrelevant extension if individual consumption
growth is i.i.d.. However, models with heterogeneous agents can easily lead to slow-moving
predictable components in individual consumption growth, even if aggregate consumption
growth is i.i.d. This is especially true in models where different birth cohorts experience
different integrated consumption paths over their life time due to lack of inter-cohort risk
sharing.
   One interesting feature of recursive preferences is that they do not require a strong high-
frequency co-movement between consumption inequality changes and asset returns to make
income heterogeneity matter for the risk premium. Indeed over the short run there need not
be any relation at all, and yet income heterogeneity can matter for asset returns.
   The last section of the survey (section 4) addresses two further observations relating to
equation (1). Section 4.1 discusses models, where for each risky asset, equation (1) applies
only to a subset of agents. Section 4.2 discusses the validity of (1) in the presence of
asymmetric information.



                                              8
   Section 4.1 discusses a multi-asset economy where all agents participate in some risky as-
sets, but no agent participates in all asset classes. Models of this sort can feature equilibrium
arbitrages. In such models it is natural to consider the incentives of agents to exploit the
arbitrages by modeling pricing and participation decisions as joint outcomes. Interestingly,
the presence of an arbitrage leads to a non-convexity in agent's optimization problems, which
in turn leads to heterogeneous portfolio and participation decisions, even in the absence of
any initial heterogeneity. In a sense, the extent of heterogeneity and equilibrium risk premia
are jointly determined in response to endogenous participation decisions. Models of this sort
are particularly well suited to study portfolio flows, leverage and asset price determination
as joint outcomes.
   Section 4.2 discusses the possibility that investors may have superior information com-
pared to the econometrician. By itself, this is not a problem for the Grossman and Shiller
(1982) argument, because the Euler equation (1) "conditions down" from the perspective of
the econometrician. If, however, short selling constraints prevent equation (1) from holding
for every investor and every asset, then agents may (endogenously) choose to not partici-
pate in certain asset classes. This means that the model features effectively heterogeneous
stochastic discount factors. Models of this sort have important implications for portfolio
biases, and performance evaluation.
   In terms of presentation, this survey doesn't simply outline these models. All sections
contain a simplified mathematical model that illustrates not only the economic ideas, but
also the techniques that can be used to analyze these models. The reason for presenting
these techniques is that models with heterogeneity can become intractable. One of the goals
of this survey is to introduce the reader to some basic techniques to keep the mathematical
strucuture tractable.
   To be concrete, there are two difficulties when dealing with heterogeneous agents models.
The first and obvious difficulty is that the wealth distribution becomes a state variable. And
second, these models tend to be non-stationary, since the innate differences between the
agents lead to different consumption growth rates, which end up driving the consumption



                                               9
levels of different agents arbitrarily far apart in the long run.
     I address these problems by placing the models within a "perpetual youth" framework.
In such framework, new generations arrive constantly with new units of the aggregate en-
dowment. This constant flow of wealth towards each group ensures their long term survival.
Moreover, the solution of the model boils down to the solution of a system of differential
equations. However, most of the insights and the analysis don't even require that one be
able to solve these differential equations, so I relegate their formulation to the appendix.
     After every section there is a literature review. Given the overwhelming size of the
literature, the reader should view this literature review merely as providing some indicative
pointers, not as an exhaustive list. It would be a mistake to presume that papers not included
in the literature review are less important than the ones cited. The choice of which papers
to cite was mostly dictated by the proximity of these papers to the ideas and techniques
developed in each section.



2      Heterogeneous preferences, beliefs, and limited par-
       ticipation models

2.1      Heterogeneous preferences

The models of heterogeneous preferences, beliefs and limited participation can be presented
in a unified framework. This section develops this framework in the context of heterogeneous
preferences. The next two sections reuse this model with minor modifications to incorporate
different beliefs and access to markets.
     Time is continuous. This assumption is quite helpful to make the model tractable and
obtain sharp results. To ensure stationarity, I assume the arrival of new agents who are
endowed with new "trees". Per unit of time a mass of agents  is born. Existing agents face
a constant hazard rate of death . By the law of large numbers, the surviving population of
agents who were born at time s  t is e-(t-s) and total population is constant and equal
     t
to   -
         e-(t-s) ds = 1.

                                               10
       Arriving agents at time t are equally endowed with shares to a "tree" born at time t.
Letting s  t denote the time of "birth" of a tree, its time-t dividends are given by


         Dt,s = e-(t-s) Dt .


Accordingly, the total endowment of this economy is

              t                        t
                      Dt,s ds =             e-(t-s) ds × Dt = Dt .
          -                           -


The aggregate endowment Dt follows a geometric brownian motion with some mean µD and
some volatility D

         dDt
             = µD dt + D dBt ,                                                                       (4)
          Dt

where Bt is a standard brownian motion.
       It should be noted here that in a typical perpetual youth, or overlapping generations
model, the endowment of agents takes the form of labor income. The choice to endow agents
with new trees rather than labor income is a (rather innocuous) shortcut to accelerate the
presentation of the main results.4
       Agents optimize their life-time consumption5

                                                i
                                                -
                      
                             -(i + )(u-t)    c1
                                              u,t
         Et              e                        du                                                 (5)
                  t                         1 - i

where  i , i denotes the risk aversion (discount factor) of agent i  {A, B } . Without loss of
generality,  A <  B , so that agents of type A are the less risk averse agents. A fraction  of
agents is of type A and 1 -  of type B.
       Once born, agents can trade with other agents (who are also alive at the same time) in
   4
     The reader who wants to see how to modify the setup to allow for income is referred to G^arleanu and
Panageas (2015).
   5
     Note that the discount rate is i +  to reflect the hazard rate of death . See G^
                                                                                    arleanu and Panageas
(2015) on the specification of preferences in the presence of death.



                                                            11
complete markets. The associated stochastic discount factor in this economy is Ht . The goal
of the analysis is to determine the dynamics of this stochastic discount factor.


2.1.1        Model Analysis

To start, note that the assumption of complete markets makes an agent's optimization
problem simple to solve. Specifically, the consumers born at time t maximize (5) subject to
the intertemporal budget constraint

                     
                                         Hu                  1
        Et              e-(u-t)                  ci
                                                  u,t du =     Pt,t ,                                   (6)
                 t                       Ht                  

      1
where   Pt,t denotes the (per-cohort member) value of the shares of the tree born at time t.
Multiplying both sides of (6) by Ht and attaching a Lagrange multiplier  to (6) gives

                                                                     i
                                                                     -
                               
                                       - (u-t)        -i (u-t)    c1
                                                                   u,t                     1
        max Et                     e              e                    du - Hu cu,t du   +  Ht Pt,t ,
        cu,t               t                                     1 - i                     

which results in the first order condition

             i                 i
        e- (u-t) c- 
                  u,t = Hu .                                                                            (7)


Equation (7) is the familiar requirement that the marginal utility of consumption be pro-
portional to the stochastic discount factor.
                                                                         i
   Evaluating (7) at time t implies that c- 
                                          t,t = Ht , and hence the consumption growth of

a consumer of type i is

                                                     1
                                                 -
        ci
         u,t
                   i
                - i (u-t)                Hu          i
             = e                                         .                                              (8)
        ci
         t,t                             Ht

   Equation (8) is intuitive. Inspection of the right hand side shows that all consumers of
type i that belong to the cohort born at time t experience the same consumption growth
between times u and t. This reflects the assumption of a complete market, which allows


                                                                         12
perfect risk sharing within a cohort.
   In equilibrium, the consumption market needs to clear at each time t. To analyze the
implications of market clearing, recall that a fraction let xi
                                                             t denote the consumption share

accruing to type-i agents

                        t
                i       -
                            e-(t-s) ci
                                     t,s ds
        xi
         t                                  ,                                               (9)
                             Dt

where  i =  if i = A and  i = 1 -  if i = B . In other words,  i is the population weight
of agents of type i, while xi
                            t is their consumption weight. Market clearing requires that



        xA    B
         t + xt = 1.                                                                       (10)


   Substituting (8) into (9) leads after some re-arranging to

                        1                                  i         1
                    -             t                    - i (t-s)
                        i                                             i
                Ht          × i   -
                                      e-(t-s) ci
                                               s,s e
                                                                   Hs ds
        xi
         t                                                                 .               (11)
                                        Dt

   Equation (11) provides a key relationship between the consumption share of type i agents
and the stochastic discount factor Ht . This relationship can be used to derive the joint
dynamics of the consumption share, the interest rate and the Sharpe ratio.


2.1.2        Volatility of xi
                            t and countercyclical Sharpe ratios


To start, is useful to recall a standard result in asset pricing, namely that the dynamics of
the stochastic discount factor are given by

        dHt
            = -rt dt - t dBt ,                                                             (12)
         Ht

where rt is the interest rate and t the market price of risk (or Sharpe ratio). Applying Ito's
Lemma to the right hand side of (11) and using (12) and (4) shows that xi
                                                                        t follows a diffusion




                                                               13
dxi    i      i
  t = µx dt + x dBt , where


        i        t
        x          -  D xi
                         t.                                                                  (13)
                 i

                                                         A   B
      The market clearing requirement (10) requires that x + x = 0.6 This is intuitive, since
any movement in the consumption share of type-A agents must be offset by an opposing
movement in the consumption share of type-B agents. Combining (13) with (10) and the
                       A   B
associated requirement x + x = 0 leads to

                                        -1
                                   -1
        t =                xi
                            t 
                               i             × D .                                           (14)
                 i{A,B }



      Equation (14) shows that the Sharpe ratio is proportional to the harmonic average of the
risk aversions of the two agents times the volatility of the aggregate endowment (D ).
      The weights of this harmonic mean are time-varying since xi
                                                                t changes over time. Indeed,

combining (13) with (14) leads to
                                                 
                                   i -1
        i                     ( )
        x  D ×                             - 1 xi
                                                t.                                           (15)
                                              
                                 i     - 1
                               xt ( i )
                        i{A,B }



      Equation (15) shows that xA                     B
                                t is procyclical and xt is countercyclical. Given the nor-

malization  A <  B , the term inside brackets in equation (15) is positive when i = A and
negative when i = B. Hence, a positive shock to the aggregate endowment increases the
consumption share of type-A agents and reduces the consumption share of type-B agents.
      This procyclicality of the consumption share of the less risk averse agents implies that the
Sharpe ratio is countercyclical. Inspection of equation (14) shows that when the share of the
less risk averse agents xA
                         t increases (which happens in response to a positive aggregate shock),

the Sharpe ratio declines. In that sense one can think of an economy with heterogenous agents
as being equivalent to an economy with a representative agent but with a risk aversion that
  6
      This can be proven by applying Ito's Lemma to both sides of (10).


                                                     14
declines in response to good aggregate shocks and increases in response to bad aggregate
shocks.
   The economic force behind this countercyclicality of aggregate risk aversion is simple.
Less risk averse agents choose to bear more aggregate risk than less risk averse agents.
Because of this higher exposure to aggregate risk, a positive aggregate shock leads to an
increase in their consumption share. Being a harmonic weighted average of risk aversions,
the market price of risk declines, reflecting the increased weight of the relatively more risk
tolerant agents.
   This basic mechanism that links the movements of the wealth distribution with the
countercyclicality of the Sharpe ratio is a common feature in almost all models with het-
erogeneous agents, whether the source of heterogeneity stems from preferences, beliefs, or
access to markets, as will become evident in the subsequent sections.
   To complete our characterization of equilibrium, we next turn attention to the deter-
mination of the drift of xi
                          t and the implications for the equilibrium interest rate and the

stationarity of the consumption shares


2.1.3        Drift of xi
                       t , equilibrium interest rate rt , and stationarity of the consump-

             tion distribution

Applying Ito's Lemma to (11) and using (12) leads after some simplifications to the following
expression for the drift of xi
                             t :


                                            2
                 rt - i             1   t       1      t D          ci
                                                                   i t,t
        µi
         x   =       i
                                2
                        - µ D + D +                           i
                                                  + 1 - i -  xt +        .               (16)
                                    2   i       i                   Dt

In turn, market clearing implies that µA    B
                                       x + µx = 0, since the two consumption shares have

to always add up to one. Combining µA    B
                                    x + µx = 0 with (10) and (16) gives the following




                                                15
expression for the interest rate
                            -1
                         xi
                          t
rt =                                     ×                                                                           (17)
                         i
               i{A,B }

       inverse weighted average of IES
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                  
                                                                       2
                              i                                1   t       1      t D                      i ci
                                                                                                              t,t 
                                                                                                                  
       ×                 xi               2
                                    + µD -D -             xi                 +1 -           + 1 -                 .
        
                          t                                t
                              i                                2   i       i      i                       Dt      
               i{A,B }                          i{A,B }                                           i{A,B }         
           weighted discount rate                    weighted precautionary savings                  deaths-births


While the expression for the equilibrium interest rate is long, it has the same basic structure
as the interest rate in a standard representative investor economy. Indeed if xA
                                                                               t = 1 and
                                                                                 1
 = 0, the expression for the interest rate simplifies to r = A +                 A
                                                                                      µD + 1 2
                                                                                           2 D
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                 A
                                                                                                     +1      ,
which is the interest rate that one would obtain in an economy populated by a single,
infinitely-lived, representative agent of type A. A similar expression obtains when xB
                                                                                     t = 1

and  = 0.
   For intermediate values of xi
                               t , the interest rate can be expressed as a product of two

terms. The first term is the consumption-weighted average of the intertemporal elasticity of
substitution (IES) of the two agents. (Recall that with CRRA preferences the IES is just
the reciprocal of the risk aversion). The second term is the sum of a) a weighted sum of
discount rates, b) the aggregate growth rate, c) a term reflecting a weighed average of the
precautionary savings motives and d) a term that captures the effect of deaths and births.
   There are a few things worth noting about the equilibrium interest rate:
   First, since the interest rate is the product of a weighted IES and a summation term that
also depends on consumption weights, the interest rate in a heterogenous-agents economy
cannot be expressed as some weighted average of the interest rates in a pure type-A or pure
type-B economy.
   Second, the dependence of the interest rate on xA
                                                   t is ambiguous and depends on several

effects. As xA
             t increases, the weighted average of the IES increases. Assuming that the

interest rate is positive, (i.e. assuming that the term inside square brackets in equation (17)


                                                     16
is positive), this effect pushes the interest rate up, reflecting the increased importance of
agents who are more willing to substitute inter-temporally. However, as xA
                                                                         t increases, the

precautionary savings term decreases, reflecting that the agents with the high IES are also
the agents with the low risk aversion. The reduced importance of precautionary savings
pushes the interest rate down, counteracting the effect of higher IES. The behavior of the
                        i
                        
term      i{A,B }    xi                                        A  B
                      t  i depends on whether one assumes that  <  or the reverse. In short,

the dependence of the interest rate on xA
                                        t is ambiguous.

   Third, in a heterogeneous-agents economy, the interest rate fluctuates as the consump-
tion weights change, even when there is no change in the conditional moments of aggregate
consumption growth (i.e., when consumption growth is i.i.d). This would not be possible in
a representative-agent economy, where the interest rate can only change if the conditional
moments of aggregate consumption growth change. The fact that the interest rate exhibits
variation even when aggregate consumption growth is i.i.d., could be one of the reasons for
the very low estimates obtained from macro-level estimates of the IES. Motivated by repre-
sentative agent models that ignore heterogeneity, researchers in this literature estimate the
IES of the representative agent as the ratio of predictable variations in aggregate consump-
tion growth to predictable variations in the (real) interest rate. In the economy analyzed
above, this ratio would be zero even though any given agent has a strictly positive IES.
   Fourth, even if all investors have the same preferences, the resulting interest rate would
differ from the one in an economy populated by a single representative agent with the same
                                                               ct,t,
preferences. There would be an additional term  1 -             Dt
                                                                       , which is due to the presence
of deaths and births. In an economy with deaths and births and no altruistic linkages, the
consumption growth rate of any fixed cohort of agents is not equal to aggregate consumption
growth. The reason is that a fraction of consumption every period accrues to the newly born
         ct,t
agents   Dt
              ,   while at the same time a fraction  of agents dies, thus increasing the per capita
consumption growth of surviving agents. Section 3.2 discusses this issue in further detail.
   As a concluding observation, note that, despite allowing for heterogeneity, the consump-
tion distribution is stationary. Specifically, note that equation (13) implies that limxi
                                                                                        t 0




                                                   17
i                                                                ci
x = 0, while (16) implies that limxi
                                   t 0
                                       µi   i t,t
                                        x =  Dt > 0. This means that as the consump-

tion share of one type of agents approaches zero, the diffusion process starts resembling a
deterministic process with positive growth. (Section 2.2.3 goes into some further details on
the issue of stationarity). The economic intuition behind stationarity is that ­ irrespective
of the past path of the economy ­ there are constantly new agents of type i arriving with
new units of wealth. Indeed, note that as one group starts approaching extinction (i.e., as xi
                                                                                             t

approaches zero), it is exclusively the properties of the entering cohort of type i agents that
matter for the dynamics of xi                         i
                            t (specifically, the mass  of the cohort times its consumption
                                              ci
                                               t,t
relative to aggregate consumption,            Dt
                                                   .)


2.1.4        Completing the construction of equilibrium

Taking stock, equations (14) and (15) provide the Sharpe ratio t and the volatility of xi
                                                                                        t

as functions of xi
                 t . Equations (16) and (17) provide the drift µx and the interest rate rt as
                                                        ci                                       ci
functions of xi
              t and the endogenous quantity
                                                         t,t
                                                        Dt
                                                             .   The determination of             t,t
                                                                                                 Dt
                                                                                                        requires the usage
of the budget constraint of an agent who enters the economy at time t. Specifically,

                                                                          
                                 Hu               1                                      Hu
        Et           e-(u-t)          ci
                                       u,t du =     Pt,t = Et                e-(u-t)            Du,t du,              (18)
              t                  Ht                                   t                  Ht

which states that the present value of consumption should equal the value of the shares that
an agent is endowed with, which in turn should equal the present value of the dividends
accruing to the stock. Defining

                                            ci                                     
                                      Hu     u,t                                                Hu         Du,t
     i
    gt  Et                  e-(u-t)                 du, and pt  Et                    e-(u-t)                     du, (19)
                     t                Ht    ct,t                               t                Ht         Dt,t

the intertemporal budget constraint (18) can be expressed compactly as

        ci
         t,t    pt
             =   i
                   .                                                                                                  (20)
        Dt      gt




                                                        18
The term pt can be interpreted as the price-to-dividend ratio in this economy, while the term
 i
gt is the wealth-to-consumption ratio for an agent of type i. The appendix shows that pt and
 i
gt are functions of xi
                     t and solve a pair of differential equations, similar to the ones that one
                                                         ci
finds in the derivatives literature. This implies that    t,t
                                                         Dt
                                                                is a function of xi
                                                                                  t . Accordingly both
i
x and µi                   i                                        i
       x are functions of xt , i  {A, B } which in turn means that xt , is a Markov process.



2.1.5   Summary

If one had to isolate the main insight sofar, it is that a model of preference heterogeneity
contains a natural mechanism to render the Sharpe ratio and the interest rate time-varying
even when the aggregate endowment growth is i.i.d.. The time-variation in the Sharpe ratio
is countercyclical, as positive shocks favor the consumption share of the bold agents, who
require lower compensation for risk. The cyclicality of the riskless rate is ambiguous.


2.1.6   Literature review

The methodology presented in this section is based on G^
                                                       arleanu and Panageas (2015), who
consider a model with heterogeneous risk aversions and heterogeneous inter-temporal elastic-
ity of substitution in a stationary, perpetual youth framework. Blanchard (1985) analyzes the
perpetual youth framework in a deterministic framework without preference heterogeneity.
   The literature on risk sharing with heterogeneous risk aversions dates back at least to
Borch (1962). Dumas (1989) is an early contribution, characterizing the risk sharing problem
in a dynamic framework. Wang (1996) considers the risk sharing problem in a dynamic,
exchange economy and derives implications for the term structure of interest rates. Longstaff
and Wang (2012) and Barro et al. (2017) derive implications for credit markets. Bhamra
and Uppal (2013) uses Lagrange's Theorem to characterize the risk sharing problem with
infinitely lived agents. G^
                          arleanu and Pedersen (2011) considers a model of heterogeneous
preferences with margin constraints.
   Chan and Kogan (2002) and Xiouros and Zapatero (2010) consider an alternative ap-
proach to obtaining a stationary consumption distribution, which relies on specifying agents'


                                              19
consumption preferences as being relative to aggregate consumption. Santos and Veronesi
(2018) considers an alternative approach to stationarity that relies on a combination of habits
and non-homothetic preferences.
   Dumas et al. (2000) considers a planner's problem with heterogeneous recursive prefer-
ences. Schneider (2017) studies the term structure and bond risk premia in a model with
heterogeneous risk aversion and IES. Recently several papers have used models of heteroge-
neous preferences to study issues related to inequality. Indicative examples include Gomez
(2017), Pastor and Veronesi (2019) , Akira Toda and Walsh (2019). Kargar (2018), uses a
model of heterogenous risk aversions and IES to study heterogeneous intermediation. Kondor
and Vayanos (2019) studies the dynamics of arbitrage in a framework of heterogeneity. Al-
varez and Atkeson (2018) consider a tractable model of random shifts in risk aversion. Calvet
et al. (2019) study the empirical cross-section of household risk aversion and intertemporal
elasticity of substitution.


2.2      Heterogeneous beliefs

2.2.1         Model setup and analysis

For the purposes of this section, all investors have the same preferences ( i = , i = ),
but different beliefs. For instance, suppose that agents of type A believe that the aggre-
gate dividend grows at the rate µ rather than µD , while agents of type B have correct
expectations.
                                                                  µi -µD
   The easiest way to capture this situation is to define  i        D
                                                                         ,   where µA = µ and
µB = µD , and let

                            2

                  -
                      (i )      t+ i Bt
        Zti   e         2                                                                 (21)


denote the likelihood ratio between the correct probability measure and the probability
measure perceived by agent i. Note that  B = 0 and ZtB = 1, which reflects that agent
B is rational. An implication of Girsanov's theorem is that we can write each agents'


                                              20
maximization problem as

                                               -
                 
                        -(+ )(u-t)    i     c1
                                             u,t
        Et          e                Zu,t        du                                                            (22)
             t                              1-

The intertemporal constraint of each agent continues to be given by (6). Attaching a La-
grange multiplier and repeating the same steps as in the case with heterogeneous preferences
leads to the following equation describing the evolution of optimal consumption

                                        1           1
                                                   -
        ci
         u,t                    Zu            Hu
         i
             = e-  (u-t)                                .                                                      (23)
        ct,t                    Zt            Ht

2.2.2        Sharpe ratio and interest rate

Using the optimal consumption process (23) in the definition of xi
                                                                 t (equation 9), and applying
                                                            dZti
Ito's Lemma (along with the fact that                         i
                                                             Zt
                                                                   =  i dt) gives the following expression for the
volatility of xi
               t


        i                t +  i
        x  xi
            t                   - D .                                                                          (24)
                           

                                                                                  i
In turn, using the market clearing requirement                          i{A,B }   x = 0 and   i{A,B }   xi
                                                                                                         t = 1 gives

the following expression for the Sharpe ratio


        t = D -                      xi i
                                      t .                                                                      (25)
                           i{A,B }


Equation (25) shows that the Sharpe ratio in an economy where some investors have distorted
beliefs is equal to the Sharpe ratio that would obtain in an economy without belief distortions
(D ) minus a term that represents a consumption-weighted belief distortion. Specifically,
if  A > 0 (meaning that the perceived growth rate of the aggregate endowment by agent
A is higher than in reality), the Sharpe ratio is lower than D , reflecting the optimism of
a fraction of the agents. By contrast, when the economy is populated by some pessimistic
agents  A < 0 , the Sharpe ratio is higher.


                                                                   21
      Substituting (25) into (24) and re-arranging gives
                                           
         i        xi
                   t    i -
         x =                            xi
                                         t
                                           i
                                             .                                                                    (26)
                  
                              i{A,B }


            A
The sign of x depends on the sign of  A . If  A is positive, then x
                                                                  A
                                                                     0, i.e., the consumption
share of optimistic agents is pro-cyclical. Similarly, if  A is negative, x
                                                                          A
                                                                             0. Since t is
declining in xA      A                       A      A
              t when  > 0 and increasing in xt when  < 0, it follows that the Sharpe

ratio declines in response to a positive shock to the aggregate endowment irrespective of
the sign of  A . Therefore, as in the case of heterogenous preferences, the Sharpe ratio is
unambiguously countercyclical, irrespective of whether the irrational agents are optimistic
or pessimistic.
      Proceeding as in the case with heterogeneous preferences, the drift of xi
                                                                              t is given by


                       r-            t +  i                        1   t +  i           1                    ci
                                                                                                              t,t
       µi    i
        x = xt
                                 2
                          - µD + D -                   i + D -                            +1       -  +  i        , (27)
                                                                   2                                         Dt

and upon using             i{A,B }   µi
                                      x = 0 and       i{A,B }   xi
                                                                 t = 1 the interest rate is

                                                          
                                                      i
                                                     ct,t                      t +  i          1   t +  i    1
      rt =  + µD +  1 -                            i       +              xi
                                                                           t            i -                    +1
                                                     Dt                                        2             
                                         i{A,B }                i{A,B }




      Just as in the case of heterogeneous preferences, the interest rate cannot be expressed as
a simple average of its value at xA          A
                                  t = 0 and xt = 1. As  becomes small, one can however

show that if  A > 0 (optimism), then the interest rate is higher when xA
                                                                       t = 1 than when

xA
 t = 0. Optimists believe in higher consumption growth than the rational agents and in an

effort to smooth that perceived upward sloping consumption path, they end up dissaving,
thus increasing the interest rate. (Vice versa in the case of pessimism  A < 0 ).
      As before, fully characterizing the interest rate rt and the drift µi
                                                                          x requires an expression
      ci
       t,t
for   Dt
           .   Obtaining such an expression requires one to impose the budget constraint at time
0 as in section 2.1.4. In the special case where both agents have logarithmic preferences


                                                          22
                                                                          ci
                                                                           t,t
( = 1) , there is a simple expression for the initial consumption ratio   Dt
                                                                               .   In this case the
        ci
         t,t                            
ratio   Dt
               is constant and equal to  .


2.2.3          Long-term "survival" of irrational agents

                                                     i                                     ci
As in the case of heterogeneous preferences, limxi
                                                 t 0
                                                     x = 0, while limxi
                                                                      t 0
                                                                          µi   i t,t
                                                                           x =  Dt > 0,

which means that there is a force to ensure stationarity and long term "survival" of all
agent groups, even the ones that have wrong beliefs. To obtain some further insight into
the role of births and deaths in guaranteeing survival of each agent type, it is useful to
compute a "stochastic steady state value of xB
                                             t ". This value is defined as the consumption

share of rational agents xB            B   B
                          t such that µx (xt ) = 0. In other words it is the value of the

consumption share of rational agents, xB
                                       t , which has neither a tendency to grow or shrink in

expectation. (Since µA    B
                     x + µx = 0, it follows that the consumption share of irrational agents

is also drift-less.)
    To simplify matters, it is instructive to focus on the case where all investors have loga-
rithmic preferences ( = 1). Substituting the expressions for the Sharpe ratio (25) and the
interest rate (28) into (27) and solving for the value that sets µB
                                                                  x = 0 results in


                             
        xB
         t = 
              B
                                2            > B.                                               (28)
                    - 1-     xB
                              t     ( A )2

    Equation (28) implies that any steady state value xB            B
                                                       t that sets µx = 0 must be such

that the steady state consumption weight (xB
                                           t ) of rational agents exceeds their population

weight  B . Since both xA    B         A
                        t + xt = 1 and  + 
                                           B
                                             = 1 the implication is that the steady
state consumption weight of irrational agents xA
                                               t is below their population weight  A .
Accordingly, rational agents consume more per capita than irrational agents. Whether the
irrationality takes the form of optimism or pessimism  A < 0 or  A > 0 is irrelevant, since
only ( A )2 enters equation (28). What does matter is the magnitude of the belief distortion
( A )2 .
    What allows the survival of irrational agents is the fact that the incoming cohorts of



                                                    23
both types are endowed with new trees. Interestingly, the steady state value of xB
                                                                                 t is not

affected by the rate of death and birth , but only by the endowment fraction that accrues
to newly-borns per unit of time. This highlights an important aspect of the economic forces
that ensure survival in this model, namely that incoming cohorts of both types are endowed
with a fraction of the endowment irrespective of past history.
       I conclude the discussion of survival with a technical remark. I argued earlier that since the
volatility of x (xi                    i                             i
                  t ) goes to zero as xt approaches zero, while µx (xt ) approaches a positive

number, this model allows for a stationary distribution. While intuitive, this argument
requires an extra step. The exact condition7 to ensure stationarity is that

                A         2
                x  xAt
          lim                 < 2 µA
                                   x (0) .                                                                 (29)
         xA
          t 0     xA
                   t


Equation (26) implies that the left hand side of the above expression is zero, and hence
positivity of µA
               x (0) is sufficient for survival.
                                                8




2.3        Multiple types of agents

The assumption so far has been that there are two types of agents, in which case the dis-
tribution of consumption across the two groups is characterized by xA
                                                                    t , the consumption

share of type A agents. (The consumption share of type B agents is simply 1 - xA
                                                                               t ). None

of the conclusions of either the heterogeneous-preferences, or heterogeneous-beliefs model
changes, if instead there are N type of agents having different preferences (or beliefs). All
the equations derived above remain unchanged ­ other than the fact that all sums of the
form       i{A,B }   would have to be replaced with the sum             i{A,B,C...}   .
       The central insight, namely that the Sharpe ratio is some weighted average of the Sharpe
ratios that would obtain in the economies populated by type A, B , C... etc agents continues
to hold, since equation (14) (in the case of heterogeneous preferences) and equation (25) (in
   7
    G^arleanu and Panageas (2020) shows the sufficiency of this condition.
   8
    A similar argument shows that positivity of µi
                                                 x (0) is sufficient for stationarity in the case where investors
have heterogeneous preferences.



                                                       24
the case of heterogeneous beliefs) continue to hold with the sum running over all groups.
       Interestingly, one can extend the insight that the Sharpe ratio is countercyclical. To
start, suppose that the groups A, B, C, .., are defined in order of declining risk aversion (or
declining optimism if investors have different beliefs).
   Viewing the Sharpe ratio as a function of the vector -
                                                        x t and applying Ito's Lemma to
obtain the dynamics of d (-
                          x ) shows that the diffusion component of d (
                                      t
                                                                        -x ) is given by9              t

                                                                 -2                                   
                        i                                   -1                                  -1
                          = -                      xi
                                                    t 
                                                       i              ×                     i        i
                                                                                                     x < 0.       (30)
                       xi x
         i{A,B,C...}                 i{A,B,C...}                             i{A,B,C...}


       In other words, a positive shock to the aggregate endowment reduces the Sharpe ratio.
Importantly, the Sharpe ratio is countercyclical no matter what assumptions one makes
about the magnitude of the preference discrepancies, the fractions, the discount rates, the
initial endowments etc. of each group. These assumptions may impact the quantitative
magnitude, but not the qualitative nature of the result.
       In the case of heterogeneous beliefs, the analog of equation (30) is10

                        i
                          =-                      i x
                                                    i
                                                      < 0,
                       xi x
         i{A,B,C...}               i{A,B,C...}


       Once again, the assumptions on the magnitude of the belief distortions, the fractions of
each group, their preferences etc. are immaterial. All that matters is that there is some
discrepancy in beliefs between different groups.
   9                                i                                            -1
       To see that     i{A,B,C...} xi x   < 0, note that                 xi
                                                                          t 
                                                                             i
                                                                                      > 0. The second term on the right
                                                           i{A,B,C...}
hand of (30) is also positive since it can be written as
                             
                                                       -1
                       i - 1                        i                  i
                              ×                                     -1 x     xi
                                                                              t .
                                                               i
           i{A,B,C...}            i{A,B,C...}     i{A,B,C...} ( )

                                                                                         i
The expression immediately above is positive because a)                    i{A,B,C...}   x xi
                                                                                            t    = 0, b) the weights
           -1
     ( i )                                      i
              ( i )-1
                      are declining in i and c) x is declining in i.
  i{A,B,C...}
  10                                                                            i
    As in the case of heterogenous preferences, the facts that a) i{A,B,C...} x   = 0, b)  i is declining in i
                          i
by construction, and c) x   is declining in i, imply that that i{A,B,C...}  i x
                                                                              i
                                                                                > 0.


                                                           25
2.3.1    Literature review

Methodologically, the presentation in this section combined the approach of Kogan et al.
(2006) with that of G^
                     arleanu and Panageas (2015).
   The literature on heterogeneous beliefs and the survival of irrational agents is voluminous.
Scheinkman and Xiong (2003), Chen et al. (2012), Buraschi and Jiltsov (2006), David (2008),
Dumas et al. (2016), Ehling et al. (2017) is a small, indicative sample of applications of such
models in finance. The issue of survival of irrational traders is discussed in Sandroni (2000),
Blume and Easley (1992), Kogan et al. (2006), Yan (2008) and Borovicka (2019).


2.4     Limited participation

Both in the case of heterogenous preferences and heterogenous beliefs agents were assumed
to trade in complete markets. In this section, I show how to extend the analysis to a situation
where some agents don't participate in the stock market. To simplify matters, suppose that
there are two groups of investors who have the same discount rates and (rational) beliefs.
Agents of type A have risk aversion  A and access to complete markets, while agents of
type B have risk aversion  B = 1 (log preferences) and cannot enter into any contracts that
are contingent on the realization of the brownian motion Bt ; put simply agents of type B
cannot dynamically trade stocks. The limited participation assumption of type B agents is
encapsulated in the following assumption on the evolution of their wealth:

        dWtB                   cB
                                t
             =       rt +  -         dt.                                                  (31)
         WtB                   WtB

There are two observations about equation (31).
   First, in an effort to save notation, equation (31) is in terms of cB       B
                                                                       t and Wt rather than

cB         B
 t,s and Wt,s . The reason is that since all agents of type B face the same hazard rate of

death  and interest rate rt , and have the same homogenous preferences, they choose the
same consumption-to-wealth ratios irrespective of their cohort. Indeed, because  B = 1, it
               cB
follows that    t
               WtB   =  + .


                                              26
      Second, the presence of the term  reflects the assumption of annuitization. Specifically,
since agents have no bequest motives, they enter contracts that require them to surrender
their wealth upon death in exchange for an income stream of dt while alive. The (com-
petitive) insurance company offering this contract breaks even as it collects a fraction 
of aggregate wealth from the dying agents and distributes it as an income stream to the
                                                                               cB
surviving agents.11 Mathematically, equation (31) together with                 t
                                                                               WtB   =  +  implies that

        WtB        t                cB            t
                   s (ru + -- )du                 s (ru -)du
                                     t
            =e                       B =e                      .                                     (32)
        WsB                         cs

Assuming momentarily the existence of a stochastic discount factor Ht , defining xA
                                                                                  t xB
                                                                                     t as

the consumption share of the type A (type B ) agents, repeating the calculations of section
2.1 and using equation (32) for the consumption evolution of the type-B agent implies that

        A        t
        x =        -  D xA       B       B
                         t , and x = -D xt .
                 A

                                        A   B
Imposing the market clearing conditions x + x = 0 and xA    B
                                                       t + xt = 1 results in


               1 A        A
        t =       D , and x = 1 - xA
                                   t D                                                               (33)
              xA
               t


                                                      A D
Clearly, the Sharpe ratio satisfies t =               xA
                                                                 A D . In other words, the Sharpe ratio
                                                       t

exceeds the one that would obtain in an economy populated by a single representative agent
with risk aversion  A . Morover, the Sharpe ratio is declining in xA
                                                                   t , and since the share of
                              A
type A agents is procyclical (x =  D 1 - xA
                                          t  0), the Sharpe ratio is countercyclical.
      Note that setting  B =  in equations (14) and (15) would lead to (33). In other words,
for the purposes of the determination of the Sharpe ratio and the volatility of xA
                                                                                 t , the limited

participation model implies the same formulas as a model with heterogeneous preferences
with the more risk averse agent having infinite risk aversion.
      Repeating the steps of earlier sections, one can derive the drifts µi
                                                                          x and the interest rate
 11
      See Blanchard (1985) for further details.



                                                         27
rt . The expression for µA                                                               B
                         x continues to be given by (16). Using (32), the definition of xt is

now
                    t                    t
               B    -
                        e-(t-s) cB
                                 s,s e
                                         s (ru -)du   ds
        xB
         t =                                               ,
                             Dt

and therefore Ito's Lemma implies that

                                                                cB
                                                               B t,t
        µB
         x   = (rt - ) - µD +      2
                                   D   -      xB
                                               t   +                     .                                  (34)
                                                                    Dt

      Requiring that markets clear implies that µA    B
                                                 x + µx = 0, which leads to the equilibrium

interest rate
                        -1
             xA
              t
rt =            + xB
                   t         ×                                                                                   (35)
             A
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                 
                                                                     2
                xA                                                                                        i ci
                                                                                                                   
                 t                                 1           t             1      t D                      t,t   
          
                 A
                   + xB
                      t      +       2
                                 µD -D   -   xA
                                              t                                 +1 - A    +  1 -                  .
                                                   2           A              A                          Dt 
                                                                                                 i{A,B }           
                                           Impact of type A's precautionary savings


      Unlike the expression for the Sharpe ratio, the equilibrium interest rate in the presence
of limited participation cannot be obtained by simply setting  B =  in the heterogeneous-
preferences model. There are, nonetheless, several similarities between the interest rate in
                                                                                                      xA
the two models. In both models, the inverse of the weighted IES of the two agents,12                  A
                                                                                                       t
                                                                                                           + xB
                                                                                                              t ,

multiplies a term that is seemingly identical across the two models; the main difference is
that in the limited participation model the term reflecting the effect of precautionary savings
only captures the precautionary savings undertaken by agent A. This is intuitive , since only
agent A s consumption has a positive diffusion component.
      I conclude this section with an important caveat. Equation (33) illustrates a potential
problem of models with limited participation, namely that the Sharpe ratio may not be
bounded. Indeed as xA
                    t approaches zero, t grows without bound. This is unlike the models
 12
      Recall that the type B agents have an IES of one.



                                                               28
of heterogenous preferences or beliefs, where both the Sharpe ratio and the interest rate are
bounded. Since the Sharpe ratio is unbounded, Novikov's condition does not automatically
apply. For instance, as is shown by Hugonnier (2012) in the context of the Basak and Cuoco
(1998) model, the marginal utility of the participating investor is not a mathematically valid
stochastic discount factor and valuation bubbles are needed to support the equilibrium. A
full discussion of this issue is beyond the scope of this chapter. (The literature review includes
references for further reading). In that sense the reader should interpret the results on non-
participation as purely formal, i.e. with an understanding that some further assumptions
need to be made to ensure the existence of a stochastic discount factor. For instance one could
assume that when the Sharpe ratio becomes sufficiently high, then some non-participants
may switch to the group of participants, an approach taken by Khorrami (2019a).


2.4.1   Literature Review

Basak and Cuoco (1998) solves a model very similar to the one considered in this section,
but utilizing different techniques. Specifically Basak and Cuoco solve their model by using
the concept of a central planner with state dependent weights. This approach does not apply
in a perpetual youth framework and therefore section 2.4 used a direct approach to solving
for equilibrium. See also Chabakauri (2013) for a different approach to solving models with
heterogeneous investors and portfolio constraints.
   The idea that limited stock market participation may be to blame for the poor perfor-
mance of asset pricing models goes back at least to Mankiw and Zeldes (1991). Vissing-
Jorgensen (2002) estimates the intertemporal elasticity of substitution for different groups of
investors, depending on the markets that they choose to participate in. Parker and Vissing-
Jorgensen (2009) discusses who bears aggregate fluctuations.
   Slight modifications of the techniques to solve limited participation models can be ap-
plied to a variety of constraints (leverage constraints, shorting constraints, etc.). Indicative
examples include He and Modest (1995), Detemple and Murthy (1997) and Detemple and
Serrat (2003).



                                               29
       Favilukis (2013) , Guvenen (2005) and Gomes and Michaelides (2008) use numerical
methods to solve models of limited participation and discuss the joint implications of these
models for the equity premium and participation decisions.
       Hugonnier (2012) discusses the technical problems that arise in limited participation
models. Khorrami (2019a) discusses entry in such models, which can help keep the Sharpe
ratio bounded.


2.5       Recursive preferences and the Sharpe ratio

Using recursive preferences, G^
                              arleanu and Panageas (2015) solve a model whereby investors
are heterogeneous both in terms of their risk aversion, but also their IES. Specifically, type
                                                                                   -1
A investors have risk aversion  A and IES equal to 1 - A                                and investors of type B have
                                                              B -1
risk aversion  B and IES equal to 1 -                                . Without loss of generality,  A <  B .
       In the presence of recursive preferences13 the optimal consumption of agent i is14

                                                              i
                                                              1               1
                                                                          -
         ci
          u,t     1        u
                                   i
                                   1
                                        i -1 +i +
                                       ( )
                                       gw     2     dw
                                                          i
                                                         gu   i      Hu       i

          i
              = e i       t
                                                          i
                                                                                                                (36)
         ct,t                                            gt          Ht

            + -1      i+       i
where i
      1  -   i
                 , i           i         i
                   2  - i (1 -  ) , and gt is defined in equation (19). In the special

case where the inverse of the IES is equal to the risk aversion of the agent (1 - i =  i ) ,
i         i
1 = 0 and 2 = - ( +  ) and hence equation (36) reduces to (8).

       Using (36) inside the definition of xi                                                i
                                            t (equation (9)), applying Ito's Lemma to obtain x ,
                                        i
and requiring that                      x = 0 leads to the following expression for the Sharpe ratio

                                             i   1 -  i - i       g i (xA
                                                                        t ) A
         t = t D -                           t                              ,                                   (37)
                                                     i            g (xt ) x,t
                                                                    i   A
                               i{A,B }

  13
     For a discussion of recursive preference in continuous time, see e.g., Duffie and Epstein (1992).
  14
     Note that equation (36) differs from equation (A.21) in the appendix of G^   arleanu and Panageas (2015),
                                   i A
because in this survey I define gt  (xt ) as the wealth-to-consumption ratio. G^  arleanu and Panageas (2015)
          i A
defines gt (xt ) as the consumption-to-wealth ratio. This explains some differences between the formulas in
this section and G^  arleanu and Panageas (2015).




                                                                   30
                                         -1
                                  i -1                     -1
where t                     xi
                             t   ( )            i
                                              , t  ( i )        t xi        i                              i
                                                                   t , and g is the partial derivative of g with
                 i={A,B }
               A
respect to    xt .
    The Sharpe ratio is the sum of two terms. The first term (t D ) is identical to equation
(14). The second term is a weighted average of a term that measures the discrepancy from
                       1- i -i
expected utility         i
                                       times the volatility of the two agents' wealth-to-consumption
ratios. When all agents are neutral to the resolution of uncertainty (1 - i =  i ), equation
(37) reduces to (14).
                                                           gi
    When, however, 1 -  i - i = 0 and                      gi
                                                                A
                                                                x,t = 0 for some agent i, then the Sharpe is
no longer a simple harmonic average of the Sharpe ratios that would obtain in an economy
populated exclusively by type A or exclusively by type B agents. (In such single-agent
economies the Sharpe ratio would be given by  i D , since the aggregate endowment growth
is i.i.d.).
    The reason for the additional term in equation (37) is that the equilibrium fluctuations
of wealth and consumption shares lead to persistent components in individual consumption
growth, even though the growth rate of the aggregate endowment is i.i.d.. As is well un-
derstood in the literature on "long run risks" these persistent components affect the Sharpe
ratio whenever investors are not neutral to the resolution of uncertainty 1 -  i - i = 0.
    The fact that the Sharpe ratio is no longer a simple average of the Sharpe ratios that would
obtain in pure type-A or type-B economies, implies that the Sharpe ratio in an economy
with heterogenous recursive preferences may even exceed the Sharpe ratio that would obtain
in an economy populated exclusively by the most risk-averse agents. G^
                                                                     arleanu and Panageas
(2015) provide one such example along with conditions that make the second term of equation
(14) positive. By contrast, in economies with either heterogeneous preferences or beliefs, the
Sharpe ratio is bounded between the Sharpe ratios that would obtain in the respective
single-agent economies.




                                                            31
                                                             Model-implied excess returns and realized excess returns
                                                   1

                                                                      Data
                                                  0.5                                                  Model

             Excess returns
                                                   0


                                                 -0.5


                                                  -1
                                                   1880   1900      1920        1940          1960       1980       2000   2020
             8-year averages of excess returns




                                                  0.2
                                                                                                     Model
                                                             Data
                                                  0.1


                                                   0


                                                 -0.1


                                                 -0.2
                                                   1880   1900      1920        1940          1960       1980       2000   2020
                                                                                       Year




Figure 1: Year-over-Year and 8-year average excess returns in the G^
                                                                   arleanu and Panageas
(2015) model plotted against the data.

2.6    Empirical Implications

The recurring theme of all the models presented sofar has been the counter-cyclicality of
the Sharpe ratio. Campbell and Cochrane (1999) emphasized the importance of a counter-
cyclical Sharpe ratio in terms of providing a unified explanation of asset pricing puzzles in a
consumption-based framework.
   As a result, it should not come as a surprise that calibrated heterogeneous-agent models
can be successful in terms of explaining the data. Perhaps the most demanding test for an
asset pricing model is to use the historical consumption path as an input and test whether
the model-implied excess returns match up to the historical excess returns.
   Figure 1 provides an illustration of such an exercise for the calibrated version of the

                                                                                     32
                                    arleanu and Panageas (2015).15 As is evident from
heterogeneous-preferences model of G^
Figure 1, the model manages to reproduce the historically observed path of the equity pre-
mium, both at the one- and eight-year horizons, simply by taking consumption data as
an input. The main exception are the two decades after the second World War, where the
model originally under- and then over-pedicts the realized excess returns. Outside of equities,
Schneider (2017) discusses the empirical implications of this model for the term structure
and bond risk premia.
       One should not jump to the conclusion that any model featuring a countercyclical Sharpe
ratio will automatically match the data. To provide a simple counter-example, if one were to
take a model of heterogenous agents (say a limited participation model), but with all agents
having unit IES, the price-to-aggregate-consumption ratio would be constant and return
volatility would be counterfactually low, despite the Sharpe ratio being countercyclical. This
happens because the same wealth shifts that cause the Sharpe ratio to decline (increase)
also cause precautionary savings to decline (increase), making the interest rate move in
the opposite direction of the Sharpe ratio, thus cancelling the overall impact of the wealth
movements on the total discount rate. To match the asset pricing data, a heterogeneous-
agents model must not only feature a sufficiently countercyclical Sharpe ratio, but also
have some mechanism to keep the real interest rate stable in response to wealth shifts,
which is a feature of both Campbell and Cochrane (1999) (in the context of a representative
agent model) and G^
                  arleanu and Panageas (2015) (in the context of a heterogeneous agents
model).16
       However, the most important distinguishing feature of heterogeneous agents model from
their closest representative-agent relative (the Campbell and Cochrane (1999) model) is the
fact that external habits are unobservable, in contrast to wealth distributions. Heterogeneous-
agents models contain predictions on the joint movement of asset prices and the wealth dis-
tribution, which are absent in representative agent models. The added value of such models
  15
    The reader is referred to the paper for details of the calibration
  16
    G^ arleanu and Panageas (2015) achieves a stable interest rate by assuming that investors with a low risk
aversion also have high intertemporal elasticity of substitution. As a result, shifts in precautionary savings
are offset by shifts in the consumption weighted intertemporal elasticity of substitution.


                                                     33
lies in testing these joint implications, which impart an additional layer of discipline on the
theory. Recent empirical studies of these joint implications include Gomez (2017) (which
studies the implications of these models for the tail of the wealth distribution), Akira Toda
and Walsh (2019) (which focuses on the joint movements of the top wealth shares and equity
prices), and Greenwald et al. (2019), which provides a framework for accounting for equity
valuations in an environment of shifting factor shares.



3     Heterogeneous endowments

3.1    Lack of intra-cohort risk sharing

Cross-sectional data suggest that within any given birth cohort the cross-sectional hetero-
geneity of income is large and generally increasing as the cohort ages.      A large literature
in macroeconomics has investigated whether the increasing cross-sectional dispersion of in-
come over the life-cycle of any given cohort also translates into an increasing consumption
dispersion, suggesting incomplete risk sharing within each cohort.
    The finance literature has generally taken the lack of risk sharing as given and asked
whether the associated dispersion of consumption growth rates is relevant for risk premi-
ums. At first pass, Grossman and Shiller (1982) would suggest that consumption growth
dispersion caused exclusively by incomplete risk sharing should be irrelevant for risk pre-
miums. Inspection of equation (3) shows that if all agents have the same preferences, then
return differentials between different assets are still determined by the aggregate CAPM, no
matter how cross-sectional consumption heterogeneity is specified.
    In a seminal paper, Constantinides and Duffie (1996) reach a conclusion that seems
to contradict the results of Grossman and Shiller (1982). Specifically, in a discrete time
model Constantinides and Duffie (1996) showed that any stochastic discount factor in a
specific class can be supported as the equilibrium stochastic discount factor, if the individual
consumption growth process follows some appropriately specified dynamics. For instance,
an implication of Constantinides and Duffie (1996) is that even if aggregate consumption


                                              34
growth is constant, then the discount factor can still be stochastic (e.g., exhibit a positive
risk premium), something that would be impossible in an economy where the aggregate
consumption CAPM holds. In that sense Grossman and Shiller (1982) and Constantinides
and Duffie (1996) seem to contradict each other.
   This section reconciles the findings of the two papers. To do this, and compare the
results of the two papers more effectively, it is essential to develop a minimal modification of
the Constantinides and Duffie (1996) model that allows the time interval between decision
to become arbitrarily small. This is important because the Grossman and Shiller (1982)
argument becomes exact only as the time interval shrinks to zero.
   Specifically, consider again an endowment economy and simplify things by assuming no
births or deaths, but a continuum of infinitely lived agents (or more appropriately altruisti-
cally linked "dynasties"). This will jeopardize stationarity, but stationarity is irrelevant for
the arguments of this section.
   Assume next that each agent's income follows a process of the form


      Ii,t = si,t × Ct - Dt


where Ct is aggregate consumption, Dt are the dividends of the (representative) "Lucas tree"
in this economy and si,t is a share process with the property      i
                                                                       sit di = 1 for all t.
   The next assumption is key for the results. Suppose that si,t obeys the following process:

                              (t+ - t )    (i)   (i)
      si,t+ = si,t × exp -              + Bt+ - Bt             ,                               (38)
                                 2

                                                                                    (i)
where t is a positive, increasing, discontinuous, random process and Bt is a Brownian
                                                                                               (j )
motion that is specific to each agent i and independent of all other brownian motions Bt ,
                                     (i)      (i)
j = i. Note that the variance of Bt+ - Bt between times t +  and t is not , but is
random and equal to t+ - t  0. The process t is common to all agents, and thus it
                                                             (i)           (i)
controls the cross-sectional dispersion of the increments Bt+ - Bt between t and t + .
Because the process t can only increase, but not decrease, it cannot be a diffusion. It is


                                              35
instead a "jump process".
       Assumption (38) implies that si,t is a martingale. The law of the iterated expectation
together with standard formulas for the expectation of a (conditionally) log-normal variable
imply that Et {si,t+ } = si,t .17 Initializing the process at si,0 = 1, we have that for any time
t, Et {si,t } = 1 and a version of the law of large numbers implies that                i
                                                                                            si,t di = 1 for all
times t.
       While the specification (38) is slightly different than the one employed in Constantinides
and Duffie (1996), it preserves the key economic element of that specification, namely the
                                                                                                 si,t+
presence of a shock (t+ - t ) that controls the cross-sectional dispersion of                      si,t
                                                                                                          . One
advantage of (38) is that it allows a study of the limit as  becomes small, which allows a
comparison with the results of Grossman and Shiller (1982). A further advantage is that si,t
can be chosen to be "infinitely divisible".18 In practical terms, the assumption of infinite
divisibility helps ensure that all risk premiums are the same (per unit of time) irrespective
of the length of the time-interval .
       From this point onward, the construction of an equilibrium follows a "guess and verify"
approach. Suppose that the representative investor maximizes an objective of the form

                                      -
                             -ti   c1
                                    ti
         Et                  e          .                                                                  (39)
              ti =0,,2,...
                                   1-

Guess that in equilibrium there is no trade in financial markets, in which case each investor
holds one share of the tree, no bonds, and consumes her endowment and the dividends, so
that ci,t = si,t Ct . Next, postulate that the (gross) interest rate and the stock market price
  17


                                                   t+ - t    (i)   (i)
         Et {si,t+ } = si,t × Et Et exp -                 + Bt+ - Bt            t+ - t
                                                     2
                        = si,t × Et {1} = si,t .


  18
     One possible example is to choose t to have increments that are Gamma distributed. In this specific
case, log(si,t ) follows a so-called variance-gamma process, which has a known (Laplace) distribution. This
specification is quite tractable and has been used in other contexts in finance (e.g, option pricing) to model
fat-tailed distributions.



                                                      36
Pt are given by

                                                                                                    -
         f                      1                                                           ci,ti
        Rt t+ =                              - , Pt =  × Et                          e-ti               Dti .   (40)
                    Et   e-
                                 ci,t+
                                                                    ti =t+,t+2,...
                                                                                            ci,t
                                   ci,t


                                    ci,t+        si,t+ Ct+
Since the distribution of             ci,t
                                             =       si,t Ct
                                                               is the same for all i at time t, it follows that
      f                                                                    f
both Rt t+ and Pt do not depend on i. This means that the postulated pair Rtt+ , Pt

would make the Euler equations of all investors hold, if they chose to not trade in the
bond market and simply hold one share of stock. Alternatively phrased, not trading is
optimal. Moreover, if everyone holds a zero allocation in bonds and a unit allocation in
stocks, both the bond market and the stock market clear. So does the consumption market,
since    c di
        i i,t
                =    i
                         si,t di × Ct .
   An alternative way of writing equation (40) is to define the stochastic discount factor
as the expected value (across all agents i) of the marginal utility of their consumption
conditional on t+ - t

                                                     -
        Ht+                             ci,t+
             e- E(i)                                     |t+ - t
         Ht                               ci,t
                                                 -
                            -        Ct+                        ( +1)
                                                                      (t+ -t )
                =         e                              × e     2               ,                              (41)
                                      Ct
                                                          Impact of heterogeneity
                    Aggregate consumption CAPM


in which case the law of the iterated expectation implies that (40) can be put in the familiar
                                       -1
      f                     Ht+                                                  Hti
form Rt t+ = Et              Ht
                                             and Pt =  × Et            ti =t+,.. Ht Dti .

   An implication of (41) is the following: Suppose that one desired to choose some process
t in a way that would lead to some desired stochastic discount factor Ht as an equilibrium
outcome. Then (41) implies that one would simply have to define the process t+ - t as

                           2
        t+ - t =                 log Ht+ - log Ht +  +  (log Ct+ - log Ct ) .                                   (42)
                          ( + 1)

To ensure that t is an increasing process, one needs to assume that the right hand side of (42)
is positive, irrespective of the realization of uncertainty. Therefore, log(Ht ) - log(e-t Ct- )

                                                               37
needs to be an increasing process (assumption 6 in Constantinides and Duffie (1996)).
      To summarize, the results of Constantinides and Duffie (1996) imply that heterogeneity
matters for asset prices. Even if aggregate consumption growth is constant, the stochastic
discount factor can be stochastic and claims whose value depend on the realization of the
process t can exhibit risk premiums. It is important to note that the stochastic process Ht
cannot be chosen arbitrarily. The discrepancy between log Ht and the log-SDF that would
be implied by the aggregate consumption CAPM log(e-(t+) Ct- 
                                                          + ) must be an increasing

process.
      But shouldn't the Grossman and Shiller (1982) result imply that the ability to support
such a stochastic discount factor disappears as  approaches zero? The answer is no. The
next example shows that even as the time interval shrinks to zero, the risk premium (per
unit of time ) stays constant.
                             Ct+
Example 1 Suppose that        Ct
                                   = eg , i.e., aggregate consumption grows deterministically.
Define xt+  (t+ - t ) , and suppose that xt+ is gamma distributed with density:

                       
        f (xt+ ) =        (xt+ )-1 e-xt+
                     G ()

                                           ( +1)
for some parameters  > 0,  >                2
                                                   and G () the gamma function evaluated at
. Consider a one-period state-dependent claim with cash flow e-xt+ for some  > 0.
This claim delivers lower payoffs the higher is the cross sectional dispersion xt+ . Letting
E (Rtt+ ) denote the expected return of such a claim, and using the closed-form expres-
sions for the moment-generating function of a gamma-distributed variable gives after some
calculations:

        E (Rtt+ )                     ( +1)
                                                                
log        f                   E e     2
                                            xt+
                                                   E (e-xt+ )                     ( +1)
          Rt t+       1                                                    -        2     +
                     = log                 ( +1)
                                                                 = - log                         > 0.
                                                                                ( +1)
                                   E e(     2
                                                 -   )xt+                  -     2
                                                                                      +    
                                                                                          (43)


      There are several observations about (43). First, the expected excess return of the pos-

                                                     38
tulated claim (per unit of time ) is constant and does not depend on . This is despite
the fact that aggregate consumption growth is constant, which would seemingly imply (by
the Grossman and Shiller (1982) argument) that the risk premium should approach zero as
 shrinks to zero.
   The reason why Grossman and Shiller (1982) does not apply is that the individual con-
sumption process si,t is not a diffusion in this example, but to a process with discontinuous
sample paths (jumps). Intuitively, this happens because t is random and discontinuous,
which makes the paths of Bt discontinuous, despite the fact that Bt itself is continuous in
t. By contrast, for the Grossman and Shiller (1982) approximation to become exact as 
becomes small, one has to assume that the underlying data-generating process for individual
consumption growth is a diffusion, so as to apply Ito's Lemma and make equation (2) hold
as an exact equation.
   The above discussion shows that the Constantinides and Duffie (1996) argument does
not depend on whether the model is set up in discrete or continuous time, but rather on
whether the model is set up to make higher order moments of consumption growth relevant.
In a diffusion setup, any non-linear function (such as the marginal utility of consumption)
behaves like a linear function in the continuous time limit. Accordingly, the covariance of an
individual's marginal utility of consumption with an excess return becomes proportional to
the covariance of the individual's consumption growth with the same return. But when in-
dividual consumption growth doesn't have continuous sample paths, then one cannot simply
approximate the marginal utility of consumption with a linear function, since consumption
can experience large moves even as the time interval shrinks toward zero. In these situations,
the covariance of higher moments of individual consumption growth with an asset's return
become relevant, reflecting the fears of risk-averse agents that if re-distribution abruptly
intensifies (a high jump of t+ - t ) they could find themselves among the losers of this
redistribution at the same time as when the asset's returns are bad.




                                             39
3.1.1   Literature review

While most of the discussion in this section focused on Constantinides and Duffie (1996),
there are numerous papers in the literature that have explored the interactions of market
incompleteness and asset pricing. A precursor to Constantinides and Duffie (1996) is Mankiw
(1986). Krueger and Lustig (2010) discuss an irrelevance result in a discrete time model
utilizing a different argument than Grossman and Shiller (1982), which applies to discrete
time models. Lucas (1994), Heaton and Lucas (1996), Telmer (1993), Luttmer (1996),
Angeletos and Calvet (2006), Kogan et al. (2019), G^
                                                   arleanu and Panageas (2018) all discuss
alternative setups of imperfect risk sharing with asset pricing implications. Storesletten et al.
(2004), Cogley (2002), Brav et al. (2002), Kocherlakota and Pistaferri (2009) are empirical
studies of the implications of incomplete risk sharing for asset pricing.
   Several papers in the literature study models of investors facing liquidity or collateral
constraints. In this literature, the investor's indebtedness is constrained by her ability to
pledge some collateral whenever she wishes to borrow. The most well studied version of such
models considers "liquidity" constraints, which allow an investor to borrow, but only against
the value of the liquid assets in her portfolio. Importantly, borrowing against future labor
income is not allowed.
   The difference between discrete-time and continuous-time trading manifests itself in mod-
els of liquidity (or collateral) constraints as well, especially as it pertains to the implications
of such models for risk premia. Indicatively, Alvarez and Jermann (2000) find that solvency
constraints matter for the market price of risk in discrete time, while Detemple and Serrat
(2003) prove that the related concept of liquidity constraints don't affect the conditional
aggregate consumption CAPM in the continuous-time limit, implying that the quantitative
results of discrete time models will tend to disappear as the trading interval shrinks.
   One way to understand the different conclusions of continuous-time and discrete-time se-
tups is to view them through the lens of the "Lagrange-Multiplier approach" of and Marcet
and Marimon (1998). Both He and Pages (1993) and Marcet and Marimon (1998) observe
that models with liquidity constraints (or collateral constraints more generally) lead to an


                                                40
optimal individual consumption process that is the product of two terms: a) the consump-
tion process that would result in a frictionless market and b) a non-decreasing, continuous
process that is related to the cumulative sum of the Lagrange multipliers on the liquidity
constraint. Because this second process is non-decreasing, it has bounded variation and zero
quadratic variation in continuous time. The implication of zero quadratic variation is that
the fluctuations caused by this process cannot command a risk price. Detemple and Serrat
(2003) use this insight in general equilibrium to prove the absence of risk premia associated
with liquidity constraints.
   The economic intuition is that if asset price processes and consumption processes follow
continuous-time diffusions, the continuity of the paths allows investors to essentially know
(at least over the next small time interval) whether the liquidity constraint is likely to bind
or not. As a result, there is no genuine "shock" or "risk" associated with liquidity constraints
in the continuous time limit. This is unlike the setup of section 3.1, where the discontinuity
of t faces the investor with "shocks" even over a small time-interval.


3.2    Lack of inter-cohort risk sharing

In the Constantinides and Duffie (1996) model the lack of risk sharing manifests itself within
existing households. This section presents an alternative way to make heterogeneity matter,
by re-introducing births and deaths and assuming that income risk is imperfectly shared
across cohorts. The goal of the section is to show an equivalence between models featuring
imperfect inter- and intra-cohort risk sharing.
   Specifically, consider the following discrete time variant of the perpetual-youth, endow-
ment economy of section 2.1, with the additional assumption that the depreciation (and
arrival) rate of trees is random. Specifically, the dividend process for trees of cohort s, Dt,s ,
obeys the dynamics

      Dt+,s       Dt+
            =              e-t+ ,
       Dt,s        Dt




                                               41
where Dt =           st   Dt,s is the aggregate dividend process at time t and t+ is a non-negative,
random, and i.i.d. shock across time. The initial dividends of the trees born at time t are
given by


        Dt+,t+ = 1 - e-t+ Dt+ .                                                                           (44)


As in section 2.1, assume that the newly-born obtain the new trees. To highlight the differ-
ences from the results of that section, all agents have the same expected utility preferences
and maximize (39).
      The Euler equation for in this model is given by

                                   -
                      ct+,s
        Et e-                          Rtt+ = 1,                                                          (45)
                        ct,s

for the return of any asset. Note that the consumption growth entering equation (45) is the
                               ct+,s                                                                  Ct+
consumption growth               ct,s
                                        of a fixed cohort s, not aggregate consumption growth,         Ct
                                                                                                          .   To
                                                                               ct+,s
relate the two notions of consumption growth, conjecture that                    ct,s
                                                                                        is independent of s, so
       ct+,s        ct+
that     ct,s
                =     ct
                         .   With this assumption, the consumption growth of a fixed cohort is given
by19

        ct+,s    ct+               Ct+   ct+,t+
               =      =                -                 e .                                              (46)
          ct,s     ct               Ct      Ct

The consumption growth of any fixed cohort is comprised of two multiplicative terms. The
first term is equal to aggregate consumption, but reduced by the consumption fraction ac-
cruing to the newly-born agents. This term captures the idea that a fraction of aggregate
consumption every period is the property of the arriving cohort and should be subtracted
 19


                                                                              ct+,s
        Ct+     =               e-(t+-s) ct+,s =              e-(t+-s) ct,s             + ct+,t+
                                                                                ct,s
                      st+                             s<t+

                          ct+,s                                           ct+,s
                =                  e-          e-(t-s) ct,s + ct+,t+ =                  e- Ct + ct+,t+
                            ct,s                                            ct,s
                                          st




                                                         42
from aggregate consumption growth in order to arrive at the consumption growth accruing
to cohorts born before t + . The second term e > 1 is due to deaths. Since only a
fraction e- of agents survives from t to t + , per-capita consumption growth is increased
by e .
                 ct+,t+
   Determining      Ct
                          is particularly easy in this example because all agents have identical
preferences. One can show that applying the budget constraint at birth and using equation
(64) in the appendix leads to

        ct+,t+            Ct+
               = 1 - e-t+     .                                                            (47)
           Ct              Ct

Combining (46) and (47) gives

      ct+    Ct+ -t+ +
           =     e
        ct    Ct

which implies that the stochastic discount factor is

                                  -
      Ht+                  Ct+
          = e-(+)                     et+ .                                                (48)
       Ht                   Ct

The stochastic discount factor of equation (48) is proportional to the SDF of the previous
section (equation 41), as long as the increments of the process t are chosen as

                   2
     t+ - t =         t+ .
                   +1

   The remarkable similarity in the SDFs of the two models is not just a coincidence. There
are economic reasons for the correspondence. With lack of inter-generational risk sharing the
existing cohorts of agents fear that a large value of t+ will lead to a large redistribution of
dividends from existing trees toward the new vintages of trees. This redistribution benefits
the (not yet born) entrepreneurs who introduce the new trees; however it hurts the owners
of the existing trees, who understand that a large value of t+ shifts dividend income away
from them ("displacement risk"). To achieve some risk mitigation, the owners of the existing


                                               43
firms would have to trade with the not-yet born cohorts, who are also exposed to fluctuations
in t+ but in the opposite direction (the arriving cohorts benefit from large values of t+ ).
But since trade with the unborn is impossible, the risk t+ is not diversifiable for the existing
cohort and hence becomes priced in the SDF.
      There is a close analogy with models featuring lack of intra-cohort risk sharing, such as
Constantinides and Duffie (1996). In such models a large increment in t+ causes a large
dispersion in income and consumption growth. While this redistribution of the endowment
could turn out to be either good or bad for a given agent, risk aversion makes them more
concerned with the possibility of being amongst the losers of this redistribution rather than
the winners. By overweighting the possibility of losing, their decisions resemble those of
agents in models with imperfect inter-cohort risk sharing, who are certain that a large value
of t+ is associated with a higher displacement for them. As a result, in both setups agents
want a risk premium for assets that perform badly in states of the world where there is more
re-distribution (either within or across cohorts).
      These re-distributional fears may offer a potential explanation for the emergence of risk
premia that seem somewhat unrelated to aggregate outcomes, but may affect the distribution
of profits across different firms. For instance, increased "creative destruction", which redis-
tributes profits both within existing and across existing and arriving firms can lead to the
emergence of a "value premium". Firms that are more exposed to displacement by entrants
("value firms") must deliver a risk premium compared to firms that are less vulnerable to
discplacement ("growth firms").20


3.2.1      Literature Review

The discussion of lack of inter-generational risk sharing is based on G^
                                                                       arleanu et al. (2012).
G^
 arleanu and Panageas (2018) shows the connections between lack- of inter- and intra- cohort
risk sharing in a framework where existing investors cannot share the benefits of innovation
neither within, nor across cohorts. Kogan et al. (2019) also present a model where innovation
 20
      See, G^
            arleanu et al. (2012) and Kogan et al. (2019), G^
                                                            arleanu and Panageas (2018).



                                                     44
has redistribution implications across and within investor cohorts.
       A recent set of papers (Gomez (2019), Zheng (2019)) investigate the importance of dis-
placement effects for the dynamics of top wealth shares. The key issue in these papers is to
disentangle the dynamics of top wealth shares into an intensive margin (wealth growth of
the existing rich) and a displacement effect (entrants who displace the existing rich from the
top wealth shares).
       Indicative examples of papers that use overlapping generations models for asset pricing
are Constantinides et al. (2002), Abel (2003), Geanakoplos et al. (2004), Krueger and Kubler
(2006), Storesletten et al. (2007), Campbell and Nosbusch (2007), Gomes and Michaelides
(2008), Maurer (2017), Farmer (2018). A large fraction of these papers employ discrete-time
setups, with households choosing portfolios and consumption only at a few discrete points
in their life-time (sometimes only once, or twice over the course of their lives). This makes
it hard for many of these models to deliver predictions for returns as the trading frequency
shortens, which can be a source of concern in light of the Grossman and Shiller (1982) result.
For this reason, in this survey I adopted a perpetual youth framework, which allows trading
to be modeled over any frequency without jeopardizing tractability.21


3.3       Recursive preferences

The increased popularity of long run risk models has led several researchers in recent years
to propose alternative mechanisms in order to make heterogeneity matter, by exploiting
recursive preferences. With recursive preferences, the Grossman and Shiller (1982) argument
ceases to apply even if the underlying asset price and individual consumption processes are all
diffusions in the continuous time limit. The reason is that equation (1) no longer holds. The
stochastic discount factor "prices" not only the immediate impact of consumption shocks,
but requires compensation also for consumption risks that affect consumption over the long
run.
  21
    It should be noted, however, that for some papers infrequent trading is a central feature that they
intentionally employ, highlight, and analyze. See, e.g., Abel et al. (2007), Abel et al. (2013), Chien et al.
(2012).



                                                     45
       Of course, by themselves, recursive preferences might make no difference. For instance,
if individual consumption growth is i.i.d. (as in the models of sections 3.1 and 3.2), then
recursive preferences make no difference. However, if the interaction of income heterogeneity
and imperfect risk sharing leads to persistent components in the drift or volatility of indi-
vidual consumption growth, then heterogeneity does matter even if all underlying processes
are diffusions.
       To illustrate these ideas, I revisit the baseline continuous-time setup of section 2.1 , but
assuming that a) all investors have identical, recursive preferences with an intertemporal
elasticity of substitution equal to (1 - )-1 and a risk aversion  > 1 and b) the depreciation
rate is stochastic, so that the dividend process of a tree born at time s is

                            t
         Dt,s = s e-        s u du   Dt ,                                                                (49)

                                                                   t
where Dt is the aggregate dividend. (By construction               -
                                                                       Dt,s ds = Dt for any positive de-
preciation process t ). Assume furthermore that t follow some positive, Markov, stationary
diffusion processes


         dt = µ (t ) dt +  (t ) dBt .


for some functions µ (t ) ,  (t ) . To sharpen results, and draw a clear distinction from
Grossman and Shiller (1982) assume that the aggregate dividend is deterministic

         t
         D
            = ,                                                                                          (50)
         Dt

i.e., there is no short run risk in this economy, so that the aggregate consumption CAPM
would imply zero risk premia.
       To analyze this model, note first that aggregate consumption growth and consumption
growth for any fixed cohort s are related by22
                                                                                   t
  22
       To arrive at this equation, time differentiate aggregate consumption Ct =   -
                                                                                       e-(t-s) ct,s ds and use
                c
                 t,s
the fact that   ct,s   is independent of s.


                                                      46
          30                                                                                      0.3
                      Simulated P/E ratio (left axis)
                      Cross-sectional variance of log(cons.) (right axis)




          20                                                                                      0.2




          10                                                                                      0.1
               0     10       20          30         40         50          60   70   80   90   100




Figure 2: An indicative, model-implied path of the price-earnings ratio (left scale) and the
cross- sectional standard deviation of log consumption (right scale) in the G^  arleanu and
Panageas (2019) model.




      c
      t,s    t
             C    ct,t
           =    -      + .                                                                              (51)
      ct,s   Ct   Ct

Equation (51) is the continuous time analog of equation (46). It states that the consumption
growth of a fixed cohort is equal to aggregate growth minus the fraction of consumption
accruing to the newly borns  cC
                              t,t
                               t
                                                   plus the death rate  .
   Using the intertemporal budget constraint at birth and equation (64) in the appendix
implies that gt = pt and therefore

        ct,t
             = t ,                                                                                      (52)
        Ct

                                                                47
Substituting (52) into (51) gives

      c
      t,s
           =  +  - t .                                                                  (53)
      ct,s

This implies that the consumption growth of any fixed cohort has a stochastic drift (driven
by the persistent component t ), even though aggregate consumption is deterministic. To
determine the equilibrium risk premium, apply Ito's Lemma to both sides of equation (36)
and match the diffusion components to arrive at

              +  - 1 g (t )
     t = -                   (t ) ,                                                     (54)
                     g (t )

where gt = g (t ) is the wealth-to-consumption ratio defined in (19). Equation (54) is the
Sharpe ratio that one would obtain in a Bansal and Yaron (2004) model without any short
run risks.   Indeed, if the IES is above one ( > 0), an increase in the depreciation rate
t lowers expected consumption growth of any fixed cohort s, and hence the wealth-to-
consumption ratio declines g (t ) < 0. If investors have preference for early resolution of
uncertainty  +  > 1, this means that negative news for the drift rate of existing agents'
consumption (and the dividends of existing firms) going forward, require risk compensation.
   The takeaway from the above discussion is that imperfect risk sharing across cohorts
leads to a model that resembles a representative-agent long run risks model. The major
difference is that long-run risk in the Bansal and Yaron (2004) model is driven by persistent
and random components in aggregate consumption growth, whereas here long-run risk is
driven by persistent, random components in the consumption growth of a fixed cohort.
Positive innovations to t are negative news for the long run consumption growth of existing
cohorts. However, t is a purely re-distributional risk between existing and arriving cohorts.
Aggregate consumption growth is constant.




                                             48
3.3.1   Literature Review

The literature that uses heterogeneous-agents models together with recursive preferences
is recent and includes Schmidt (2015), Constantinides and Ghosh (2017), (who utilize re-
cursive preferences in a context of imperfect intra-cohort risk sharing) and G^
                                                                              arleanu and
Panageas (2019) (which utilizes recursive preferences in a context of imperfect inter-cohort
risk sharing).


3.4     Summary and Empirical Implications

Models of imperfect risk sharing are qualitatively different from models that feature hetero-
geneous preferences, beliefs, or access to markets. In models of imperfect risk sharing all
agents have the same preferences, beliefs and access the same markets. However, either some
key markets are missing (i.e., the markets for trading idiosyncratic income shocks), or some
key market participants are missing (the unborn who cannot trade before their birth).
   In models of imperfect risk sharing the aggregate consumption CAPM fails both con-
ditionally and unconditionally. In these types of models it is possible to have positive risk
premia even if aggregate consumption is deterministic.
   The unifying mechanism behind all the models in section 3 is to drive a wedge between
individual and aggregate consumption growth that is priced. The model of section 3.1
achieves this by exploiting higher-order movements in consumption growth, the model of
section 3.2 achieves this by creating a random redistribution between young and old that
resembles a jump-risk from the perspective of the old, while the model of section 3.3 makes
the displacement activity "smoother" over time and introduces recursive preferences to make
the representative agent unsure about its long term impact.
   Ultimately, whether these models are plausible candidates to resolve asset pricing puzzles
boils down to whether these models make empirically plausible predictions about the joint
movement of inequality and asset returns.
   Models that utilize expected utilities require a negative, short-run correlation between
innovations to the cross-sectional consumption dispersion and asset returns. Especially as

                                             49
                  0.1                              0.05                                             0.025


                                                            0.04                                    0.02



                   0                               0                                                0.015
                                                            0.03


                                                                                                    0.01
                                                            0.02

                 -0.1                              -0.05                                            0.005
                    1940   1960   1980   2000   2020          1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010




                  0.1                              0.04     0.06                                    0.03




                 0.05                              0.02     0.04                                    0.025




                   0                               0        0.02                                    0.02




                -0.05                              -0.02      0                                     0.015
                    1940   1960   1980   2000   2020          1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010




Figure 3: Top left plot: Expected real interest rate at the beginning of each year and
"marginal-agent" consumption growth over the year. (For the computation of the expected
real interest rate and "marginal-agent" consumption growth, see G^   arleanu and Panageas
(2019)). Top right plot: 10-year moving averages yearly marginal agent consumption growth
and 10-year moving average of expected real interest rate. Bottom left and right plots:
Identical to the top plots, except that marginal-agent consumption growth is replaced with
aggregate consumption growth per capita.

one shrinks the time-interval to zero, this becomes more evident: for heterogeneity to matter,
there have to be joint discontinuous jumps in both cross-sectional variance and risky asset
returns.
   One obvious response is that people don't trade very frequently in reality. Still, the issue
remains that the asset return movements and shocks to inequality have to coincide over the
course of a decision interval.
   The model of recursive preferences in section 3.3 is more forgiving on this issue. Even with
the first warning signs that she might be losing from redistribution, an investor wants risk
compensation for assets with bad payoffs if redistributive activity intensifies unfavorably. The
empirical implication is that innovations to inequality and asset returns may look completely


                                                       50
unrelated in the short run. Indeed in the model of section 3.3 , the cross-sectional variance of
consumption follows a locally deterministic (time-differentiable) process, while asset prices
follow a diffusion with positive volatility. This means that over short time intervals, there
is no correlation between the two series. Figure 2 provides an illustration of this fact. The
figure is from G^
                arleanu and Panageas (2019), which analyzes a model with similar properties
to the one in section 3.3 .
   Before concluding this section, it is worth noting that models of imperfect risk sharing (be
it imperfect inter- or intra-cohort) have interesting implications not just for risk premiums
but also for real interest rates. An implication of equation (41) is that a location shift of
the increments t+1 - t to the right lowers the interest rate. The reason is that increased
uncertainty about individual-level consumption growth boosts precautionary savings.
   The same tendency (namely to obtain low real rates) is also a typical feature of overlap-
ping generations models. As G^
                             arleanu and Panageas (2015) show in a model that features
both capital and labor income, the interest rate in an overlapping generations economy is
generally lower than in an economy with infinitely lived investors, whenever the life cycle
income profile declines with age. The reason is that agents in an overlapping generations
economy cannot count on the income of their children to smooth their consumption and need
to save more for the years when their income drops.
   But leaving the level of interest rates aside, overlapping generations economies have
different implications for the consumption growth d log(ct,s ) of a fixed cohort versus aggregate
consumption growth d log(Ct ), with only the former being relevant for asset pricing. G^
                                                                                       arleanu
and Panageas (2019) propose an econometric technique to infer d log(ct,s ), ("marginal agent
consumption growth") utilizing a time-, age-, and cohort- decomposition of log consumption
in cross sectional data.
   According to the Euler equation, the drift of d log(ct,s ) should reflect the movements of
the real interest rate. Figure 3 shows that the inferred d log(ct,s ) co-moves with the real
interest rate better than aggregate consumption growth (per capita). Interestingly, marginal
agent consumption growth starts declining steadily at the onset of the secular decline of the



                                               51
real interest rate, which started in the mid-eighties.
       I conclude this section with a digression on the co-movement between dividends and
consumption.


3.4.1      Digression: The co-movement between the dividends of the market port-
           folio and consumption

Throughout this survey, the focus has been on the properties of the stochastic discount factor.
For an equity premium to arise one has to also establish a link between the stochastic discount
factor and the dividends of the market portfolio.
       For instance in the models of sections 3.2 and 3.3, aggregate consumption is deterministic
as are aggregate dividends. But then how can there be an equity premium?23
       The short answer to this question is that even though aggregate dividends are determinis-
tic, the dividends of the market portfolio are stochastic and not co-integrated with aggregate
dividends. There is a subtle distinction between the dividends of the market portfolio and
aggregate dividends that pertains not just to this survey, but all asset pricing models.
       In the real world the number of companies that are included in the market portfolio
is constantly expanding. While obvious, it is worth stressing that the market value of
all companies in existence at time t equals the present value of the dividends that these
companies (and these companies alone ) will produce from t onwards. This is not the same
as the present value of the aggregate dividends from t onwards, since some of the dividends in
the future will be produced by future companies, which are not part of the market portfolio
today.
       This idea is reflected in the definition of the price-to-dividend ratio in equation (19),
namely

                        
                                     Hu   Du,t
         p t = Et          e-(u-t)               du.
                    t                Ht   Dt,t
  23
    Because the stock market is a long-lived claim, it could be that there is an equity premium that is a
pure term premium. So the right question is: How can there be an equity premium above and beyond any
term premium?



                                                       52
This definition says that the dividend growth in the definition of the price-to-dividend ratio
                                                                                                        Du
is the dividend growth of a fixed firm, not aggregate dividend growth                                   Dt
                                                                                                           .   The two notions
of dividend growth are related as follows: Using the definition of aggregate dividend growth
         t
Dt =     -
             Dt,s ds, implies the decomposition

                          t,s
                         D                                  t
                                                            D                                 Dt,t
                                              =                               -                                    .           (55)
                         Dt,s                               Dt                                Dt
       Dividend growth of existing firms          Aggregate Dividend Growth       Dividends of the new entrants



   The dividend-growth decomposition (55) is just an accounting identity that applies to any
model with an expanding set of firms. A very similar decomposition applies to the capital
gains of the market portfolio, since the ratio of prices to dividends is independent of s.
                                                                                                                          t
Indeed, letting Pt,s denote the market value of firms born into cohort s, and Pt =                                        -
                                                                                                                              Pt,s ds
denote the market capitalization of these firms gives

                     dPt,s                                 dPt                                Pt,t
                                          =                                     -                  dt               .          (56)
                      Pt,s                                 Pt                                 Pt
       Capital Gains of existing firms        Growth in market capitalization       Market Value of new entrants


   By the definition of a self-financing strategy, the return on any portfolio with weights
                                                        t                                        dPt,s         Dt,s
wt,s ds summing to one is defined as                    -
                                                             wt,s dRt,s , where dRt,s =           Pt,s
                                                                                                         +     Pt,s
                                                                                                                    dt.   Using the
                                Pt,s
market weights wt,s =            Pt
                                     ds   implies that

                     t
                                          dPt Dt       Pt,t
       dRt =              wt,s dRt,s =       +    dt -      dt.                                                                (57)
                     -                    Pt   Pt      Pt

An equivalent way to arrive at equation (57) is to define a "share" or "divisor" process
         t Ps,s
                ds
St = e      Ps       and treat the entire stock market as a single company with value equal to the
market capitalization Pt , but a time-varying number of shares St . The return "per-share"
of the market portfolio is then defined as the change in the price of each share plus the




                                                                 53
aggregate dividends per share

                             Pt          Dt
                   d         St
                                     +   St
                                            dt
         dRt =                    Pt
                                                 .                                                                                               (58)
                                  St


Mathematically, (58) coincides with (57). Ecomomically, (58) shows that the dividends that
                                                                                                                                                Dt
are pertinent for the computation of the market portfolio are the dividends per share                                                           St
                                                                                                                                                   .
       An equivalent way of thinking about the dividends of the market portfolio in a world
where the mass of productive units ("trees") is expanding, is to treat the stock market as
consisting of a "representative" firm whose yearly profits are equal to aggregate profits Dt ,
but the firm invests Pt,t to purchase the newly arriving productive entities. Accordingly, the
payoff to investors is equal to profits minus investment (Dt - Pt,t ) and the firm's market
value can be expressed as

                                                                                      
                                     Hu                                                   Hu    St
         P t = Et                       (Du - Pu,u ) du              = Et                             Du du                                      (59)
                              t      Ht                                           t       Ht    Su

       where the last equation follows from the definition of St .24
                                                                                                     Pt
       Figure 4 plots the relation between the value of an index                                     St
                                                                                                          and aggregate market capital-
ization, while Figure 5 gives a visual depiction of the relation between aggregate dividends
  24                                                                                  t                   t
       To derive (59) multiply both sides by Ht and add -                             0
                                                                                          Hu Pu,u du +    0
                                                                                                              Hu Du du to obtain
                         t                           t                       
         Pt Ht -             Hu Pu,u du +                Hu Du du = Et          Hu Du du.
                     0                           0                       0

                                                                                                                               t Ps,s
                                                                                                                                        ds
The right hand side of the above equation is a martingale. Using the definition of St = e                                         Ps         , one can
write the above equation in differential form:

                                       dSt
         d (Pt Ht ) - Ht Pt                      = -Ht Dt + dMt ,
                                        St

where dMt is a martingale increment. Noting that d (Pt Ht ) - Ht Pt dS
                                                                     St = d
                                                                       t                                          Pt Ht
                                                                                                                   St     × St implies that the
above equation can be written as

             Pt Ht                Ht Dt   dMt
         d                   =-         +     .
              St                   St      St

Integrating both sides and taking expectations (noting that dMt is a martingale increment) gives (59).



                                                                             54
 5                                                                     5
                         Log CRSP Index + Sum (log(1+new additions))           Log SP Index + Sum (log(1+new additions))

 4                                                                     4


         Log CRSP Market Capitalization
 3                                                                     3         Log SP Market Capitalization


 2                                                                     2
           Log GDP                                                             Log GDP

 1                                                                     1



 0                                                                     0
                                           Log CRSP Index                                                         Log SP Index

 -1                                                                    -1
  1920     1940       1960          1980     2000       2020            1920    1940       1960          1980     2000      2020
                             Year                                                                 Year


Figure 4: Left plot: Logarithm of GDP, logarithm of the CRSP market index (obtained
by cumulating ex-dividend CRSP gross returns), log market capitalization, and log market
capitalization plus the cumulative sum of the logarithm of 1+addition rate to the market.
The addition rate is defined as the market value of additions to the index (valued at the end
of each year) divided by the total value of the index at the end of each year. All series are
deflated by subtracting the logarithm of the CPI. Right plot: Same as left plot, except that
the market index is the S&P 500.

                                                                                 Dt
Dt and the dividends per share of the market portfolio                           St
                                                                                    .    These figures use the time
series of price per share and dividends per share that are used in index construction. In
the data, the number of shares of the index gets adjusted for a multitude of reasons not
captured here (typically corporate payouts or issuances of existing firms). However, as the
figure shows over long horizons, the dominant force in accounting for the discepancy between
the (log) price-per-share of an index and (log) aggregate stock market capitalization is the
                                                      Pt,t
cumulative sum of the addition rate                   Pt
                                                           .   The same applies to the discrepancy between log
dividends-per-share and log aggregate dividends.
     To return to the implications of these accounting identities for the model of section 3.3 , a
positive shock to the depreciation rate t acts as a permanent shock to both the consumption
of a fixed cohort ct,s and the dividends of existing firms Dt,s . The investor realizes that because
t is persistent, this shock has a permanent effect on her long run consumption. Therefore
she demands compensation for shocks to t . The value of the market portfolio, being a long-

                                                                 55
                             Index Dividends          Aggregate Dividends

                             Consumption              Index Dividends + New Cap




                2
                1.5
                1
                .5
                0




                      1960        1970         1980                 1990          2000   2010
                                                           Year




Figure 5: Real S&P 500 dividends per share, aggregate consumption and aggregate dividends
in logarithms. The line "Index Dividends + New Cap" is equal to real log-dividends per
share plus the progressive sum of the logarithm of the cumulative change in the number of
shares of the index that is due to the introduction of new companies.

term claim to dividends-per-share, also drops in response to a shock to t , and therefore an
equity premium emerges.



4      Further applications: Equilibrium Arbitrage, het-
      erogeneous stochastic discount factors

4.1    Equilibrium arbitrage

In models of market incompleteness, either a market, or some key market participants are
missing. However, typically one can price all assets at time t by considering the consumption
growth of a fixed agent at time t.
    One possibility, though, is that no agent participates in all asset markets. In these
situations, the existence of a stochastic discount factor is not guaranteed, idiosyncratic risk


                                                         56
                       0


                   -0.5
.8   1                     0       0.2         0.4          0.6           0.8         1
                                                       i

                                          D(i) (polar coordinates)


                      2


                      1


                      0
                    0.2
                                                                                          0.2
                                   0                                            0.1
                                                                      0
                                                             -0.1
.8   1                                       -0.2    -0.2




               Figure 6: A sample path of the dividend process postulated in equation (60).

         may be priced, and there could be an equilibrium arbitrage. Models of this sort become
         especially interesting if one introduces a participation decision, so as to study the incentives
         of agents to take advantage of the arbitrages, thus eliminating them.
            To illustrate the issues that arise in models of endogenous participation and limited
         equilibrium arbitrage, this section utilizes the structure proposed in G^
                                                                                 arleanu et al. (2015).
         The model is a one-period model, whereby investors are aligned on a circle with circumference
         normalized to one. An investor in location i  [0, 1) is endowed with a tree that pays a
         random, location-specific dividend. The distribution of this dividend is constructed to ensure
         that the distribution of the dividend is location-invariant, and that all risk is idiosyncratic.
         Specifically, letting Bi denote a brownian motion for i  [0, 1) with B0 = 0, define


               Zi  Bi - iB1 .


         The process Zi is called a "Brownian Bridge"'. While random for all i  (0, 1), the process

                                                       57
Zi satisfies Z0 = 0, Z1 = 0, i.e., the process starts and ends at zero. Using this definition of
Zi , the time-1 dividend in location i is

                                 1
        Di = 1 + Zi -                Zi di.                                                     (60)
                             0


                         1
By construction,        0
                             Di = 1, i.e., all location-specific risk is diversifiable. Moreover, the
distribution of Di is normal, independent of i, and the correlation between i and j is a
declining function of the distance between i and j on the circle.25 Figure 6 provides an
illustration of this construction by plotting a sample path of of Di (in polar coordinates).
Given the normality of dividends and in order to obtain closed form solutions, investors have
constant absolute risk aversion utilities (CARA).
      In this framework investors have a clear incentive to diversify. In the absence of frictions,
each investor in location i would sell her own tree, and purchase a portfolio of all other trees,
which would be riskless. To make matters interesting, participation in some market j = i is
an increasing function of the distance between i and j. G^
                                                         arleanu et al. (2015) assumes that
participation costs start approaching infinity as an investor attempts to invest in all locations
on the circle, so that in equilibrium no investor participates in all markets. (The only market
where all investors participate is the zero-net-supply bond market.) Because no investor can
fully diversify the location-specific asset risk, that risk becomes priced. This leads to an
(unexploitable) arbitrage opportunity: the payoffs of an equally weighted portfolio of all
risky assets (which has a certain payoff of one) costs less than a zero coupon bond with unit
face value
      G^
       arleanu et al. (2015) shows that in this economy an agent's joint participation-investment
allocation decision is generally non-concave. The non-concavity of the optimization prob-
lem stems from the complementarity between leverage and participation. As an investor
contemplates leveraging her portfolio, she has an incentive to also increase her participation
in more markets in order to further diversify risk. Because idiosyncratic risk is priced, the
lower variance of the portfolio translates into a higher Sharpe ratio, which in turn further
 25
      See G^
           arleanu et al. (2015) for a proof.


                                                     58
increases the incentive to leverage. In equilibrium, the investor is faced with two maxima,
one associated with a small participation arc and a positive allocation to bonds, while the
other involving a large participation arc and a leveraged portfolio.
   As in Aumann (1966), markets clear by determining the fractions of agents that choose
the first and the second maximum. Specifically, a group of investors participate in a small
arc and choose a positive allocation to bonds, while another mass of agents in the same
location choose to participate in a large arc and borrow. The first group of investors accept
a lower Sharpe ratio and pay less fees, while the latter group of investors obtain a higher
Sharpe ratio and pay more fees for it.
   Unlike the other models presented in this survey, in G^
                                                         arleanu et al. (2015) all investors in
a location are ex-ante identical . Yet, they are heterogeneous ex-post, since the interaction
of participation and leverage decisions makes an investor's optimization non-convex, leading
ex-ante identical investors to make different portfolio and leverage decisions. Specifically, the
endogeneity of the participation (and leverage) decision separates investors into high-Sharpe
ratio, high-leverage, high-participation strategies and low-Sharpe ratio, low participation,
positive-bond-holding strategies.
   Models of equilibrium arbitrages are useful for linking portfolio flows into high- and
low- Sharpe ratio strategies with equilibrium risk premiums. An additional aspect of these
models is that they can lead to multiple, Pareto ranked equilibrium if one imposes leverage
constraints.


4.1.1   Literature Review

The literature on constrained arbitrage is voluminous and any attempt to summarize it
within the confines of this survey would not do it justice. Some indicative papers (chosen to
exemplify the varied approaches taken in this literature) include Basak and Croitoru (2000),
Gromb and Vayanos (2018), G^
                           arleanu and Pedersen (2011), Kondor (2009), Davilla and
Korinek (2017), Liu and Longstaff (2003) among many others.
   To highlight some recent contributions, Hebert (2019), Davilla and Parliatore (2019) pro-



                                               59
pose frameworks to measure the welfare costs of equilibrium arbitrages. Zentefis (2019b),
Zentefis (2019a), Khorrami (2019b) utilize models that feature a tradeoff between participa-
tion costs and diversification.


4.2    Asymmetric information and heterogeneous stochastic dis-
       count factors

The purpose of this section is not to survey the literature on asymmetric information, which
is voluminous and outside the scope of this survey. Mostly, for reasons of completeness, this
section simply mentions a high-level observation contained in Grossman and Shiller (1982),
when the source of heterogeneity among investors is asymmetric information.
   Specifically, the Grossman and Shiller (1982) result applies to cases where the econo-
metrician has a coarser information set than the agents. Indeed, the law of the iterated
expectation implies that

       (I )    (i)                  f              (I )                  f
      Et      Et     u ci
                        t+   Rt+ - Rt +      = Et         u ci
                                                             t+   Rt+ - Rt +    =0


where superscript I in the expectations operator denotes the econometrician's information
set and i denotes the investor's information set. Accordingly, it would seem that if agents
are better informed than the econometrician, then different information sets do not affect
the validity of the Grossman and Shiller (1982) result.
   One requirement, however, for the this argument to hold is that all investors choose
interior portfolios in all assets. If assets cannot be shorted, then some investors may choose
zero allocations to individual assets that their information set identifies as problematic, thus
leading to endogenous non-participation. When the information asymmetry interacts with
the participation decision, then the Grossman and Shiller (1982) fails. G^
                                                                         arleanu et al. (2019)
provides a model of such a failure of Grossman and Shiller (1982) akin to the failure of the
Euler equation that would obtain in an economy where agents face heterogeneous returns
when investing in the same asset class. As a result, information heterogeneity matters for


                                              60
equilibrium prices and the Grossman and Shiller (1982) fails.26




  26
    Besides pricing implications, models of asymmetric information have natural applications to performance
evaluation. G^arleanu et al. (2019) show that some classical results on performance evaluation cease to hold
in a model where information asymmetries and portfolio constraints interact. For instance, the classical
results of Mayers and Rice (1979) and Dybvig and Ross (1985), who show that the return of an informed
investor regressed against the return of any benchmark portfolio (efficient or inefficient) has positive alpha
in the presence of pure "selection" ability, ceases to hold when portfolio decisions are not interior.


                                                     61
A       Appendix
                                                                 i
This appendix derives the differential equations characterizing gt and pt .
    Using (8) inside (19) implies

                                                                                        1
                                                   i                               1-
       i                            -  + i (u-t)                      Hu                i
                                                
      gt       = Et               e                                                         du.                                                                    (61)
                           t                                          Ht

                          i
Equation (61) shows that gt is essentially a present value relation. Using some basic argu-
ments, this present value relationship satisfies an ordinary differential equation. In order to
                                                i
derive this ordinary differential equation for gt , start by multiplying both sides of (61) by
           i               1                                               i
 - + i t            1-
                           i
                                                              
                                                        t - +  i u                            1-   1
                                                                                                   i
e               Ht                and add              s
                                                         e                          (Hu )              du to both sides, which results in

                       i               1                   t                   i                                                       i
        - + i t                   1-
                                       i    i                      - + i u                    1-   1                             - + i u           1-   1
                                                                                                   i                                                    i
      e                        Ht          gt   +              e                     (Hu )             du = Et               e             (Hu )            du.    (62)
                                                       s                                                              s


Observe that the right hand side of equation (62) is a conditional expectation and hence a
martingale. This means that the left hand side must be a martingale as well.
    To proceed, conjecture that the equilibrium is Markovian in xA
                                                                 t , which means that

rt , t , µi   i    i                                      A
          x , x , gt and pt are exclusively functions of xt . (This conjecture is verified at the

end of the proof).
                                                                    ci              pt
    This conjecture implies that                                     t,t
                                                                    Dt
                                                                           =         i
                                                                                    gt
                                                                                            is a function of xA
                                                                                                              t . The implication is that rt and

µi                                             A                     i          B        A
 x can be written exclusively as functions of xt , (and so can t and x ) since xt = 1 - xt .
    Applying Ito's Lemma to compute the drift of the left-hand side of (62) and setting the
resulting expression to zero leads after some simplifications to the following two differential
equations for i = A, B :

2
x  xA
    t                                                      1                                                              i                1                      1 2 xAt
               gi   + µA  A
                       x xt - 1 -                                    xA      A
                                                                      t × x xt                          gi -         +            + 1-         r xA
                                                                                                                                                  t +                       g i +1 = 0.
  2                                                        i                                                              i                i                      i   2
                                                                                                                                                                    (63)


The final step is to obtain an expression for pt , which enters the pair of differential equations
                                                                                                          ci          pt
(63) through the dependence of r xA     A  A
                                  t , µ x xt on                                                            t,t
                                                                                                          Dt
                                                                                                                 =     i.
                                                                                                                      gt
                                                                                                                             Asset market clearing implies


                                                                                              62
that aggregate wealth of the two agent groups needs to equal the value of the stock market,
that is


      WtA + WtB = Pt ,


where Wti is each group's total wealth and Pt is the value of the stock market. Moreover,
                                                   i
each group's budget constraint implies that Wti = gt xA  i
                                                      t xt Ct . Accordingly


                             Pt
                xi  i  A
                 t gt xt =      = p xA
                                     t .                                                    (64)
                             Ct
      i{A,B }



   Substituting this expression for p xA
                                       t into the expressions for r (xt ) , µi
                                                                             x (xt ) implies that

equations (63) are fully specified ODEs, i.e., can be written in the form F xA    i A      A
                                                                             t , g xt , g xt , g    xA
                                                                                                     t

= 0. Hence if g i xA
                   t , i  {A, B } solves this pair of differential equations, then the conjecture

that there exists a Markovian equilibrium (i.e., an equilibrium where rt , t , µi   i    i
                                                                                x , x , gt and pt

are exclusively functions of xA
                              t ) is confirmed.




                                               63
References
Abel, A. B. (2003). The effects of a baby boom on stock prices and capital accumulation in
  the presence of social security. Econometrica 71 (2), 551­578.

Abel, A. B., J. C. Eberly, and S. Panageas (2007). Optimal inattention to the stock market.
  American Economic Review 97 (2), 244­249.

Abel, A. B., J. C. Eberly, and S. Panageas (2013). Optimal inattention to the stock market
  with information costs and transactions costs. Econometrica 81 (4), 1455­1481.

Akira Toda, A. and K. Walsh (2019). Asset Pricing and the One Percent. Forthcoming,
  Review of Financial Studies.

Alvarez, F. and A. Atkeson (2018). Random risk aversion and liquidity: a model of asset
  pricing and trade volumes. Working Paper, University of Chicago and UCLA.

Alvarez, F. and U. J. Jermann (2000). Efficiency, equilibrium, and asset pricing with risk of
  default. Econometrica 68 (4), 775­797.

Angeletos, G.-M. and L. Calvet (2006). Idiosyncratic production risk, growth and the busi-
  ness cycle. Journal of Monetary Economics 53 (6), 1095­1115.

Aumann, R. J. (1966). Existence of competitive equilibria in markets with a continuum of
  traders. Econometrica 34 (1), 1­17.

Bansal, R. and A. Yaron (2004). Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset
  pricing puzzles. Journal of Finance 59 (4), 1481­1509.

Barro, R. J. (2006). Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 121 (3), 823­66.

Barro, R. J., J. Fern´
                     andez-Villaverde, O. Levintal, and A. Mollerus (2017). Safe assets.
  Working paper.



                                             64
Basak, S. and B. Croitoru (2000). Equilibrium mispricing in a capital market with portfolio
  constraints. The Review of Financial Studies 13 (3), 715­748.

Basak, S. and D. Cuoco (1998). An equilibrium model with restricted stock market partici-
  pation. Review of Financial Studies 11 (2), 309­41.

Bhamra, H. S. and R. Uppal (2013). Asset Prices with Heterogeneity in Preferences and
  Beliefs. The Review of Financial Studies 27 (2), 519­580.

Blanchard, O. J. (1985). Debt, deficits, and finite horizons. Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 93 (2), 223­247.

Blume, L. and D. Easley (1992). Evolution and market behavior. Journal of Economic
  Theory 58 (1), 9 ­ 40.

Borch, K. (1962). Equilibrium in a reinsurance market. Econometrica 30 (3), 424­444.

Borovicka (2019). Survival and Long-run Dynamics with Heterogeneous Beliefs Under Re-
  cursive Preferences. Forthcoming, Journal of Political Economy.

Brav, A., G. M. Constantinides, and C. C. Geczy (2002). Asset Pricing with Heteroge-
  neous Consumers and Limited Participation: Empirical Evidence. Journal of Political
  Economy 110 (4), 793­824.

Breeden, D. T. (1979). An intertemporal asset pricing model with stochastic consumption
  and investment opportunities. Journal of Financial Economics 7 (3), 265 ­ 296.

Buraschi, A. and A. Jiltsov (2006). Model uncertainty and option markets with heterogeneous
  beliefs. The Journal of Finance 61 (6), 2841­2897.

Calvet, L. E., J. Y. Campbell, F. J. Gomes, and P. Sodini (2019). The cross-section of
  household preferences. Working Paper, Harvard University.

Campbell, J. Y. and J. H. Cochrane (1999). By force of habit: A consumption-based expla-
  nation of aggregate stock market behavior. Journal of Political Economy 107 (2), 205­251.

                                            65
Campbell, J. Y. and Y. Nosbusch (2007). Intergenerational risksharing and equilibrium asset
  prices. Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (8), 2251­2268.

Chabakauri, G. (2013). Dynamic Equilibrium with Two Stocks, Heterogeneous Investors,
  and Portfolio Constraints. The Review of Financial Studies 26 (12), 3104­3141.

Chan, Y. L. and L. Kogan (2002). Catching up with the joneses: Heterogeneous preferences
  and the dynamics of asset prices. Journal of Political Economy 110 (6), 1255­1285.

Chen, H., S. Joslin, and N.-K. Tran (2012). Rare Disasters and Risk Sharing with Hetero-
  geneous Beliefs. The Review of Financial Studies 25 (7), 2189­2224.

Chien, Y., H. Cole, and H. Lustig (2012). Is the volatility of the market price of risk due to
  intermittent portfolio rebalancing? American Economic Review 102 (6), 2859­96.

Cogley, T. (2002). Idiosyncratic risk and the equity premium: evidence from the consumer
  expenditure survey. Journal of Monetary Economics 49 (2), 309­334.

Constantinides, G. M., J. B. Donaldson, and R. Mehra (2002). Junior can't borrow: A
  new perspective of the equity premium puzzle. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (1),
  269­96.

Constantinides, G. M. and D. Duffie (1996). Asset pricing with heterogeneous consumers.
  Journal of Political Economy 104, 219­40.

Constantinides, G. M. and A. Ghosh (2017). Asset pricing with countercyclical household
  consumption risk. The Journal of Finance 72 (1), 415­460.

David, A. (2008). Heterogeneous beliefs, speculation, and the equity premium. The Journal
  of Finance 63 (1), 41­83.

Davilla, E. and A. Korinek (2017). Pecuniary Externalities in Economies with Financial
  Frictions. The Review of Economic Studies 85 (1), 352­395.



                                             66
Davilla, E. and C. Parliatore (2019). Trading costs and informational efficiency. Working
  paper, Yale and New York University.

Detemple, J. and S. Murthy (1997). Equilibrium Asset Prices and No-Arbitrage with Port-
  folio Constraints. The Review of Financial Studies 10 (4), 1133­1174.

Detemple, J. and A. Serrat (2003). Dynamic Equilibrium with Liquidity Constraints. The
  Review of Financial Studies 16 (2), 597­629.

Duffie, D. and L. G. Epstein (1992). Stochastic differential utility. Econometrica 60 (2),
  353­394.

Dumas, B. (1989). Two-person dynamic equilibrium in the capital market. Review of Fi-
  nancial Studies 2 (2), 157­188.

Dumas, B., K. K. Lewis, and E. Osambela (2016). Differences of Opinion and International
  Equity Markets. The Review of Financial Studies 30 (3), 750­800.

Dumas, B., R. Uppal, and T. Wang (2000). Efficient intertemporal allocations with recursive
  utility. Journal of Economic Theory 93 (2), 240 ­ 259.

Dybvig, P. H. and S. A. Ross (1985). Differential information and performace measurement
  using a security market line. Journal of Finance 40 (2), 383­399.

Ehling, P., A. Graniero, and C. Heyerdahl-Larsen (2017). Asset Prices and Portfolio Choice
  with Learning from Experience. The Review of Economic Studies 85 (3), 1752­1780.

Farmer, R. E. (2018). Pricing assets in a perpetual youth model. Review of Economic
  Dynamics 30, 106 ­ 124.

Favilukis, J. (2013). Inequality, stock market participation, and the equity premium. Journal
  of Financial Economics 107 (3), 740 ­ 759.

G^
 arleanu, N., L. Kogan, and S. Panageas (2012). Displacement risk and asset returns.
  Journal of Financial Economics 105, 491­510.

                                             67
G^
 arleanu, N. and S. Panageas (2015). Young, old, conservative, and bold: The implications
  of heterogeneity and finite lives for asset pricing. Journal of Political Economy 123, 670­
  685.

G^
 arleanu, N. and S. Panageas (2018). Finance in a time of gisruptive growth. Working
  paper, UC Berkeley and UCLA.

G^
 arleanu, N. and S. Panageas (2019). Heterogeneity and asset prices: A different approach.
  Working paper, UC Berkeley and UCLA.

G^
 arleanu, N. and S. Panageas (2020). What to expect when everyone is expecting: Self-
  fulfilling expectations and asset-pricing puzzles. Forthcoming, Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics.

G^
 arleanu, N., S. Panageas, and J. Yu (2015). Financial entanglement: A theory of incomplete
  integration, leverage, crashes, and contagion. American Economic Review 105 (7), 1979­
  2010.

G^
 arleanu, N., S. Panageas, and J. Yu (2019). Impediments to financial trade: Theory and
  applications. Forthcoming, Review of Financial Studies.

G^
 arleanu, N. and L. H. Pedersen (2011). Margin-based Asset Pricing and Deviations from
  the Law of One Price. The Review of Financial Studies 24 (6), 1980­2022.

Geanakoplos, J., M. Magill, and M. Quinzii (2004). Demography and the long-run pre-
  dictability of the stock market. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2004 (1), 241­307.

Gomes, F. and A. Michaelides (2008). Asset pricing with limited risk sharing and heteroge-
  neous agents. Review of Financial Studies 21 (1), 415 ­ 449.

Gomez, M. (2017). Asset prices and wealth inequality. Working Paper, Columbia University.

Gomez, M. (2019). Displacement and the rise in top wealth inequality. Working paper,
  Columbia University.


                                             68
Greenwald, D. L., M. Lettau, and S. Ludvigson (2019). How the wealth was won: Factors
  shares as market fundamentals. NBER Working paper, 25769.

Gromb, D. and D. Vayanos (2018). The dynamics of financially constrained arbitrage. The
  Journal of Finance 73 (4), 1713­1750.

Grossman, S. J. and R. J. Shiller (1982). Consumption correlatedness and risk measurement
  in economies with non-traded assets and heterogeneous information. Journal of Financial
  Economics 10 (2), 195 ­ 210.

Guvenen, F. (2005). A parsimonious macroeconomic model for asset pricing: Habit formation
  or cross-sectional heterogeneity. mimeo, University of Texas at Austin.

He, H. and D. M. Modest (1995). Market frictions and consumption-based asset pricing.
  Journal of Political Economy 103 (1), 94­117.

He, H. and H. F. Pages (1993). Labor income, borrowing constraints, and equilibrium asset
  prices. Economic Theory 3 (4), 663­696.

Heaton, J. and D. J. Lucas (1996). Evaluating the effects of incomplete markets on risk
  sharing and asset pricing. Journal of Political Economy 104 (3), 443­487.

Hebert, B. (2019). Externalities as arbitrage. Working Paper, Stanford Graduate School of
  Business.

Hugonnier, J. (2012). Rational asset pricing bubbles and portfolio constraints. Journal of
  Economic Theory 147 (6), 2260 ­ 2302.

Kargar, M. (2018). Heterogeneous Intermediary Asset Pricing. Unpublished Working Paper,
  UCLA.

Khorrami, P. (2019a). Entry and slow-moving capital: using asset markets to infer the costs
  of risk concentration. unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago.



                                            69
Khorrami, P. (2019b). The risk of risk-sharing: Diversification and boom-bust cycles. Work-
  ing paper, University of Chicago.

Kocherlakota, N. R. and L. Pistaferri (2009). Asset pricing implications of pareto optimality
  with private information. Journal of Political Economy 117 (3), 555­590.

Kogan, L., D. Papanikolaou, and N. Stoffman (2019). Left behind: Creative destruction,
  inequality, and the stock market. Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

Kogan, L., S. A. Ross, J. Wang, and M. M. Westerfield (2006). The Price Impact and
  Survival of Irrational Traders. The Journal of Finance 61 (1), 195­229.

Kondor, P. (2009). Risk in dynamic arbitrage: The price effects of convergence trading. The
  Journal of Finance 64 (2), 631­655.

Kondor, P. and D. Vayanos (2019). Liquidity risk and the dynamics of arbitrage capital.
  The Journal of Finance 74 (3), 1139­1173.

Krueger, D. and F. Kubler (2006). Pareto-improving social security reform when financial
  markets are incomplete!? American Economic Review 96 (3), 737­755.

Krueger, D. and H. Lustig (2010). When is market incompleteness irrelevant for the price
  of aggregate risk (and when is it not)?. Journal of Economic Theory 145 (1), 1 ­ 41.

Liu, J. and F. A. Longstaff (2003). Losing Money on Arbitrage: Optimal Dynamic Portfolio
  Choice in Markets with Arbitrage Opportunities. The Review of Financial Studies 17 (3),
  611­641.

Longstaff, F. A. and J. Wang (2012). Asset Pricing and the Credit Market. The Review of
  Financial Studies 25 (11), 3169­3215.

Lucas, D. (1994). Asset pricing with undiversifiable income risk and short sales constraints:
  Deepening the equity premium puzzle. Journal of Monetary Economics 34 (3), 325­341.

Luttmer, E. (1996). Asset pricing in economies with frictions. Econometrica 64 (6), 1439­67.

                                             70
Mankiw, N. (1986). The equity premium and the concentration of aggregate shocks. Journal
  of Financial Economics 17 (1), 211 ­ 219.

Mankiw, N. and S. P. Zeldes (1991). The consumption of stockholders and nonstockholders.
  Journal of Financial Economics 29 (1), 97 ­ 112.

Marcet, A. and R. Marimon (1998). Recursive contracts. UPF Working Paper.

Maurer, T. (2017). Asset pricing implications of demographic change. Working Paper, Olin
  School of Business.

Mayers, D. and E. Rice (1979). Measuring portfolio performance and the empirical content
  of asset pricing models. Journal of Financial Economics 7, 3­28.

Parker, J. A. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2009). Who bears aggregate fluctuations and how?
  American Economic Review 99 (2), 399­405.

Pastor, L. and P. Veronesi (2019). Inequality Aversion, Populism, and the Backlash Against
  Globalization. unpublished manuscript.

Sandroni, A. (2000). Do markets favor agents able to make accurate predictions? Econo-
  metrica 68 (6), 1303­1341.

Santos, T. and P. Veronesi (2018). Leverage. NBER Working Paper 22905.

Scheinkman, J. and W. Xiong (2003). Overconfidence and speculative bubbles. Journal of
  Political Economy 111 (6), 1183­1220.

Schmidt, L. D. W. (2015). Climbing and falling off the ladder: Asset pricing implications of
  labor market event risk. Unpublished working paper, MIT Sloan.

Schneider, A. (2017). Risk sharing and the term structure of interest rates. Unpublished
  working paper, Federal Reserve Board of Governors.

Storesletten, K., C. Telmer, and A. Yaron (2004). Cyclical dynamics in idiosyncratic labor
  market risk. Journal of Political Economy 112 (3), 695­717.

                                              71
Storesletten, K., C. I. Telmer, and A. Yaron (2007). Asset prcing with idiosyncratic risk and
  overlapping generations. Review of Economic Dynamics 10 (4), 519­548.

Telmer, C. I. (1993). Asset-pricing puzzles and incomplete markets. The Journal of Fi-
  nance 48 (5), 1803­1832.

Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2002). Limited asset market participation and the elasticity of in-
  tertemporal substitution. Journal of Political Economy 110 (4), 825 ­ 853.

Wang, J. (1996). The term structure of interest rates in a pure exchange economy with
  heterogeneous investors. Journal of Financial Economics 41 (1), 75­110.

Xiouros, C. and F. Zapatero (2010). The Representative Agent of an Economy with Exter-
  nal Habit Formation and Heterogeneous Risk Aversion. The Review of Financial Stud-
  ies 23 (8), 3017­3047.

Yan, H. (2008). Natural selection in financial markets: Does it work? Management Sci-
  ence 54 (11), 1935­1950.

Zentefis, A. (2019a). Bank net worth and frustrated monetary policy. Working Paper, Yale
  School of Management.

Zentefis, A. (2019b). Self-fulfilling asset prices. Working Paper, Yale School of Management.

Zheng, G. (2019). Wealth shares in the long run. Working Paper, UCLA.




                                             72
