                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               GENERALIZED ROBUSTNESS AND DYNAMIC PESSIMISM

                                      Pascal J. Maenhout
                                       Andrea Vedolin
                                          Hao Xing

                                      Working Paper 26970
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26970


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2020




We thank John Campbell, Gary Chamberlain and Lars Hansen for insightful comments and
discussions. All errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Pascal J. Maenhout, Andrea Vedolin, and Hao Xing. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Generalized Robustness and Dynamic Pessimism
Pascal J. Maenhout, Andrea Vedolin, and Hao Xing
NBER Working Paper No. 26970
April 2020
JEL No. G11,G4

                                        ABSTRACT

This paper develops a theory of dynamic pessimism and its impact on asset prices. Notions of
time-varying pessimism arise endogenously in our setting as a consequence of agents' concern
for model misspecification. We generalize the robust control approach of Hansen and Sargent
(2001) by replacing relative entropy as a measure of discrepancy between models by the more
general family of Cressie-Read discrepancies. As a consequence, the decision-maker's distorted
beliefs appear as an endogenous state variable driving risk aversion, portfolio decisions, and
equilibrium asset prices. Using survey data, we estimate time-varying pessimism and find that
such a proxy features a strong business cycle component. We then show that using our measure
of pessimism helps match salient features in equity markets such as excess volatility and high
equity premium.

Pascal J. Maenhout                            Hao Xing
INSEAD                                        Questrom School of Business
1 Ayer Rajah Avenue                           595 Commonwealth Avenue
138676 Singapore                              Boston, MA 02215
Singapore                                     haoxing@bu.edu
pascal.maenhout@insead.edu

Andrea Vedolin
Questrom School of Business
Boston University
595 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
avedolin@bu.edu
       The seminal work of Hansen and Sargent posits that economic agents with an aversion to
uncertainty seek robustness by entertaining a family of models constructed as a neighborhood
around a benchmark model and optimize against the worst-case within this family.1 In a Bayesian
interpretation the worst-case model that the decision-maker guards against can be viewed as
representing endogenously distorted pessimistic beliefs.2 A crucial modeling assumption throughout
the entire literature on Hansen and Sargent robustness is the use of relative entropy, also known
as Kullback and Leibler (1951) entropy, to measure the discrepancy between models. Hansen and
Sargent (2008) discuss several reasons why relative entropy is appealing. For example, relative entropy
is particularly tractable in a continuous-time setting where alternative models are represented by
exponential martingales reflecting the drift distortions applied to the state variables of interest to the
decision maker. As a consequence, relative entropy often allows for closed-form solutions of difficult
dynamic problems. Little is known, however, about the "robustness" of these robust decision rules
and corresponding equilibrium quantities and prices to the use of relative entropy. In addition to
facilitating analytical tractability, the assumption of relative entropy might not be innocuous, nor
without loss of generality. While relative entropy has strong foundations in information theory, work
in econometric theory, statistical decision-making, and empirical model selection also considers
alternative measures of model discrepancy.                   In this paper, we consider the family of Cressie-
Read divergences (Cressie and Read, 1984), a one-parameter generalization of relative entropy with
parameter  , and study deviations from the entropy case and its implications for asset prices in
a general equilibrium setting.3 More specifically, we show that our extension of robustness offers
an important generalization of stochastic differential utility. In particular, we derive the conditions
under which the agent's pessimistically distorted beliefs form a state variable, which generates
endogenous time-variation in pessimism and stochastic effective risk aversion, unlike in the case of
entropy, and helps match salient features in equity markets.
       We summarize our main contributions as follows. We first carefully construct a generalization of
Hansen and Sargent robustness that is designed to be recursive and homothetic. Relative entropy
is nested as a special case, when the Cressie-Read parameter  tends to unity. Our generalization
of Hansen and Sargent relative-entropy multiplier preferences is based on a novel and carefully
constructed discounted divergence measure, used as a penalty or cost function when minimizing
distorted expected utility. The penalty is an expected integral of suitably scaled and appropriately
weighted discounted Cressie-Read divergence measures. By design, our measure permits a recursive
   1
     Notable contributions include Hansen and Sargent (2001), Anderson, Hansen, and Sargent (2003), and Hansen, Sargent,
Turmuhambetova, and Williams (2006), among many others, or Hansen and Sargent (2008) for a textbook treatment.
   2
     Alternatively, the family of models being considered by the decision-maker can be viewed as the set of non-
unique priors in the max-min expected utility of Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989). The work of Chen and Epstein (2002),
Epstein and Schneider (2003) and related papers offers another approach to modeling ambiguity aversion in a dynamic
setting motivated by the work of Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989). Maccheroni, Marinacci, and Rustichini (2006a) and
Maccheroni, Marinacci, and Rustichini (2006b) show that the framework of variational preferences nests these different
approaches. Strzalecki (2011) characterizes multiplier preferences axiomatically, extending in an important way the findings
in Maccheroni, Marinacci, and Rustichini (2006a). Most recently, Hansen and Sargent (2019) construct a continuous-time
extension of variational preferences that combines ambiguity aversion in the sense of Chen and Epstein (2002) with model
uncertainty aversion in the sense of Anderson, Hansen, and Sargent (2003).
   3
     The family of Cressie-Read divergences nests relative entropy as a limiting case, as well as several other interesting cases
such as Hellinger, 2 , Burg entropy, and others.



                                                               1
formulation, constituting a recursive ambiguity index in the sense of Maccheroni, Marinacci, and
Rustichini (2006b), and preserves homotheticity of the resulting preferences, see, e.g., Maenhout
(2004). Using the theory of backward stochastic differential equations of El Karoui, Peng, and
Quenez (1997) and Kobylanski (2000), we show that these preferences lead to a form of generalized
stochastic differential utility of Lazrak and Quenez (2003), which extends Duffie and Epstein (1992),
the continuous-time version of the well-known recursive preferences of Epstein and Zin (1989). In
particular, the variance multiplier of the utility process is a nonlinear function of the belief distortion
state variable. Intuitively, we obtain belief- and state-dependent risk aversion, except when  = 1,
i.e., in the special case of entropy. We show that for  < 1, risk aversion is countercyclical and
declines following positive shocks, while  > 1 generates procyclical risk aversion. Intuitively, the
parameter  governs the desire for intertemporal smoothness reflected in the Cressie-Read penalty
that intertemporally aggregates all drift distortions. Low values of  indicate a high desire for
intertemporal smoothing of drift distortions by the malevolent agent, or similarly a low willingness
to substitute intertemporally inside the Cressie-Read penalty function.
   Second, to gain further intuition about the effects at work, we examine a simplified two-stage
model, where the belief distortion state variable is frozen at the start of each stage. Solving backwards,
we find that in the second stage, the Cressie-Read investor with fixed belief state variable can be
interpreted as an entropy investor, but where effective risk aversion depends on the temporarily
fixed state variable, i.e., on the state of the economy that prevails at the time when the state variable
was frozen. In the first stage, the investor anticipates the fact that future effective risk aversion
will be determined by the (from her vantage point) future state of the economy. This gives rise to
an endogenous hedging demand against future random market conditions and associated effective
risk aversion. Using this intuition, we then illustrate the consequences of these rich dynamics
in a simple partial equilibrium portfolio problem. More specifically, we show that generalized
robustness produces intertemporal hedging and therefore state- and horizon-dependent portfolios,
despite return dynamics being i.i.d.      This stands in sharp contrast to the findings for relative
entropy, where optimal portfolios are constant and myopic whenever investment opportunities are
constant. Intuitively, because of time-varying sentiment, investment opportunities are perceived
by the investor fearing misspecification as time-varying, even when returns are truly i.i.d. and
investment opportunities are constant under the benchmark model.
   Third, before delving into a general equilibrium analysis, we examine the dynamics of
optimism/pessimism in the data. To this end, we hand collect survey data on macroeconomic
aggregates from a large cross-section of professional forecasters using Blue Chip Economic
Indicators. In our model, ambiguity averse or robustness seeking agents imply pessimistically
distorted beliefs relative to a rational benchmark. To test this hypothesis, we construct belief wedges,
i.e., the difference between the agent's subjective (from the survey) and objective beliefs. To measure
the latter, we estimate "rational" forecasts using a macroeconomic vector autoregressive model. In
line with our theory, we find strong evidence for time-variation in pessimism in the data: wedges
are negative on average, indicating pessimism, and contract sharply during recessions, in line with
sharply increased pessimism. Since our theory predicts a unique mapping between these wedges



                                                    2
and the agent's distorted beliefs, we extract time-varying proxies of distorted beliefs from the data
which we use in our calibration exercise.
   Finally our fourth contribution concerns the effect of stochastic risk aversion on asset prices in
a general equilibrium setting. To this end, we extend our set-up to generalized robustness based
on the Cressie-Read penalty introduced earlier, but for an investor with stochastic differential utility
or recursive preferences, allowing us to disentangle risk aversion and elasticity of intertemporal
substitution even without robustness.        This extension plays an important role in the general
equilibrium asset pricing analysis with distorted beliefs, see, e.g., Li and Liu (2019), Jin and Sui
(2019) and Nagel and Xu (2019) in the case of extrapolative expectations. We show that generalized
robustness has several interesting effects. Not surprisingly, the unconditional increase in effective risk
aversion helps to generate high risk premia and low risk-free rates due to a stronger precautionary
savings motive. This mirrors existing results in the literature for robustness. Additionally, we also
obtain endogenous time-variation in risk premia, with Sharpe ratios and equity premia increasing
in bad times, along with stochastic volatility. Interestingly, Monte Carlo simulations reveal that the
distribution of the state variable is skewed and heavy tailed in bad states of nature, reflecting the
higher instantaneous volatility of beliefs in those states of the world.


Related Literature:    We contribute to several strands of the literature. Our paper builds on the
literature studying pessimistic subjective beliefs such as Hansen and Sargent (2001), Anderson,
Hansen, and Sargent (2003), and Hansen, Sargent, Turmuhambetova, and Williams (2006), among
many others. Different from this literature, which imposes an entropy penalty, we show that for values
of  = 1, we generate time-varying beliefs and risk aversion. Moreover, our model calibration shows
that time-varying pessimism induces rich dynamics in asset prices.
   Two very recent papers consider extensions of entropy-based robustness in portfolio choice.
Chamberlain (forthcoming) offers an excellent survey on empirical methods for robust portfolio
choice as an example of econometric issues in decision making.                 He shows how dynamic
-divergence preferences can be used for purposes of sensitivity analysis when an investor fears
misspecification. -divergence measures nest Cressie-Read divergence measures. Balter, Horvath,
and Maenhout (2019) show that robustness with a Cressie-Read penalty jettisons the intertemporally
myopic behavior of Nature that is imposed by entropy-based robustness. Our work extends theirs by
solving explicitly for optimal portfolio choice and dynamic general equilibrium, as well as calibrating
the model based on empirical estimates of pessimism in survey data.
   A large literature in asset pricing studies time-varying risk aversion. Most prominently, in the
habit models of Constantinides (1990), Detemple and Zapatero (1991), and Campbell and Cochrane
(1999) time-varying risk aversion is tightly linked to the level of consumption relative to its recent past
history. Similarly, Bekaert, Engstrom, and Xing (2009) underscores the importance of time-varying
risk aversion to explain the size of the equity premium, variation in equity returns, and long-horizon
predictability of equity returns. While in these models time-varying risk aversion is exogenously
imposed on the utility function of the representative agent, in our setting, stochastic risk aversion
arises endogenously due to the agent's concern for model misspecification.



                                                    3
      Another related strand of the literature studies Cressie-Read divergence measures to derive and
estimate minimum-dispersion stochastic discount factor (SDF) bounds. In particular, these papers
show duality between the optimal portfolios of asset returns and minimum dispersion SDFs, see, e.g.,
Almeida and Garcia (2017) and Orlowski, Sali, and Trojani (2019). Different from this literature, which
does not impose any preference structure to derive SDFs and does not study optimal portfolios in
general equilibrium, we derive optimal portfolios in a Merton (1969) setting and study the effect of
time-varying risk aversion on equilibrium quantities.
      We also contribute to the empirical literature that extracts proxies of optimism and pessimism
from survey data.      For example, Bhandari, Borovicka, and Ho (2019) also model time-varying
worst-case drift distortions and argue that macroeconomic survey data comes from the worst-case
model. The authors document that US households indeed display pessimism when forecasting
unemployment and inflation. This pessimism is then shown to be a major driver of movements
in macroeconomic aggregates, in particular in the labor market. Szoke (2019) studies an economy
where the agent is concerned about the persistence properties of her baseline model of consumption
and inflation are misspecified. Using survey data on interest rates, he then documents that forecasts
line up with those predicted from the model. Adam, Matveev, and Nagel (2019) ask whether survey
expectations of stock returns reflect ambiguity aversion. To this end, the authors use several different
surveys of individual investors, professional investors, and chief financial officers, and find that
survey forecasts are often overly optimistic, not pessimistic. We extend this literature along several
dimensions. First, we propose a theoretical asset pricing model in which dynamic pessimism is
an endogenous outcome. Second, we estimate such pessimism in the data to inform our model
calibration and we find that our model matches moments in equity markets well.


Outline of the paper:      The rest of the paper is organized as follows.                          Section 1 provides the
theoretical framework and studies the robust utility index. Section 2 examines the partial equilibrium
portfolio problem. Section 3 develops a general equilibrium model with an Epstein and Zin (1989)
representative agent with Cressie-Read generalized robustness. Section 4 estimates empirical proxies
of pessimism that we use in Section 5 for model calibration. Finally, Section 6 concludes. To save
space, we collect all proofs and further technical details in a separate appendix.


1      The Model
1.1     The Cressie-Read Penalty Function

The basis of our analysis is the Cressie-Read cost (or penalty) function. We fix a reference probability
space (, (Ft )t[0,T ] , B) and a standard d-dimensional Brownian motion B B . Given a bounded d-
dimensional vector-valued process u, an alternative model U parameterized by u is defined as follows.
Let
                                             t                        t
                                                 1      2                      B
                           Zt = exp -            2 |us | ds   -           us dBs ,   t  [0, T ],                      (1)
                                         0                        0




                                                              4
be the Radon-Nikodym derivative. Because u is bounded, EB [ZT ] = 1, and we define U via
                                                           dU
                                                                        = ZT .                                             (2)
                                                           dB   FT

For each random outcome   , ZT (w) describes the adjustment of the probability for this outcome
under U compared to B. In particular, for an event A  FT , its probability under U is given by PU (A) =
EB [ZT 1A ]. The larger Z ( ) is, the more weight is put on  under the adjustment. The process Z also
fixes the conditional probabilities. For A  Fs ,

                                       PU (A|Ft ) = EB
                                                     t [Zt,s 1A ],           for any t  s.

      t [·] denotes the conditional expectation E [·|Ft ] and Zt,s = Zs /Zt .
Here EB                                          B

    Given a parameter  > 0 and two positive processes  and , we define the (conditional) Cressie-
Read divergence between U and B on [t, T ] as
                                                                    T
                                                  1 B
                                          U
                                         Rt =      E                    e-(s-t) s dDt,s ,                                  (3)
                                                  t t           t
where  is a constant discount rate,
                                                                    1 -  + z - z 
                         Dt,s = (Zt,s )     and (z ) =                            ,       R \ {0, 1}.                      (4)
                                                                        (1 -  )
Here (·) is the Cressie-Read divergence function (Cressie and Read (1984)). It is convex and satisfies
(1) = 0. For   {0, 1}, the function (z ) is defined as the corresponding limit, with  = 1 being
the Kullback and Leibler (1951) divergence (relative entropy), and  = 0 is known as Burg entropy
(Burg (1972)) The class of Cressie-Read divergence functions also includes several other well-known
cases, e.g.,  = 1/2 corresponds to the Hellinger (1909) distance and  = 2 describes the modified
2 -divergence. Figure 1 plots the Cressie-Read divergence function for a range of different values of 
that we consider in this paper.

                                                  [Insert Figure 1 here]

    In equation (4), Dt,s measures the realized divergence between U and B on [t, s]. Its increment,
Dt,s+s - Dt,s , is weighted by s and discounted, before being integrated. The parameter  describes
the strength of the preference for robustness. As we shall see next,  is chosen to ensure that RU
has a recursive structure and is thus time-consistent. Moreover, the process  is fixed to ensure the
problem remains homothetic and scale-invariant as in Maenhout (2004). In the case when  =  = 1,
we can rewrite equation (3) using integration-by-parts as
                                                     T
                                     1
                                  U
                                 Rt = EB                 e-(s-t) Dt,s ds + e-(T -t) Dt,T .4                                (5)
                                      t          t

When  = 1, RU in (5) is exactly the entropy divergence introduced by Hansen and Sargent (2001).
    The Cressie-Read divergence in (3) may not be time-consistent for arbitrarily chosen t , because
Dt,s depends on t, i.e., the time at which the conditional expectation is computed.                                 For our
applications, we need RU to satisfy a recursive structure. The following lemma characterizes a  that
ensures the desired recursivity.
   4
     Equation (5) shows that it is without loss of generality to restrict alternative models U to be absolutely continuous with
respect to B, otherwise, both Zt,s and Dt,s could be infinite with positive probability, hence RU is ill-defined.


                                                                    5
                   1-                              T
Lemma 1. When t = Zt  and EB                      0    e-s |s |p ds <  for some p > 2, then RU in (3) becomes
                                                               T
                                                1 U
                                         U
                                        Rt =     E                 e-(s-t) s Zs
                                                                               -1
                                                                                  |us |2 ds                         (6)
                                                2 t        t

and it satisfies
                                    ~
                                    t
                                                  1                       ~
                     U
                    Rt = EU
                          t             e-(s-t)         -1
                                                    s Zs   |us |2 ds + e-(t-t) Rt
                                                                                U
                                                                                ~ ,
                                                                                                            ~  t.
                                                                                                    for any t
                                t                 2

   Our construction of RU satisfies Theorem 2 (b) in Maccheroni, Marinacci, and Rustichini (2006b)
                   1 U     t+1 - (s-t)     -1
with t (U) =       2 Et   t   e        s Zs   |us |2 ds             as the one-period-ambiguity index. Theorem 2 in
Maccheroni, Marinacci, and Rustichini (2006b) implies that {Rt
                                                             U
                                                               } is a recursive ambiguity index.
   Equation (6) shows that the Cressie-Read divergence not only depends on the preference
parameter , but also on the state-dependent weight Z -1 when  = 1. Importantly, notice that Z is
the agent's Radon-Nikodym derivative or cumulative distorted belief process. Therefore the Cressie-
Read divergence criterion crucially embeds a nonlinear function Z -1 of the agent's distorted beliefs.
As can easily be seen, when  = 1, the Cressie-Read divergence becomes the entropy divergence
and loses its state-dependence. Beyond the special case of relative entropy, Z therefore matters.
When Z -1 is large for some states, deviating from the reference model B is costly for these states.
This state-dependence of the penalty function is the key driver of our results and represents the
main generalization due to the Cressie-Read specification. We demonstrate below that this is the
mechanism generating endogenous time-variation in risk aversion. In particular, depending on the
sign of ( - 1), the nonlinear function Z -1 of the agent's distorted beliefs either increases or decreases
following a favorable shock, which endogenously affects sentiment and thereby the agent's effective
risk aversion, as well as the instantaneous volatility of the agent's beliefs.
   For the numerical analysis of our portfolio choice and general equilibrium problems we will
consider an approximation of (6)
                                                               T
                                               1 U                             -1
                                         U
                                        Rt =    E                  e-(s-t) s Zs       2
                                                                                 |us | ds ,                         (7)
                                               2 t         t

where 0 < z < z are constants and

                                             = inf {t  0 : Zt  z or Zt  z }.                                        (8)

The interval [z, z ] contains all plausible adjustments, so that Z < z (Z > z ) is regarded as unreasonably
underweighted (overweighted) in our model. The constant z (z ) is fixed to be sufficiently close to zero
(large) so that only extreme weights are excluded and the probability of  < T can be made arbitrarily
small. When t >  ,
                                                    -1                  T
                                                  Z
                                          U
                                         Rt =          EU                   e-(s-t) s |us |2 ds ,
                                                   2 t              t
                                                                                        1-
which can be viewed as an entropy penalty, but with preference for robustness given by Z   rather
than by . This specification helps to pin down boundary conditions for portfolio choice and general
equilibrium problems studied later.


                                                                        6
1.2      The Utility Index Process with Generalized Robustness:                                  Understanding the
         Mechanism

The main mechanism generating dynamic pessimism and belief- and state-dependent effective risk
aversion that drive the key results in the paper can already be understood from an analysis of the
utility index process.
       To this end, consider a consumption process c and an intertemporal utility function U . We then
define a utility index U c for c as
                                                 T
                          Utc = inf EU
                                     t               e-(s-t) U (cs )ds + Rt
                                                                          U
                                                                            + e-(T -t) U (cT ) ,                     (9)
                                 u           t

where U , with a positive constant , is the bequest utility and RU is given in (7). The utility index
reflects the alternative measure U, based on an endogenous belief distortion u. The infimization
with respect to u addresses the agent's concern of model misspecification and the role of {Rt
                                                                                            U
                                                                                              } is
to constrain the choice of u by penalizing distortions that are too large and deemed unreasonable.
       In order to derive the dynamics of U c and the associated optimal measure U, consider now for any
fixed u the associated utility index
                                             T
                           Utc,u = EU
                                    t            e-(s-t) U (cs )ds + Rt
                                                                      U
                                                                        + e-(T -t) U (cT ) .
                                         t

The martingale representation theorem ensures the existence of a vector-valued process  such that

                                                                       -1
                      dUtc,u =  Utc,u - U (ct ) dt -             1
                                                                 2 t Zt |ut |
                                                                              2                   B
                                                                                  - t ut dt + t dBt .

                                                    c,u
Because U c,u is subject to the terminal condition UT   = U (cT ), U c,u satisfies a backward stochastic
differential equation (BSDE). The comparison theorem for BSDEs of El Karoui, Peng, and Quenez
(1997) implies that Utc = inf u Utc,u satisfies

                                                             -1
              dUtc =  Utc - U (ct ) dt - inf           1
                                                       2 t Zt |ut |
                                                                   2                      B
                                                                          - t ut dt + t dBt ,    c
                                                                                                UT = U (cT ).       (10)
                                                 u

The first-order condition in u yields the optimal distortion

                                                                      t
                                                          ut =       -1    .                                        (11)
                                                                 t Zt

Finally, combining (10) and (11), we get that

                                                           1
                     dUtc =  U c - U (ct ) +                        2         B
                                                             -1 |t | dt + t dBt ,
                                                                                         c
                                                                                        UT = U (cT ).               (12)
                                                       2 t Zt

This is a so-called quadratic BSDE and can be seen as a new form of generalized stochastic differential
utility introduced by Lazrak and Quenez (2003). When U (c) is bounded and  is bounded away from
zero, existence and uniqueness of U c is ensured by Kobylanski (2000).5
   5
    The boundedness assumption is not generally satisfied in our portfolio and general equilibrium problems. Existence of
the generalized stochastic differential utility is treated individually there.




                                                                 7
      In the terminology of Duffie and Epstein (1992), |t |2 enters the utility index via a variance
multiplier, which represents a utility penalty as a multiple of the utility volatility. This can be seen
from the integral form of (12)
                                                      T                              T
                          - (T -t)                                                                     1
               Utc = EU
                      t e          U (cT ) +              e-(s-t) U (cs ) ds -           e-(s-t)                2
                                                                                                         -1 |s | ds ,     (13)
                                                  t                              t                 2 s Zs 

                                                                                        1
where the penalty is determined by the variance multiplier                           2 Z -1 .      Economically speaking, this
factor captures risk aversion, i.e. the desire to smooth across states of nature. The Cressie-Read
generalization of robustness makes this variance multiplier belief-dependent and state-dependent,
through Z -1 . To build intuition, we discuss the properties of U c in the following proposition.

Proposition 1.

  1. If Z -1  Z -1 , then U c  U c .

  2. A component of u is positive if and only if the corresponding component of  is positive. For a
        fixed and positive , all components of u decrease as Z -1 increases.

  3. When a component of u is positive, positive shocks to the corresponding component in B B
        decrease Z , hence increase Z -1 when  < 1, or decrease Z -1 when  > 1.

      The first result in the proposition shows that larger Z -1 implies a smaller variance multiplier
and therefore an increase in the agent's utility. As discussed before, Z -1 is the nonlinear function
of the agent's distorted belief that introduces time-varying pessimism. To illustrate the intuition, let
us focus on a 1-dimensional case, i.e., d = 1. To see how we can interpret this as pessimism, we
notice from the second result that the optimal distortion u is positive when  is positive.6 Under U,
  B
dBt = -u                                                       
        t dt + dBt where B is a Brownian motion under U. When u > 0, the expected growth
                 U        U

rate of B B under U is underestimated relative to the growth rate under B. Therefore, the agent with
subjective belief U is pessimistic compared to the reference model B.
      The third result explains how the dynamics of fundamental shocks affect the distorted belief,
which in turn affects the variance multiplier, risk aversion, and the volatility of log(Z ). Importantly,
the effect crucially depends on whether  is greater than or smaller than 1. Consider  < 1. Positive
fundamental shocks to B B increase Z -1 due to the third result. This decreases the variance multiplier
   1
2 Z -1 ,    and thereby lowers the agent's risk aversion as well. Furthermore, by the second result, the
instantaneous optimal u decreases following increasing Z -1 , making the agent less pessimistic
following positive fundamental shocks to B B . From (1), we see that u is also the volatility of the
(log) belief distortion log(Z ). Therefore, another effect of the positive fundamental shock is to reduce
the volatility of log(Z ). On the other hand, negative fundamental shocks to B B decrease Z -1 and
hence increase u , which exacerbates the agent's pessimism and also increases the volatility of log(Z ).
Generalized robustness based on Cressie-Read divergence with  < 1 can therefore be seen as
endogenously generating expectation and belief dynamics that resemble diagnostic expectations
Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2018) or extrapolative expectations, where agents extrapolate from
  6
       is shown to be positive in our applications later.


                                                                   8
recent experience when forming expectations, see, e.g., Hong and Stein (1999), Barberis, Greenwood,
Jin, and Shleifer (2015), Barberis (2018), Jin and Sui (2019), Li and Liu (2019), and Nagel and Xu (2019).
   In contrast, when  > 1, the agent can be labeled contrarian. Positive shocks to fundamentals B B
decrease Z -1 , hence increases u , i.e., the agent becomes more pessimistic after positive shocks to
fundamentals, while negative fundamental shocks tend to reduce pessimism.
   In our applications, we use survey data to investigate empirically how pessimism evolves over the
business cycle. Recall that  < 1 leads to countercyclical risk aversion, pessimism, and volatility of
beliefs, whereas  > 1 is associated with procyclical risk aversion, pessimism, and belief volatility.
Table 1 summarizes these results.

                                                    [Insert Table 1 here]


Example:    The intuition discussed above can be illustrated by the following simplified two-stage
example, which allows for an explicit closed-form solution of the BSDE. The first stage is from time 0
to 1; the second stage is from time 1 to 2. Set  =  = 1 and  = 0 in (7). To focus on the intuition,
we also set z = 0 and z =  so that  = . The agent freezes Z -1 in both stages and only updates
                           -1     -1                   -1     -1
it at time 1. Therefore, Zt   = Z0   when t  [0, 1); Zt   = Z1   when t  [1, 2]. This leads to the
following Cressie-Read penalty function
                                                1                           2
                                                    1  -1                       1  -1
                             U
                            R0 = EU                  Z    |us |2 ds +            Z    |us |2 ds .           (14)
                                            0       2 0                 1       2 1

Comparing (14) to (6) with  = 1 therein, we can view (14) as a combination of two entropy
                                                                                                    -1
divergences with different  in different stages. In the first stage,  in (6) can be identified as Z0   = 1;
                                             -1
in the second stage,  can be identified as Z1   . There is no intertemporal utility and the agent
consumes only at time 2, where the utility of consumption is U (c2 ) = B2
                                                                        B
                                                                          .
   In this case, the BSDE given in (12) simplifies to

                                dUtc =             1 2          B
                                                   2 t dt + t dBt ,              t  [0, 1),
                                                1 1- 2
                                dUtc   =        2 Z1   t dt + t dBt B
                                                                      ,          t  [1, 2],

                         c = B B . This BSDE has the following explicit solution
with terminal condition U2    2

                                           1-
                   Utc =             B
                                    Bt -1
                                        2 Z1  (2 - t),                              t = 1,     t  [1, 2],
                               -       1
                                            (1- )(1-t)     1-
                   Utc = Bt
                          B
                            -1
                             2e
                                       2                  Zt  -1
                                                               2 (1 - t), t = 1,               t  [0, 1).

From (11), the optimal distortion is

                                                    ut =1,   t  [0, 1),
                                                         1-
                                                                                                            (15)
                                                    ut =Z1  ,     t  [1, 2].

   This shows that u is positive in this case. From the explicit solution we can make the following two
observations when  < 1 (all effects are reversed when  > 1): First, a positive shock to B1
                                                                                         B
                                                                                           decreases
             1-
Z1 and also Z1  (as  < 1). Therefore, a positive shock to B1
                                                           B
                                                             decreases u in the second stage; in other


                                                              9
words, the agent becomes less pessimistic following positive shocks. Second, Z is a state variable for
the utility process when  = 1. The utility does not depend on this state variable when  = 1.
      In summary, we can think of the Cressie-Read divergence as a collection of entropy divergence
functions with a dynamic belief- and state-dependent weight Z -1 . This dynamic weight depends
endogenously on the optimal u . When  < 1, the weight increases when fundamentals improve,
making the agent less pessimistic.
      One way of understanding the intuition behind the effects at work is to view the Cressie-Read
penalty function as reflecting a preference of Nature (in this case the fictitious malevolent agent
in the max-min expected utility interpretation) for intertemporal smoothing of the process for the
instantaneous distortions u . The smaller  , the stronger the preference for intertemporal smoothing,
such that the decision-maker naturally expects more adverse distortions from Nature in bad times
and less adverse distortions in good times. Loosely speaking, when  < 1, the agent's subjective
beliefs exhibit "momentum-like" dynamics, and pessimism gets worse in bad times, while beliefs
improve following positive shocks.
      In contrast, when  > 1, Nature does not have a preference for intertemporal smoothing of the
distortions. In this case, the agent expects less adverse distortions in bad times and more adverse
distortions following positive shocks. In some sense, the agent could be seen as interpreting a recent
adverse shock as disguising an adverse distortion u and as thinking that "lightning never strikes
twice" i.e., if Nature has just used its ammunition in hitting the agent with a negative shock, it will
not do so again immediately. Put differently, now the agent's subjective beliefs exhibit reversal-like
dynamics.
      The knife-edge case of  = 1 corresponds to the case where Nature allocates distortions
myopically, so that market conditions have no impact on the distortion. The agent's belief distortion
state variable Z becomes irrelevant and pessimism is now state-independent. This is the case of
entropy. As shown in Balter, Horvath, and Maenhout (2019) the entropy penalty greatly simplifies the
analysis by reducing the general Cressie-Read power function to its logarithmic limit, which makes
Nature behave myopically. In the following portfolio choice problem, our primary focus is on  < 1,
however, we also compare it to the case where  > 1.


2      Portfolio Choice

Before solving for asset prices in equilibrium, we build intuition in a partial equilibrium setting in the
context of optimal portfolio choice.

2.1     The Consumption and Portfolio Choice Problem

Consider a capital market with a risk-free bond with a constant interest rate r and d risky assets whose
prices follow
                                                               B
                                       dSt = diag(St )(µdt + dBt ),

where µ is a constant d-dimensional vector representing expected returns,  is a constant d × d-
matrix describing the return volatilities, and diag(S ) is a d-dimensional diagonal matrix with elements


                                                   10
{S 1 , . . . , S d }.
        When the agent invests her wealth in the risky assets based on a vector of portfolio weights  and
consumes at a rate c, her wealth evolves according to the following stochastic differential equation

                                                                                     B
                                           dWt = rWt + Wt t (µ - r) - ct dt + Wt t dBt .                                   (16)

The agent chooses her optimal strategy (, c) to maximize the expected utility of consumption
plus the Cressie-Read cost, but Nature chooses u to minimize the same objective function. The
optimization problem is a stochastic differential game
                                                               T
                                       inf sup EU
                                                t                  e-(s-t) U (cs )ds + e-(T -t) U (cT ) + Rt ,             (17)
                                       u   ,c              t

where R is given in (7). Here, for both intertemporal and bequest utility, we choose isoelastic or CRRA
                        c1-
utility U (c) =         1-    with coefficient of relative risk aversion 0 <  = 1.7 We denote the optimal value in
(17) by Vt .
        To maintain homotheticity and scale-invariance of the problem (17), we follow Maenhout (2004)
and choose
                                                                          = (1 -  )V.                                      (18)

Then problem (17) can be transformed to
                                                 T
                                                                               1-      -1
                   Vt = inf sup EU
                                 t                   e-(s-t) U (cs ) +            Vs Zs       2
                                                                                         |us | ds + e
                                                                                                     - (T -t)
                                                                                                              U (cT ) ,    (19)
                              u   ,c         t                                  2

where  is the stopping time from (8). Because the value V shows up on both sides of (19), it can be
considered as an optimization problem for a (generalized) stochastic differential utility.

2.2        A Two-Stage Example

To understand the impact of the Cressie-Read penalty on the agent's portfolio choice, we again
consider a simplified two-stage problem: stage 1 starts from time 0 and ends at time 1, stage 2 starts
from time 1 until . The agent freezes Z in both stages and only updates Z at time 1. Then the agent
chooses the initial u0 at time 0 and keeps it constant until time 1. At time 1, the agent updates it to u1
and then keeps it constant forever. Similar to the two-stage problem discussed in Section 1.2, we set
z = 0 and z =  so that  = .
        We solve the two-stage problem by backward induction. In the second stage, the agent's optimal
consumption and investment problem is
                                                           
                                                                                       1-       -1
                          Vt = inf sup EU
                                        t                          e-(s-t) U (cs ) +    2 V s Z1   |u1 |2   ds ,   t  1,   (20)
                                   u1 ,c               t

subject to (16).
        In the problem above, the agent does not update her belief after time 1. The process Z in the
Cressie-Read cost function is frozen at Z1 . Problem (20) is equivalent to Maenhout (2004) for an
    7
        The case of log utility is discussed in Appendix B.



                                                                               11
                                                           1-
entropy penalty, but with robustness preference parameter Z1  instead of . The reason for the
equivalence is that even though u is allowed to be stochastic there, and not fixed as here, the optimal
u turns out to be constant. Defining  =  , the optimal portfolio weight and belief distortion are
                                                      µ-r  1
                                               1 =           1- ,                                       (21)
                                                         + Z1

                                                      µ-r  
                                               u1 =        -    .                                       (22)
                                                        Z1 1 + 
                                                          

                                                                       1-
   We can see from (21) that the agent's implicit risk aversion is  + Z1  , where Z1 = exp(- 1      2
                                                                                             2 |u0 | -
    B
u0 B1 ). Suppose that u0 > 0, we first consider the case  < 1. After positive return shocks to B1
                                                                                                B
                                                                                                  , Z1
                  1-
decreases, hence Z1  decreases as well (due to  < 1). As a result, the agent's implicit risk aversion
    1-
 + Z1  decreases, which in turn increases the agent's optimal portfolio weight 1 . Meanwhile, the
agent's belief distortion u1 decreases, generating a less pessimistic expected return µ - u1 under the
subjective measure U. In summary, after a favorable return shock, the agent becomes less pessimistic
and less risk-averse. Negative return shocks lead to the opposite phenomenon: the investor becomes
more pessimistic and more risk-averse.
                                            1-
   Under extremely good market conditions, Z1  tends to zero in the limit. The agent's effective
risk aversion gets close to its minimal value  and the optimal u1 converges to 0. This implies that
the agent is no longer pessimistic in the limit. This can also be seen from (20) where the Cressie-
                                                                              -1
Read penalty becomes extremely large for nonzero u, due to the large weight Z1   , so that it is very
costly for the agent to deviate from the reference measure B. Under extremely unfavorable market
             1-
conditions, Z1  explodes to infinity, resulting in an infinitely risk-averse investor who completely
                                                  µ-r
shuns the risky asset. In this case u1 =            ,   which means the equity premium is zero under the
agent's extremely pessimistic subjective view.
                                                                               1-
   When  > 1, but u0 is still positive, the agent's implicit risk aversion  + Z1  increases after
positive return shocks, with the investor reducing her portfolio weight in the risky asset. Meanwhile,
u1 increases and the agent becomes more pessimistic after positive return shocks.
   We calculate the value for the agent at time 1 to be
                                                        1-
                                                       W1        1-
                                                V1 =       ef1 (Z1 ) ,
                                                       1-

where
                     1-                 1                             - 1 (µ - r)2    1
                f1 (Z1  ) =  log(  ) -  log  + ( - 1)r +                                1- .
                                                                      2             + Z1
   Now we turn to the agent's problem in the first stage. Given the agent's continuation utility V1 , the
agent's problem in the first stage is
                       1
                                              1-       -1                    W 1-     1-
 Vt = inf sup EU
               t           e-(s-t) u(cs ) +      V s Z0   |u0 |2 ds + e-(1-t) 1 ef1 (Z1 ) ,    0  t  1. (23)
        u0 ,c      t                           2                             1-
       -1              1-                                                   1-
Here Z0   = 1 and f1 (Z1  ) indicates the dependence of the constant f1 on Z1  . If  = 1, the
continuation utility is state-independent, then problem (23) is again equivalent to a problem with


                                                          12
the entropy cost and the optimal solution is myopic. When  = 1, the continuation utility is state-
dependent, making problem (23) state-dependent as well. The agent has an intertemporal hedging
demand in the first stage against market condition fluctuation and her changing belief at time 1.
      The intuition gained from this two-stage model survives in the fully dynamic model developed in
the next subsection.

2.3      Dynamic Optimal Consumption and Portfolio Choice

We have seen that Z should be the state variable for the problem (19). For ease of interpretation and
exposition we now introduce a monotone transformation

                                                        xt = - log Zt .                                        (24)

We call x the market sentiment variable and take it as the state variable for problem (19). Because of
(1) the dynamics of x are described by the following stochastic differential equation
                                          1
                                    dxt = 2 |ut |2 dt + ut dBt
                                                             B
                                                               = -1      2          U
                                                                  2 |ut | dt + ut dBt .                        (25)

We put a negative sign on the right-hand side of (24) so that positive fundamental shocks to B B
increase the market sentiment variable x, when u is a vector with positive components.8 The stopping
time  in (8) is reformulated as  = inf {t  0 : xt  x or xt  x}, where x = - log z and x = - log z .
      The choice of  ensures the following decomposition of the optimal value function

                                                             Wt1- f (t,xt )
                                                      Vt =       e          .                                  (26)
                                                             1-
We obtain the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation satisfied by f using dynamic programming
and summarize the agent's optimal investment and consumption strategies in proposition 2.

Proposition 2. When   (0, 1), the function f defined in (26) satisfies

                0 = inf sup t f + 1    2 2
                                  2 |u| xx f - x f + (x f )
                                                           2
                                                                                ~1- e-f
                                                             + (1 -  )x f  u +  c
                      u   ,c
                           ~
                                                                                                               (27)
                                                                                          1- (1- )x
                                                            ~- 1
                               + (1 -  ) r +  (µ - r - u) - c  2   -  +                    2 e      |u|2   ,

for (t, x)  [0, T ) × (x, x), with the boundary conditions
                                       ent                    ent
                           f (t, x) = fx   (t),   f (t, x) = fx   (t),     and   f (T, x) = log .              (28)

When  > 1, the infimum and supremum in (27) are changed to supu inf ,c
                                                                     ~. If  =  is positive
             2 f -  f + ( f )2 +              1- (1- )x
definite and xx    x     x                      e            > 0 when   (0, 1) (resp. < 0 when  > 1), for any
(t, x)  [0, T ) × (x, x), then the agent's optimal belief and strategies are given by
                                         1 -1
                                      =        µ - r - (1 - x f )u ,                                           (29)
                                         
                                                 (1 -  )(1 - x f )
                                     u =                                  ,                                    (30)
                                          2 f -  f + ( f )2 + 1- e(1- )x
                                         xx      x      x         
                                                  1
                                     ~ =   e-  f .
                                     c                                                                         (31)
  8
      As we see later, u has positive components in our applications.


                                                                13
              ent
The function fx   in (28) is the value for the problem with an entropy penalty and the robustness
parameter e(-1)x , as specified in Proposition 5 in Appendix A.

   The optimal portfolio weight in (29) generalizes our finding for the two-stage example, and shows
the impact of the Cressie-Read penalty function. Without a preference for robustness, CRRA utility
as well as Epstein-Zin preferences in combination with i.i.d. returns lead to the well-known myopic
portfolio, as first shown by Samuelson (1969) and Merton (1969), namely   =             1 -1
                                                                                          (µ    - r). For
entropy-based robustness, the main effect in this context is to increase the effective risk aversion,
replacing  by  +  (Maenhout (2004)). We obtain two important new effects by considering
the Cressie-Read penalty function. First, the investor anticipates future changes in beliefs and
the corresponding changes in perceived investment opportunities. This induces a Merton-type
                                                                        1 -1   
intertemporal hedging demand, which is captured by the term               x f u ,    added to the mean-
                           1 -1
variance optimal portfolio   (µ - r - u ) under U. Second, importantly, effective risk aversion
becomes belief- and state-dependent, driven by the endogenous sentiment state variable. Combining
(29) and (30), we obtain

                    1 -1                                       (1 -  )(1 - x f )2
               =          (µ - r),     where  eff =  +                                                (32)
                     eff                                 2 f -  f + ( f )2 + 1- e(1- )x
                                                         xx     x      x        

which represents the investor's effective risk aversion. This effective risk aversion is belief- and state-
dependent, in line with the discussion of the BSDE for the utility index process in section 1.2 earlier.
   We now study the optimal portfolio weight in more detail numerically. We numerically solve
the HJB equation (27) together with the associated boundary conditions (28) using finite difference
methods with implicit schemes. We focus on a single risky asset (d = 1) and use the parameters listed
in Table 2.

                                          [Insert Table 2 here]

   We start by considering a short horizon T of one year in order to focus on the effect of the
Cressie-Read penalty on the myopic portfolio component. Following the logic above, we expect
a portfolio allocation close to the entropy case when the state variable x equals 0. In the limit
when the investor's horizon shrinks to zero, the intertemporal hedging component vanishes and only
the myopic component remains. When the sentiment state variable x is zero, Figure 2 shows that
generalized robustness with Cressie-Read divergence produces the same optimal distortion u and
the same portfolio weight   , for any value of  . This corresponds to what we find in the second stage
of the two-stage example with Z = 1 for u1 in (22) and for 1 in (21). Figure 2 panel (a) illustrates
the effects when both risk aversion,  , and preference for robustness, , are set to 2. To put the
quantitative results in perspective, assuming an equity premium of µ - r = 0.07 and volatility  = 0.2,
CRRA expected utility ( = 0) generates a portfolio weight  = 0.775. Entropy-based robustness
( = 1) reduces this equity allocation to exactly half, reflecting a pessimistically distorted belief that
the equity premium is half its observed value.

                                     [Insert Figures 2, 3 and 4 here]


                                                    14
   For  < 1, when x increases and sentiment improves, effective risk aversion shrinks, as discussed
above. Moreover, risk aversion shrinks faster the smaller is  , which explains the steeper slope for
 = 0 than for  = 0.5. When  > 1, on the other hand, risk aversion is procyclical, as is apparent
from the negatively sloped portfolio rule for  = 1.5 and a fortiori for  = 2. All optimal portfolio
allocations are supported by the optimal distortions in the left panels of Figure 2. The larger the
optimal distortion, the more pessimistic the agent's subjective beliefs and therefore the more cautious
the corresponding portfolio allocation.
   For higher risk aversion and robustness parameters  =  = 5, the effects and patterns remain
the same as illustrated in Figure 2 panel (b). As can be shown analytically for the entropy case, and
as argued in the two-stage example in (22), the optimal distortion does not change when both  and
 increase by the same factor. This explains why the left panel is unchanged compared to the left
panel in panel (a). The portfolio allocation, however, is evidently shifted down when risk aversion and
preference for robustness both increase. It is interesting to also study the implications of an increase
in the robustness parameter  without changing risk aversion  . Figure 2 panel (c) demonstrates that
the optimal distortion increases and as a result the portfolio allocation shrinks.
   We now turn to a long horizon with T up to 100 years in order to study intertemporal hedging
and resulting horizon effects. The seminal work of Merton (1973) explains how non-myopic investors
tilt their portfolio in order to hedge against future changes in the investment opportunity set. For
example, if returns on a risky asset are contemporaneously negatively correlated with expected
returns on that asset, it becomes less risky to hold over longer horizons, inducing investors with
longer horizons to increase their holdings. Despite returns being i.i.d. in our setting, so that expected
returns are constant, intertemporal hedging appears because of the investor's distorted beliefs. Even
though expected returns are constant under the reference measure B, they are not constant under
U when  = 1. In particular, because of time-varying sentiment, belief distortion u reacts to return
innovations. When pessimism is countercyclical ( < 1), positive return shocks are associated with
improvements in sentiment, which reduces pessimism and increases the expected return on the risky
asset. In other words, for  < 1, returns and expected returns under U are positively correlated, which
leads to negative intertemporal hedging demands that grow with the horizon. This effect is clear and
quite pronounced in Figure 3 for  = 0.5, and especially for  = 0 (Note that all results are reported
for x = 0). With the same logic, and remembering that for  > 1 an increase in the state variable x as a
result of a positive return shock leads to an increase in the optimal distortion (see left panel of Figure
3) and therefore a reduction in the (distorted) expected return, we now have a negative correlation
between returns and expected returns. This explains the positive intertemporal hedging demand for
 > 1, which naturally grows with the horizon. The fact that the hedging demand is negative for  < 1
can also be understood from (29), by observing numerically that the partial derivative x f < 0 for
 < 1, and vice versa for  > 1.
   Figure 4 reports the economically relevant range of the sentiment variable. The top left panel
presents the distribution of the sentiment variable at 30 years. The distribution displays a heavy
left tail which reflects increased sentiment volatility in an adverse market environment (see Table
1). All other panels in Figure 4 are centered at the mean of sentiment and range from two standard



                                                   15
deviations below to two standard deviations above.


3         General Equilibrium

We now extend our analysis to equilibrium asset pricing. To this end, we consider an economy with a
single Lucas tree. Its dividend, which must be consumed by the representative agent, is given by the
following dynamics
                                                        dct
                                                            = µc dt +  c dBt
                                                                           B
                                                                             ,                                       (33)
                                                        ct
where µc and  c are constants. We first establish the equilibrium price P of this Lucas tree, which
follows
                                                  dPt + ct dt
                                                              = µP      P   B
                                                                 t dt + t dBt .                                      (34)
                                                      Pt
The expected return µP , the volatility  P , and the interest rate r will be determined endogenously. We
take x as the state variable and conjecture µP ,  P and r are all functions of time and the state.
         Given P and r, the representative agent, with generalized robustness based on a Cressie-Read
penalty, invests and consumes with the optimal investment strategy   and the optimal consumption
strategy c . In an attempt to match empirical asset pricing evidence quantitatively, we extend our
earlier analysis and endow the representative agent with Epstein-Zin preferences in addition to
Cressie-Read generalized robustness.9 We denote the agent's elasticity of intertemporal substitution
                                      1-
by 0 <  = 1 and define  =             1- 1   .

Definition 1. (r, µP ,  P ,   , c ) is an equilibrium if

     1. The financial market clears, i.e.,    1;

     2. the aggregate resource constraint holds, i.e., c  c.

         We can now calculate equilibrium quantities which are presented in the following proposition.

Proposition 3. Let f be a solution of the following equation

                                         2
                           0 =t f + 1
                                    2 |u | xx f - x f +  (x f )
                                                               2
                                                                 + (1 -  )x f u  c -  

                                                                                 
                                                                                                                     (35)
                                    1-                              -f                 1- (1- )x  2
                                +        µc - u  c - 2
                                                     1
                                                        ( c )2 +    e  +               2 e      |u | ,

for (t, x)  [0, T ) × (x, x), with boundary conditions

                                             ent                      ent
                                 f (t, x) = Fx   (t),     f (t, x) = Fx   (t),      f (T, x) = log .                 (36)

Moreover u in (35) is given by

                                                       (1 -  )(1 - x f ) c
                                         u =                                     .                                   (37)
                                                 2 f -  f +  ( f )2 + 1- e(1- )x
                                                 xx     x        x         
     9
         The details of the preferences and the associated optimal consumption-investment problem can be found in Appendix
A.



                                                                 16
          ent
In (36), Fx   is the value in an equilibrium where the representative agent has an entropy-based
preference for robustness with robustness parameter e(-1)x and Fx
                                                                ent
                                                                    satisfies an ODE in (A.18). Then
the equilibrium expected return, volatility, and risk-free interest rate are given by

                                 µP - r =  eff ( P )2 ,                                                                 (38)
                                                          
                                         P
                                             =    +c
                                                     x f u ,                                                            (39)
                                                   1 c   1 ent            1     c 2
                                         r =     +  µ -2             1+       ( ) + DA,                                 (40)

where
                                                       (1 -  )(1 - x f )2
                                    eff =  +
                                                 2 f -  f + ( f )2 + 1- e(1- )x
                                                 xx     x      x        
is the effective state-dependent risk aversion and  ent =  + e(-1)x is the effective risk aversion in the
entropy case with the parameter for robustness frozen at e(-1)x . DA is the dynamic adjustment,
                                                                 c
                                 DA = -  dyn ( c )2 +      x f u       + (1 - 1
                                                                                )udyn  c
                                                       2
                                         +    
                                               x f + 2 2 1 -  - 2
                                                                     imp
                                                                          (x f )2     |u |2
                                                1
                                             1-   (1- )x
                                         -    2 e        2uent udyn + (udyn )2 ,

where

                                          eff = ent +  dyn ,
                                         u =uent + udyn = e(-1)x  c + udyn .

    The equilibrium equity premium in (38) is given by a Consumption CAPM relationship, where
the key innovation is the time-varying price of risk.  eff is precisely the belief- and state-dependent
effective risk aversion that determines the optimal portfolios in the partial-equilibrium analysis. The
term simplifies to  when the agent has no preference for robustness ( = 0) and becomes  + 
when  = 1, i.e. in the entropy case, since all spatial derivatives are zero in this case. Generalized
robustness instead allows us to produce rich dynamics, despite the extremely stylized and simple
underlying dynamics in this lognormal i.i.d. economy. Applying the insights from Table 1, we expect
a countercyclical price of risk for  < 1, since this is the situation where the investor's risk aversion is
countercyclical, due to increases in pessimism following adverse shocks. This mechanism is driven
entirely by time-varying pessimism and the stochastic beliefs it generates endogenously. The increase
in risk aversion in bad states of nature bears some resemblance to models of habit formation such as
Campbell and Cochrane (1999).
    The second key contribution of generalized robustness to equilibrium asset pricing is that we
obtain excess volatility, driven by time-varying sentiment. With entropy,  P =  c and the well-known
excess volatility puzzle emerges, as is common in standard asset pricing models with lognormal
dynamics. Inspection of equation (39) reveals that our model is able to generate excess volatility
when 1
       x f > 0 given that u > 0. For  < 1, which is needed for a countercyclical price of risk,
x f < 0, so that  < 0 (or  > 1 when  > 1) is required. This explains why we extended our
analysis to Epstein-Zin preferences, as clearly this condition would be violated for CRRA utility.10 It
  10
     The necessity of Epstein-Zin preferences was also pointed out by Jin and Sui (2019) in their model of asset pricing with
extrapolative expectations. These preference parameter restrictions are also common in the long-run-risk literature.


                                                               17
is also intuitive that the excess volatility generated in our model is proportional to u , since this is
the instantaneous volatility of the (log) state variable Z capturing belief distortions. Because u is
stochastic and increases in bad times, we also expect equilibrium stock price volatility to be stochastic
and to increase in bad times, although this cannot be concluded decisively from (39) without solving
the PDE for f .
     Finally, for the equilibrium risk-free rate we present a decomposition to facilitate comparison
with existing results in the literature so as to flesh out our contributions most clearly. We find that
Cressie-Read generalized robustness adds a rich dynamic adjustment to the equilibrium risk-free rate
that obtains in an economy with entropy-based robustness. The first three terms in (40) represent
the effect of the usual determinants of savings behavior on equilibrium interest rates, namely the
rate of time preference  , intertemporal substitution based on the investor's EIS  and expected
consumption growth µc , and precautionary savings. Our Cressie-Read robustness adds a dynamic
adjustment to these standard determinants. These additional terms are all related to precautionary
savings reflecting the higher effective risk aversion and the higher volatility in the economy due to
time-varying sentiment. For the entropy case with the parameter for robustness set to e(-1)x , all
these additional terms vanish because udyn =  dyn = x f = 0, reduces (40) exactly to the case in
Maenhout (2004). Signing the additional terms requires solving the HJB (35), which we do in the
calibration later.
     Before turning to the calibration, we show how to use these equilibrium results to price the
stock market, i.e., a risky asset with dividends that are not necessarily perfectly correlated with the
representative agent's consumption. Consider dividend dynamics given by

                                   dDt                                       
                                       = µD dt +  D (dBt
                                                       B
                                                         +           1 - 2 dBt ),                        (41)
                                   Dt

where µD and  D are constants representing the dividend growth rate and volatility respectively, and
B  is a Brownian motion independent of B B . The constant  is the instantaneous correlation between
consumption growth and the dividend growth.
     We consider the stock as an asset in zero net supply with a shadow price determined in
equilibrium. To find its equilibrium (shadow) price, we first identify the state price density M for
the representative agent. Because markets are complete, M follows a stochastic differential equation
of the form
                                       dMt                U
                                           = -rt dt - t dBt ,        M0 = 1,                             (42)
                                       Mt
where r is the equilibrium risk-free rate in the Lucas tree economy. To determine the market price of
                                                                                       t
risk  , the sum of discounted wealth and consumption (i.e. the process Mt Wt +        0 cs Ms ds)   must be a
P -martingale. This leads to the following market price of risk
 U



                                                      t = t - ut .                                       (43)

              µP
               t -rt
where t =       tP     is the equilibrium Sharpe ratio of the Lucas tree. Combining (42) and (43), we have

                                               t
                                    Mt = e -   0
                                                   rs ds
                                                           E -             U
                                                                  s - us dBs ,                           (44)
                                                                               t



                                                             18
                                              t 1    2               t
where E -             U
                  s dBs   t
                              = exp -        0 2 |s | ds   -              U
                                                                    0 s dBs      is a stochastic exponential. Define a measure
Q via
                                             dQ                                      U
                                                         =E -               s - us dBs               T
                                                                                                         .
                                             dPU    FT

Then B Q , defined via
                                                               t                                 t
                                          Q    U                                B
                                         Bt = Bt +                 s - us ds = Bt +                  s ds,
                                                           0                                 0
is a Brownian motion under Q. The previous dynamics indicate that Q is the risk-neutral measure.
   Using the state price density, the stock can be priced as follows
                                                                            T
                                                           1 U
                                                   St =      E                  Ms Ds ds .                                (45)
                                                           Mt t         t

Suppose that S follows the dynamics

                                         dSt + Dt dt                   S,  
                                                     = µS      S   B
                                                        t dt + t dBt + t dBt .                                            (46)
                                             St
Define = S/D as the price-dividend ratio. The following result presents the equilibrium stock return
and volatility.

Proposition 4. Let be the solution to the following equation
                 1           1 2
              t + |u |2 xx
                        2
                           +   |u | - u  +  D u x + µD -  D  - r                                             + 1 = 0,     (47)
                 2           2
with the terminal condition (T, ·)  0 and u coming from (37). Then

                                     t     1     2    1      x              x  1
                              µS
                               t =        + |u |2 xx + |u |2   + µD + u  D    + ,
                                           2          2
                                         x                                                                                (48)
                              S
                              t =u           + ,
                          S,
                          t  =            1 - 2 .

Moreover, the following CAPM relation is satisfied:

                                                           µS          S
                                                            t = rt + t  .


   The results are intuitive and extend our earlier findings to the case of an asset that pays dividends
that are less than perfectly correlated with the consumption stream of the representative agent. The
risk premium on the stock is given by the standard Consumption CAPM, but with a time-varying price
of risk generated by our model. We also obtain excess volatility. Without robustness consideration or
with entropy-based robustness, the price-dividend ratio is trivially constant in a lognormal economy,
resulting in the equilibrium stock volatility being equal to the dividend volatility. The Cressie-
Read divergence measure injects time-varying pessimism, inducing a dynamic price-dividend ratio.
Equation (48) shows that excess volatility emerges when the price-dividend ratio is procyclical. This
condition will be verified numerically in our model calibration later for the case  < 1.




                                                                       19
4         Estimating Pessimism

In the following, we estimate a measure of time-varying sentiment from the data. In particular, we
would like a proxy for the time variation in the worst-case drift distortion. To measure subjective
beliefs, we make use of an extensive survey on several macroeconomic quantities. In addition to
subjective beliefs, we also need a measure of objective beliefs since the wedge between the subjective
and objective beliefs will help us back out the optimal distortion. Objective beliefs are calculated from
a vector autoregression (VAR) from which we infer realized macroeconomic variables.

S UBJECTIVE B ELIEFS : We hand collect survey data from Blue Chip Economic Indicators. Blue Chip
is a survey of panelists from around 40 major financial institutions. The names of institutions and
forecasters are disclosed. The survey is conducted around the beginning of each month and is
released on the tenth of each month for responses based on information for the previous month.
We use Blue Chip forecasts from the end-of-quarter month survey (i.e., March, June, September, and
December) and construct a consensus (mean) estimate from the cross-section of individual forecasts
on year-to-year changes of real GDP, inflation, industrial production, and unemployment.

O BJECTIVE B ELIEFS : To get a proxy for objective beliefs, we estimate a VAR with two lags on real GDP,
inflation, and unemployment and use forecasts from this VAR. In our estimation, we also include the
level of the three-month Treasury bill.11

                                         [Insert Figure 5 and Table 3 here]

         The wedge is then defined as the difference between the subjective and objective beliefs about
future macroeconomic activity. In particular, it measures the amount of pessimism or optimism in
the economy. Figure 5 plots the wedge for our four macroeconomic variables and Table 3 reports
some summary statistics.12 We notice a very strong component between the four series. Indeed,
as shown in Table 3, correlations are between 50% and up to almost 100% between IP and GDP
growth. More importantly, the estimates indicate that subjective beliefs are on average pessimistic
as indicated by the negative mean in the top row of Table 3. The exception is inflation but the positive
average is entirely driven by the sharp increase after the 2008 recession. The most important finding
concerns the business cycle dynamics of the wedges: wedges peak before a recession and suffer sharp
contractions during recessions. This echoes our theoretical findings which predict that bad shocks
lead agents to become more pessimistic.
         Finally, we can use our estimates of the GDP wedge to inform us about the dynamics of the optimal
distortion u . Recall that in our model the wedge is defined as -u  P . Estimates of u are therefore
estimated by dividing the wedge by the sample standard deviation of the stock.
    11
     These variables are used in standard New Keynesian models for forecasting, see, e.g., Cogley and Sargent (2005),
Primiceri (2005) or Chauvet and Potter (2013) for a survey. Our results remain unchanged whether we include interest rates
or not.
  12
     We multiply the wedges for inflation and unemployment by minus 1 to facilitate comparison with GDP and IP growth.
Higher unemployment and inflation indicate bad times, while the opposite holds for GDP and IP growth.




                                                           20
5    Calibration

We now turn to the calibration in order to explore the ability of our equilibrium model with Cressie-
Read robustness in a stylized Lucas economy with i.i.d. consumption growth and lognormality
to qualitatively and quantitatively match salient features of asset prices together with the wedge
dynamics. To this end, we numerically solve equations (35) and (47) together with their associated
boundary conditions using finite difference methods with implicit schemes. Importantly, we impose
discipline in terms of the free parameters governing the strength of the preference for robustness by
calibrating to the empirical estimates of the wedges estimated from the data in order to have realistic
dynamics for our key new state variable related to sentiment and pessimism.
    We follow Jin and Sui (2019) and use the empirical asset pricing evidence reported in Campbell
and Cochrane (1999) and in Beeler and Campbell (2012) as objectives to match. In addition, we also
match the first three moments of the empirical wedges from our empirical analysis, reported in Table
3. The rest of the model parameters used for the calibration are summarized in Panel B of Table 2.

                                         [Insert Figure 6 here]

    Figure 6 reports the equilibrium quantities produced in our model for the following preference
parameters:  = 0.04,  =  = 7,  = 1.25 and  = 0.65. The Cressie-Read parameter is crucial and our
value lies between entropy ( = 1) and Hellinger ( = 0.5). Because the key contribution of our model
is time-varying sentiment and dynamic pessimism, we report all equilibrium quantities for a relevant
range of the sentiment state variable x, obtained from Monte Carlo simulation. In the figures, we
plot two standard deviations below and above the mean across 104 paths from a 50 year Monte Carlo
simulation.
    Consistent with the results in Section 3, the optimal distortion, equilibrium Sharpe ratio,
equilibrium volatility and wedges are all countercyclical, reflecting the countercyclical pessimism
generated by the model. The price-dividend ratio is procyclical, as is the equilibrium risk-free rate.
Quantitatively, Table 4 shows that the model performs well in generating a sizeable risk premium and
a realistic Sharpe ratio. The quantitative success in producing excess volatility is more limited.
    Importantly, the wedge between the objective and the subjective risk premium is reasonable and
less than one percent at the mean of the state space, while it grows to just over 150 basis points
in bad states of nature. As Chamberlain (forthcoming) and Hansen and Sargent (2019) both point
out, a central idea in robust Bayesian analysis based on classical work of Good (1952) is to judge the
plausibility of a min-max model by examining how reasonable the worst-case measure U is that is
supporting the equilibrium.
    Turning to the moments for the wedges produced by the model versus the ones we estimate from
the data, our model produces excessive skewness. This is likely due to the heavy-tailed distribution
for sentiment due to increased sentiment volatility under adverse market conditions, echoing the
findings reported in Figure 4.
    It is worth mentioning that the same model and same parameters, but with relative entropy
produces a higher risk-free rate of 3.59 percent, a very low and constant risk premium of 1.81 percent,
a constant return volatility equal to the volatility of dividends, and a constant Sharpe Ratio of 0.1064.

                                                   21
We conclude by noting that our Cressie-Read extension improves substantially on the quantitative
front, in addition to generating meaningful time-variation at the business cycle frequency.


6    Conclusions

Our paper makes the following contributions. First, we extend the Hansen-Sargent robustness
setting to the family of Cressie-Read divergences. We show that this generalization has important
implications for the nature and source of fluctuations in risk aversion. In particular, we show that
the agent's pessimistically distorted beliefs form a state variable that generates endogenous time-
variation in pessimism and stochastic effective risk aversion. This stands in sharp contrast to the
more standard case applied in the literature relying on entropy as a divergence measure between
models and where effective risk aversion is constant when fundamentals are i.i.d.
    Second, we illustrate the implications of deviations from entropy using a simple partial
equilibrium portfolio choice framework as well as in a general equilibrium Lucas economy. Our
choice of a simple model with i.i.d.     returns is very deliberate, as we seek to understand the
contribution of Cressie-Read divergences which in more complicated models may be harder to
uncover. As a first exercise, we derive parameter conditions under which beliefs are state-dependent.
We find that when the Cressie-Read parameter  is smaller than one, endogenous effective risk
aversion is countercyclical and declines following positive shocks, while the opposite happens
whenever  > 1. In our portfolio choice problem, this induces intertemporal hedging demands and
therefore both horizon- and state-dependent portfolios, despite returns being i.i.d. This example
nicely contrasts to the entropy case where optimal portfolios are constant and myopic.
    Third, the premise of our model posits that the agent's concern for model misspecification leads
to pessimistic beliefs. It is obviously an empirical question whether this is true in the data. To test
this hypothesis in the data, we collect survey responses about future economic activity. Since our
model predicts a unique mapping between the agent's belief distortion and subjective and objective
beliefs, we can estimate those distortions from the data. With these estimates in hand, we calibrate
our general equilibrium model. We find that our simple model is able to match not only the equity
premium and Sharpe ratio, but also produces reasonable values for interest rates and especially for
the worst-case beliefs supporting this equilibrium.
    It is well-known that macroeconomic fundamentals such as consumption feature fat tails, which
might be due to a small probability of a disaster, see, e.g., Barro (2006). Canonical models in asset
pricing such as the rare disaster models study the implications of these large negative shocks for
asset prices usually within the context of representative agent models with Epstein-Zin preferences,
see, e.g.,Tsai and Wachter (2015) for a review. A setting with tail risk and agents featuring robustness
concerns is a natural extension of our framework, which we leave for future research.




                                                  22
Figures




                 3


               2.5


                 2


               1.5


                 1


               0.5


                 0
                     0           0.5            1            1.5            2           2.5             3


                         Figure 1. Cressie-Read Divergence for different values of 

Notes: This figure plots Cressie-Read divergence for different values of  .  = 0 corresponds to Burg (1972) entropy, 1/2 to
Hellinger (1909) divergence, 1 to Kullback and Leibler (1951) distance, and 2 to modified 2 distance.




                                                            23
                                 Optimal distortion                                         Optimal portfolio
           0.35                                                        0.8

            0.3                                                        0.7

           0.25                                                        0.6

            0.2                                                        0.5

           0.15                                                        0.4

            0.1                                                        0.3

           0.05                                                        0.2

              0                                                        0.1
                  -2        -1           0            1       2              -2       -1           0            1   2


                                                            (a)  =  = 2
                                 Optimal distortion                                         Optimal portfolio
           0.35                                                    0.35

            0.3                                                        0.3

           0.25                                                    0.25

            0.2                                                        0.2

           0.15                                                    0.15

            0.1                                                        0.1

           0.05                                                    0.05

              0                                                         0
                  -2        -1           0            1       2              -2       -1            0           1   2


                                                            (b)  =  = 5
                                 Optimal distortion                                         Optimal portfolio
           0.35                                                         0.7


            0.3                                                         0.6

                                                                        0.5
           0.25
                                                                        0.4
            0.2
                                                                        0.3
           0.15
                                                                        0.2

            0.1                                                         0.1

           0.05                                                              0
                  -2        -1           0            1       2                  -2    -1           0           1   2


                                                          (c)  = 2 and  = 4

                       Figure 2. Optimal distortions and portfolios for different values of 

Notes: This figure plots optimal distortions and portfolios for different values of risk aversion ( ) and preference for
robustness (). Parameters used are summarized in Panel A of Table 2 and the time horizon is T = 1 year.



                                                                  24
                                    Optimal distortion                                                Optimal portfolio
    0.2                                                                             0.55


                                                                                     0.5
   0.19

                                                                                    0.45
   0.18

                                                                                     0.4

   0.17
                                                                                    0.35

   0.16
                                                                                     0.3


   0.15                                                                             0.25
              0          20            40         60            80       100                0    20      40         60         80       100


                                                Figure 3. Optimal distortions and portfolios

Notes: This figure plots optimal distortions and portfolios for risk aversion ( ) equal to 2, preference for robustness () equal
to 2, and x = 0. Parameters used are summarized in Panel A of Table 2 and the time horizon is T = 100 years.




                                    Distribution of x at t=30                                         Optimal distortion
             15000                                                                   0.25


                                                                                      0.2
             10000
     count




                                                                                     0.15
              5000
                                                                                      0.1

                  0
                          -4             -2            0             2
                                                                                            -2   -1      0          1      2        3


                                       Optimal portfolio                                                      C/W
              0.7                                                                   0.053

              0.6                                                                   0.052

              0.5                                                                   0.051

              0.4                                                                    0.05


              0.3                                                                   0.049


              0.2                                                                   0.048
                    -2         -1           0        1           2        3                 -2   -1      0          1      2        3



                                                Figure 4. Optimal distortions and portfolios

Notes: This figure plots the distribution of the sentiment variable x, optimal distortions, portfolios, and consumption wealth
ratio for risk aversion ( ) equal to 2, preference for robustness () equal to 2, and  = 0.5. Parameters used are summarized
in Panel A of Table 2 and time horizon is T = 60 years. All figures present quantities at 30 years. They all center at the mean
of the sentiment variable and span from two standard deviation below to two standard deviation above.



                                                                               25
                                                               GDP                                                           Unemployment
                                    3                                                                    3

                                    2                                                                    2

                                    1                                                                    1

                                    0                                                                    0

                                    -1                                                                   -1

                                    -2                                                                   -2




                                                                                          Wedge (in %)




                     Wedge (in %)
                                    -3                                                                   -3

                                    -4                                                                   -4

                                    -5                                                                   -5
                                         1985   1990    1995        2000   2005   2010                        1985   1990   1995     2000   2005   2010

                                                               IP                                                                  CPI
                                    3                                                                    3

                                    2                                                                    2




26
                                    1                                                                    1

                                    0                                                                    0

                                    -1                                                                   -1

                                    -2                                                                   -2




                     Wedge (in %)
                                                                                          Wedge (in %)
                                    -3                                                                   -3

                                    -4                                                                   -4

                                    -5                                                                   -5
                                         1985   1990    1995        2000   2005   2010                        1985   1990   1995     2000   2005   2010



                                                       Figure 5. Wedge: Difference between Subjective and Objective Beliefs

     Notes: This figure plots wedges for real GDP, unemployment, inflation, and industrial production, defined as the difference between the mean one-year-ahead forecasts
     from Blue Chip Economic Indicators and corresponding statistical (objective) forecasts from a VAR. Gray shaded bar indicate recessions as defined by the NBER. Data is
     quarterly and running from 1984 to 2012.
                              Optimal distortion                                       Interest rate
            0.5                                                      0.05

            0.4
                                                                     0.04
            0.3
                                                                     0.03
            0.2

                                                                     0.02
            0.1

              0                                                      0.01
                  2       3            4             5     6                2     3          4           5        6

                              Price dividend ratio                                    Stock volatility
             26                                                     0.185

             24
                                                                     0.18
             22

             20
                                                                    0.175
             18

             16                                                      0.17
                  2       3            4             5     6                2     3          4           5        6

                      Risk premium B - Risk premium U                                  Sharpe ratio
           0.02                                                       0.5

                                                                      0.4
          0.015

                                                                      0.3
           0.01
                                                                      0.2
          0.005
                                                                      0.1

              0                                                        0
                  2       3            4             5     6                2     3          4           5        6



                                           Figure 6. General Equilibrium Results

Notes: This figure plots the optimal distortion, interest rate, price-dividend ratio, stock volatility, difference in stock risk
premia between measures, and the Sharpe ratio in equilibrium. Parameters used are summarized in Panel B of Table 2 and
time horizon is T = 100 years. All figures present quantities at 50 years. They all center at the mean of the sentiment variable
and span from two standard deviation below to two standard deviation above.




                                                               27
                     106                          Risk free rate                                           106                      Stock volatility
             6                                                                                         6


             5                                                                                         5


             4                                                                                         4
     count




                                                                                               count
             3                                                                                         3


             2                                                                                         2


             1                                                                                         1


             0                                                                                         0
                     -0.01          0       0.01            0.02     0.03      0.04                        0.17           0.175           0.18           0.185           0.19



                 106                         Risk premium B                                                106            Risk premium B - Risk premium U
             8                                                                                         8



             6                                                                                         6
     count




                                                                                               count




             4                                                                                         4



             2                                                                                         2



             0                                                                                         0
                 0           0.02   0.04   0.06      0.08      0.1   0.12   0.14   0.16                     0     0.005    0.01   0.015   0.02   0.025   0.03    0.035   0.04



                                                       Figure 7. Distribution of Equilibrium Quantities

Notes: This figure plots the distributions of interest rate, stock volatility, risk premium B, and difference in stock risk premia
between measures along equilibrium path generated via Monte Carlo between year 20 and year 50. Parameters used are
summarized in Panel B of Table 2 and time horizon is T = 100 years.




                                                                                          28
Tables




                       Table 1. Responses to Fundamental Shocks B B

    This table studies responses to fundamental shocks discussed in the theoretical model.
                       Optimal                                              Volatility
            B B                      Risk Aversion        Sentiment
                      Distortion                                           Sentiment
                                            <1
         positive                                     less pessimistic          
         negative                                     more pessimistic          
                                            >1
         positive                                     more pessimistic          
         negative                                     less pessimistic          




                                              29
                                       Table 2. Parameter Values

This table reports parameter values used for simulations. In addition to the variables defined below we use
 = 1.

                       Parameter    Variable                                 Value
                                       Panel A: Partial Equilibrium
                       r            Risk-free interest rate                    0.03
                                    Discount rate                              0.03
                                    Stock volatility                           0.20
                       µ            Expected stock return                      0.10
                                      Panel B: General Equilibrium
                                    Discount rate                               0.04
                       µc           Consumption growth rate                  0.0191
                       c            Consumption volatility                    0.038
                       µD           Dividend growth rate                     0.0245
                       D            Dividend volatility                         0.17
                                    Risk aversion                                  7
                                    Preference for robustness                      7
                                    Cressie-Read parameter                      0.65
                                    EIS                                         1.25
                                    Correlation dividend and consumption         0.2




                                                    30
                                    Table 3. Summary Statistics Wedges

This table reports summary statistics (mean, standard deviation, and skewness) for the wedges for CPI,
Unemployment, GDP and IP growth. The wedge is defined as the difference between the mean one-year
forecast of each variable from Blue Chip Economic Indicators and the one year ahead forecast using a VAR with
two lags. We multiply the wedge for CPI and Unemployment by -1. Data is quarterly and runs from January
1984 to December 2011.

                                             CPI     Unemp      GDP           IP
                               Mean         0.11%    -0.17%    -1.40%    -1.59%
                               Stdev        1.13%     0.61%     1.64%     2.91%
                               Skewness     -0.012    -0.017    -0.660    -0.013
                                                      Correlations
                               CPI           1.00
                               Unemp         0.43      1.00
                               GDP           0.52      0.86      1.00
                               IP            0.48      0.92      0.93         1.00




                         Table 4. Summary Statistics of Equilibrium Quantities

This table reports moments about equilibrium quantities of the calibrated model. The model is disciplined by
the mean, standard deviation and skewness of the wedge on GDP . The empirical values of equilibrium quantities
are obtained from Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Beeler and Campbell (2012). The theoretical values are
moments of equilibrium quantities between year 20 to 50 obtained by Monte Carlo simulation with 104 paths.
Parameters used are summarized in Panel B of Table 2. The time horizon is T = 100 years.

                 Statistic                                Calibrated value         Empirical value
                                      P
                 Mean wedge (E [-u  ])
                                B
                                                                   -1.15%                  -1.40%
                 Stdev wedge ( (-u  P ))                            0.68%                   1.64%
                 Skewness wedge (skewness(-u  P ))                   -1.77                   -0.66
                                                        Theoretical value          Empirical value
                                        S
                 Equity premium (E [µ - r])
                                    B
                                                                     4.89%                  3.90%
                 Stock volatility ( S )                              17.9%                  18.0%
                 Sharpe ratio (EB [µS - r]/ S )                        0.27                   0.22
                 Interest rate (EB [r])                              2.76%                  2.92%
                 Interest rate volatility ( (r))                     0.91%                  2.89%
                 Price-dividend ratio (EB (P/D))                       21.7                   21.1




                                                     31
References
A DAM , K., D. M ATVEEV, AND S. N AGEL (2019): "Do Survey Expectations of Stock Returns Reflect Risk
  Adjustments?," Bank of Canada Staff Working Paper 2019-11.

A LMEIDA , C., AND R. G ARCIA (2017): "Economic Implications of Nonlinear Pricing Kernels,"
   Management Science, 63(10), 3361­3380.

A NDERSON , E. W., L. P. H ANSEN , AND T. J. S ARGENT (2003): "A Quartet of Semigroups for Model
  Specification, Robustness, Prices of Risk, and Model Detection," Journal of the European Economic
  Association, 1(1), 68­123.

B ALTER , A., F. H ORVATH , AND P. J. M AENHOUT (2019): "An Exploration of Dynamic Robust Control with
   Cressie-Read Divergence," Working Paper, INSEAD.

B ARBERIS , N. (2018): "Psychology-Based Models of Asset Prices and Trading Volume," Douglas
   Bernheim, Stefano DellaVigna, and David Laibson, eds., Handbook of Behavioral Economics, 1, 79­
   175.

B ARBERIS , N., R. G REENWOOD, L. J IN , AND A. S HLEIFER (2015): "X-CAPM: An Extrapolative Capital
   Asset Pricing Model," Journal of Financial Economics, 115, 1­24.

B ARRO, R. J. (2006): "Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century," Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, 121, 823­866.

B EELER , J., AND J. Y. C AMPBELL (2012): "The long-run risks model and aggregate asset prices: an
   empirical assessment," Critical Finance Review, pp. 141­182.

B EKAERT, G., E. E NGSTROM , AND Y. X ING (2009): "Risk, Uncertainty and Asset Prices," Journal of
   Financial Economics, 91(1), 59­82.
                            KA , AND P. H O (2019): "Survey Data and Subjective Beliefs in Business Cycle
B HANDARI , A., J. B OROVI C
  Models," Working Paper, University of Minnesota.

B ORDALO, P., N. G ENNAIOLI , AND A. S HLEIFER (2018): "Diagnostic Expectations and Credit Cycles,"
  Journal of Finance, 73(1), 199­227.

B URG , J. P. (1972): "The Relationship Between Maximum Entropy Spectra and Maximum Likelihood
  Spectra," Geophysics, 37(2), 375­376.

C AMPBELL , J. Y., AND J. C OCHRANE (1999): "By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation of
  Aggregate Stock Market Behavior," Journal of Political Economy, 107(2), 205­251.

C HAMBERLAIN , G. (forthcoming): "Robust Decision Theory and Econometrics," Annual Review of
  Economics.

C HAUVET, M., AND S. P OTTER (2013): Forecasting Output vol. 2, chap. 0, pp. 141­194. Elsevier B.V.

C HEN , Z., AND L. E PSTEIN (2002): "Ambiguity, Risk, and Asset Returns in Continuous Time,"
  Econometrica, 70(4), 1403­1443.

C OGLEY, T., AND T. J. S ARGENT (2005): "Drifts and Volatilities: Monetary Policies and Outcomes in the
  Post WWII U.S.," Review of Economic Dynamics, 8, 262­302.

C ONSTANTINIDES , G. M. (1990): "Habit Formation: A Resolution of the Equity Premium Puzzle,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 98, 519­543.

                                                   32
C RESSIE , N., AND T. R. C. R EAD (1984): "Multinomial Goodness-of-Fit Tests," Journal of the Royal
  Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), 46(3), 440­464.

D ETEMPLE , J. B., AND F. Z APATERO (1991): "Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy with Habit
  Formation," Econometrica, 59(6), 1633­1657.

D UFFIE , D., AND L. G. E PSTEIN (1992): "Stochastic Differential Utility," Econometrica, 60(2), 353­394.

E L K AROUI , N., S. P ENG , AND M.-C. QUENEZ (1997): "Backward Stochastic Differential Equation in
   Finance," Mathematical Finance, 7(1), 1­71.

E PSTEIN , L. G.,   AND   M. S CHNEIDER (2003): "Recursive Multiple-Priors," Journal of Economic Theory,
   113(1), 1­31.

E PSTEIN , L. G., AND S. E. Z IN (1989): "Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of
   Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework," Econometrica, 57.

G ILBOA , I., AND D. S CHMEIDLER (1989): "Maxmin Expected Utility with Non-Unique Prior," Journal of
   Mathematical Economics, 18(2), 141­153.

G OOD, I. J. (1952): "Rational Decisions," Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B
  (Methodological), 14(1), 107­114.

H ANSEN , L. P., AND T. J. S ARGENT (2001): "Robust Control and Model Uncertainty," American
  Economic Review, 91(2), 60­66.

H ANSEN , L. P., AND T. J. S ARGENT (2008): Robustness. Princeton University Press.

H ANSEN , L. P., AND T. J. S ARGENT (2019): "Structured Uncertainty and Model Misspecification,"
  Working Paper, University of Chicago.

H ANSEN , L. P., T. J. S ARGENT, G. T URMUHAMBETOVA , AND N. W ILLIAMS (2006): "Robust Control and
  Model Misspecification," Journal of Economic Theory, 128(1), 45­90.

                                   ¨
H ELLINGER , E. (1909): "Neue Begrundung  der Theorie Quadratischer Formen von Unendlichvielen
                            ¨ die Reine und Angewandte Mathematik, 136, 210­271.
     anderlichen," Journal fur
  Ver¨

H ONG , H., AND J. C. S TEIN (1999): "A Unified Theory of Underreaction, Momentum Trading, and
  Overreaction in Asset Markets," The Journal of Finance, 54(6), 2143­2184.

J IN , L. J., AND P. S UI (2019): "Asset Pricing with Return Extrapolation," Working Paper, California
   Institute of Technology.

KOBYLANSKI , M. (2000): "Backward Stochastic Differential Equations and Partial Differential
 Equations with Quadratic Growth," The Annals of Probability, 28(2), 558­602.

K ULLBACK , S., AND R. A. L EIBLER (1951): "On Information and Sufficiency," Annals of Mathematical
  Statistics, 22(1), 79­86.

L AZRAK , A., AND M.-C. QUENEZ (2003): "A Generalized Stochastic Differential Utility," Mathematics of
   Operations Research, 28(1), 154­180.

L I , K., AND J. L IU (2019): "Extrapolative Asset Pricing," Working Paper, University of California, San
    Diego.

M ACCHERONI , F., M. M ARINACCI , AND A. RUSTICHINI (2006a): "Ambiguity Aversion, Robustness, and
  the Variational Representation of Preferences," Econometrica, 74(6), 1447­1498.

                                                     33
       (2006b): "Dynamic Variational Preferences," Journal of Economic Theory, 128(1), 4­44.

M AENHOUT, P. J. (2004): "Robust Portfolio Rules and Asset Pricing," The Review of Financial Studies,
  17(4), 951­983.

M ERTON , R. C. (1969): "Lifetime Portfolio Selection under Uncertainty: The Continous-Time Case,"
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 51(3), 247­257.

       (1973): "An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model," Econometrica, 41(5), 867­887.

N AGEL , S., AND Z. X U (2019): "Asset Pricing with Fading Memory," NBER Working Paper, University of
  Chicago.

O RLOWSKI , P., A. S ALI , AND F. T ROJANI (2019): "Arbitrage Free Dispersion," Swiss Finance Institute
  Research Paper No 19-20.

P RIMICERI , G. (2005): "Time-Varying Structural Vector Autoregressions and Monetary Policy," Review
   of Economic Studies, 72, 821­852.

S AMUELSON , P. (1969): "Lifetime Portfolio Selection by Dynamic Stochastic Programming," Review of
   Economics and Statistics, 51(3), 239­246.

S TRZALECKI , T. (2011): "Axiomatic Foundations of Multiplier Preferences," Econometrica, 79(1), 47­73.
     , B. (2019): "Estimating Robustness," Working Paper, New York University.
S Z OKE

T SAI , J., AND J. A. WACHTER (2015): "Disaster Risk and Its Implications for Asset Pricing," Annual
   Review of Financial Economics, 7, 219­252.




                                                  34
Appendix A Proofs
Proof of Lemma 1

Using It^
        o's formula on Dt,s defined in equation (4) yields that
                                                                     
                                                              Zt,s -Zt,s                           1 
                                       dDt,s = d(Zt,s ) =                   B
                                                                 1- (-us )dBs                     +2 Zt,s |us |2 ds.                                 (A.1)

It follows from H¨
                 older's inequality that
           T                                                                 T                                            1            T                  1
                                 2 2                                                               2q
               e-(s-t) (Zt,s - Zt,s ) s |us |2 ds  C 2 EB                        e-(s-t) (Zt,s - Zt,s                                      e-(s-t) 2p
                                                                                                                          q                               p
EB
 t                                                      t                                             ) ds                    EB
                                                                                                                               t                   s ds       ,
       t                                                                 t                                                         t

                                                                                       T
where C = max |u| and 1/p + 1/q = 1. Because EB
                                              t                                       t    e-(s-t) 2p
                                                                                                   s ds <  with some p > 1 by
                                T                        2q
assumption and EB
                t              t       e-(s-t) (Zt,s - Zt,s ) ds             <  due to the boundedness of u, the process
                                                                                                               · - (s-t)              
{e-(s-t) s (Zt,s - Zt,s )us }st is square integrable under B. Hence                                           t e        s (Zt,s   - Zt,s )(-us )dBs
                                                                                                                                                   B
                                                                                                                                                     is
a martingale under B. Then we have from (3) and (A.1) that
                                                                     T
                                                       1                            
                                                U
                                               Rt =      EB              e-(s-t) s Zt,s |us |2 ds .
                                                      2 t t     t

               1-
     When t = Zt  ,
                                        T                                                                 T
                        1 B                                                           1 U
                  U
                 Rt =    E                                   -1
                                            e-(s-t) s Zt,s Zs   |us |2 ds =            E                                  -1
                                                                                                              e-(s-t) s Zs   |us |2 ds .
                        2 t         t                                                 2 t             t

Then
                                   ~
                                   t                                                              T
                                                 1                       ~                                       ~   1
                    U
                   Rt =EU
                        t              e-(s-t)         -1
                                                   s Zs   |us |2 ds + e-(t-t)                         e-(s-t)              -1
                                                                                                                       s Zs   |us |2 ds
                               t                 2                                           ~
                                                                                             t                       2
                                   ~
                                   t
                                                 1                       ~
                       =EU
                         t             e-(s-t)         -1
                                                   s Zs   |us |2 ds + e-(t-t) Rt
                                                                               U
                                                                               ~ .
                               t                 2

Proof of Proposition 1

The first result follows from the Comparison Theorem of El Karoui, Peng, and Quenez (1997). The
second result is a direct consequence of (11). And the third result is a consequence of (1).

Proof of Proposition 2

In the following, we prove all portfolio choice results for Epstein-Zin utility. Proposition 2 is then a
special case. To this end, consider an agent whose preference over consumption streams is described
by a continuous time stochastic differential utility of Kreps-Porteus and Epstein-Zin type. Given the
discount rate  , the relative risk aversion 0 <  = 1, and the EIS 0 <  = 1, the Epstein-Zin aggregator
f (see, e.g., Duffie and Epstein (1992)) is
                                                                 1
                                                             c1-                           1- 1
                                                 f (c, v )       1 (1 -  )v                        - v,
                                                             1- 


                                                                         35
              1-
where  =      1- 1   . Incorporating the Cressie-Read distance, we introduce the robust Epstein-Zin
preference for a consumption stream c as
                                                      T
                                                                                 -1
                             Utc = inf EU
                                        t
                                                                   c
                                                          f (cs , Us )+    1           2
                                                                           2 s Zs |us | ds    + u(cT ) ,                        (A.2)
                                     u        t

where  = inf {t  0 : Zt  z or Zt > z }.
   Following the discussion in Section 1.2, U c follows the following BSDE
                                                                 |t |2
                       dUtc =  Utc - f (ct , Utc ) +                              B
                                                                      -1 dt + t dBt ,
                                                                                                   c
                                                                                                  UT = u(cT ),
                                                                2 t Zt

The optimal subjective measure is induced by
                                                                            t
                                                               ut =       -1     .
                                                                      t Zt

   Consider a portfolio choice problem with robust Epstein-Zin preferences.                                              The optimal
consumption-investment problem (19) for this agent is then
                                                      T
                                                                           1-       -1     2
                       Vt = inf sup EU
                                     t                    f (cs , Vs ) +      V s Zs  |us | ds + u(cT ) .                       (A.3)
                                u   ,c            t                         2
   The choice of  in (18) ensures the following decomposition of the optimal value

                                                                 Wt1- f (t,xt )
                                                            Vt =     e          ,                                               (A.4)
                                                                 1-
where x follows (25). Using dynamic programming, we obtain the HJB equation satisfied by f and
summarize the agent's optimal investment and consumption strategies as follows.

Proposition 5. When   (0, 1), the function f defined in (26) satisfies
                                                                                                                 1
                                                                            ~1-  e-  f
                                                                                                                     1
                             1
           0 = inf sup t f + 2      2
                               |u|2 xx f - x f + (x f )2 + (1 -  )x f  u +  c
                 u    ,c
                       ~
                                                                                                                                (A.5)
                                                                                                       1- (1- )x
                              + (1 -  ) r +  (µ - r - u) - c
                                                           ~-                        1
                                                                                     2      -  +        2 e      |u|2     ,

for (t, x)  [0, T ) × (x, x), with boundary conditions
                                       ent                            ent
                           f (t, x) = fx   (t),           f (t, x) = fx   (t),       and    f (T, x) = log .                    (A.6)

When  > 1, the infimum and supremum in (A.5) are changed to supu inf ,c
                                                                      ~. If  is positive definite and
2 f -  f +( f )2 + 1- e(1- )x > 0 when   (0, 1) (resp. < 0 when  > 1), for any (t, x)  [0, T ) × (x, x),
xx    x    x        
then the agent's optimal belief and strategies are given by
                                           (1 -  )(1 - x f )2                                -1
                         =  +                                                                     -1 (µ - r),                   (A.7)
                                    2 f -  f + ( f )2 + 1- e(1- )x
                                   xx       x      x        
                                      (1 -   )(1 -  x f )
                           u =                                 ,                                                                (A.8)
                               2 f -  f + ( f )2 + 1- e(1- )x
                               xx     x       x          
                                         
                           ~ =   e-  f .
                           c                                                                                                    (A.9)
          ent
Function fx   in (A.6) is the value for the problem with an entropy cost and (x) = e(-1)x . It then
satisfies the ODE given in (A.12).

                                                                      36
Proof. Dynamic programming implies that
                                                  t
                                 ~t = Vt +                             1-      (1- )xs
                                 V                    f (cs , Vs ) +    2 Vs e         |us |2 ds,
                                              0

where V is given in (A.3), is a martingale under U when u, , c are agent's optimal strategy and t <  .
                          ~ , we use equation (25) and apply It^
To calculate the drift of V                                    o's formula to derive

               def (t,xt ) = ef (t,xt ) t f + 1      2 2
                                              2 |ut | xx f - x f + (x f )
                                                                          2
                                                                                        dt + ef (t,xt ) x f ut dBt
                                                                                                                 U
                                                                                                                   .

                         c
Moreover define c
                ~=       W   as the consumption-wealth ratio. Then

                       Wt1-
                   d        = Wt1- r +  (µ - r - u) - c
                                                      ~- 1         1-
                                                         2   dt + Wt
                                                                         U
                                                                       dBt ,                                           (A.10)
                       1-
                                                             ~ (divided throughout by W 1- ef (t, xt ))
Combining the previous two equations, we obtain the drift of V

                               1                          1               2 2                  2
         r +  (µ - r - u) - c
                            ~- 2   +                     1-    t f + 1
                                                                     2 |u| (xx f - x f + (x f ) ) + x f  u
                       1
                   ~1-  e-  f
                           1
                                          1 (1- )x
          +    
              1- 1 c
                                    
                                -  1- +   2 e      |u|2 .

Then the HJB equation for f is
                                                                                                         1
                                                                        ~1-  e-  f
                                                                                                               1
                               2 2                 2
        0 = inf sup t f + 1
                          2 |u| xx f - x f + (x f )  + (1 -  )x f  u +  c
               u   ,c
                    ~
                                                                                                                       (A.11)
                                                                                               1- (1- )x
                         + (1 -  ) r +  (µ - r - u) - c
                                                      ~-                    1
                                                                            2     -  +          2 e      |u|2      ,

when   (0, 1). The infimum and supremum changed to supu inf ,c
                                                             ~ in the previous equation when
 > 1.
   The first-order condition for  yields

                                       = 1 -1
                                              µ - r - (1 - x f )u .

This is the agent's optimal strategy when  is positive definite. The first order condition in u yields

                                                (1 -  )(1 - x f )
                                  u =                                     
                                                               1- (1- )x   .
                                        2 f
                                        xx                  2
                                              - x f + (x f ) +  e
                                             2 f -  f + ( f )2 +                       1- (1- )x
This is the agent's optimal belief choice if xx    x     x                               e           > 0. The agent's optimal
choice of consumption wealth is
                                                                         
                                                         ~ =   e-  f .
                                                         c

   When the state variable x reaches the boundaries x and x, the x is absorbed there, and the problem
becomes a problem where the cressie-Read penalty in (A.3) becomes

                                          1-      (1- )x
                                           2 Vs e        |us |2 ,           for s  .

Effectively, this is an entropy penalty

                                    1-           2
                                   2(x ) Vs |us | ,         where (x ) = e(-1)x .

                                                                37
                                                                                 ent
As a result, the boundary conditions of f at x and x are specified by the value fx   with the robust
                                                                            ent
parameter (x) or (x). Setting the spatial derivatives to be zero in (A.5), fx   , with x = x or x, satisfies
the following ODE
                            ent
                      0 =t fx   -  + (1 -  ) r + ( ent ) (µ - r - uent ) - 1
                                                                           2  (
                                                                                ent
                                                                                    )  ent
                                         ent
                               -  fx                  1- (1- )x ent 2                                        (A.12)
                           +   e     +                 2 e     |u | ,
                ent
               fx   (T ) = log ,

where
                            1                                                      e(-1)x
                 ent =       ( - 1)x
                                     -1 (µ - r)               and      uent =         ( -1) x
                                                                                               -1 (µ - r).
                          + e                                                      + e


   We revisit the utility formulation in Section 1. The optimal distortion u obtained above is a
continuous function evaluated on (t, Xt )  [0, T ] × [x, x]. Hence u is bounded and satisfies the
requirement in Section 1.1. Moreover, by our construction of the HJB equation (A.5), the process
defined in (A.4) satisfies the BSDE associated to (A.3). Hence it is a utility index defined in Section 1.
Finally, the optimal portfolio weight   and consumption-wealth ratio c
                                                                     ~ are bounded, because they
are bounded functions evaluated on (t, Xt )  [0, T ] × [x, x]. Therefore the associated wealth process
W has all finite moments. Thanks to the boundedness of f ,  defined in (21) satisfies the integrability
assumption required in Lemma 1.

Proof of Proposition 3

When the agent invests in asset P , her optimal consumption and investment problem can be solved
as in Section 2. Instead of constants µ and  , µP and  P depend on the state variable x. However,
when the portfolio choice problem is solved in Proposition 5, state variable x is already taken into
account. Therefore, even µP and  P are now random, no more state variable needs to be introduced
and the function f in (26) still solves (A.5) with µ and  therein replaced by µP and  P . The optimal
belief and strategies are given by (A.7), (A.8), and (A.9).
   From consumption market clearing and (A.9),
                                                                  
                                                      ct =   e-  f (t,xt ) Wt .                              (A.13)

Applying It^
           o's formula on the right-hand side, yields
                                                                                                    
     de-  f (t,xt ) = - e
                         -  f (t,xt )
                                      t f + 1    2 2                  2   2      -  f (t,xt )
                                            2 |u| xx f + x f -  (x f ) |u| dt -  e
                                                                                                      B
                                                                                              x f u dBt .

Then using capital market clearing   = 1 and (A.9), we obtain
                                                                                         
                  de-  f (t,xt ) Wt =Wt de-  f (t,xt ) + e-  f (t,xt ) dWt + d e-  f (t,xt ) , Wt   t
                                         
                                   =e-   
                                            f
                                                Wt -  t f -
                                                                     
                                                                     2 |u|
                                                                          2   2
                                                                              xx f + x f -  (x f )
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                        dt
                                                                                      
                                      + e-  f Wt (µP -   e-  f )dt - e-  f Wt       P
                                                                               x f u dt
                                                
                                      + e -  f Wt -  x f u + 
                                                              P   B
                                                                dBt .


                                                                38
Using the previous dynamics and matching the drift and volatility on both sides of (A.13), we obtain
                                                                                                                     
                           µP = µ c +  t f +             2 |u|
                                                               2   2
                                                                   xx f + x f -  (x f )
                                                                                        2
                                                                                          +   e-  f +       P
                                                                                                       x f u ,                            (A.14)
                           P = c +  x f u.                                                                                                (A.15)

Plugging (A.15) into the right-hand side of (A.14), we transform µP into
                                                                                                                     
                            µ P = µc +  t f +             2 |u|
                                                               2   2
                                                                   xx f + x f +  (x f )
                                                                                        2
                                                                                          +   e-  f +  x f u
                                                                                                             c
                                                                                                                                          (A.16)

Combining (A.7) and (A.16), we obtain from capital market clearing that

                                                                      (1 -  )(1 - x f )2
                                     µP - r =  +                                               ( P )2 .                                   (A.17)
                                                                2 f -  f + ( f )2 + 1- e(1- )x
                                                                xx     x      x        

Plug (A.15) and (A.16) back into (A.5) and simplify, we obtain

                                           1  2
                                  0 =t f + 2 |u | xx f - x f +  (x f )2 + (1 -  )x f u c -  

                                                                                                     
                                             1-                               -f                             1- (1- )x  2
                                         +         µc - u  c - 2
                                                               1
                                                                  ( c )2 +    e  +                           2 e      |u | ,

where u in (37) is obtained by plugging (A.15) into (A.8) and solving for u . Finally, (40) follows from
combining (35), (A.16) and (A.17).
                                                             ent
      When x reaches the boundary x or x, f is specified by Fx   which is the value function in an
                                   ent
equilibrium with an entropy cost. Fx   satisfies the following ODE
                                                                                                               ent
                              ent                 1-                                 -  Fx                              1- (1- )x ent 2
                        0 =t Fx   - 
                                     +                    µc - uent  c - 1   c 2
                                                                         2  ( )  +   e     +                            2 e      |u | ,
                                                                                                                                          (A.18)
           ent
          Fx   (T ) = log ,

where
                                                                    uent = e(-1)x  c .

Proof of Proposition 4

It follows from (45) and the definition of Q that
                                                                             T         s
                                                               St = EQ
                                                                     t           e-   t
                                                                                           rv dv
                                                                                                   Ds ds                                  (A.19)
                                                                         t

Let          = S/D be the price-dividend ratio.                              It follows from the previous equation that Dt =
      t                            t -   s
e-    0
          rv dv D
                    t   (xt ) +   0 e
                                         0
                                             rv dv D
                                                       s ds   is a Q-martingale. Given that the dynamics of x and D under Q
are
                                                        1 2
                                             dxt =       |u | - u              Q
                                                                 t t dt + ut dBt ,
                                                        2 t
                                         dDt                                                                       
                                             = µD -  D t dt +  D (dBt
                                                                    Q
                                                                      +                                    1 - 2 dBt ).
                                         Dt

Equating the drift of D to be zero, we get equation (47) for .


                                                                                 39
   To obtain µS and  S , we apply It^
                                    o's formula to St = Dt (t, xt ) to obtain

                                            t   1     x  1     2                x
         dSt = d Dt (t, xt ) =Dt (t, xt )     + |u |2   + |u |2 xx + µD + u  D                            dt
                                                2        2
                                                 x
                                + Dt (t, xt ) u    +  dBtB
                                                           +  1 - 2 dBt
                                                                          .

Adding Dt dt on both sides and dividing by St = Dt , we obtain

                dSt + Dt dt    t  1      x    1   2                x   1
                            =    + |u |2   + |u |2 xx + µD + u  D    +   dt
                    St            2           2
                                  x
                              + u   +  dBt  B            
                                              +  1 - 2 dBt .

Matching the previous equation with equation (46), we obtain µS ,  S , and  S, .
                                                                       t
Finally, to obtain the CAPM relation, we note that St Mt +            0 Ms Ds ds   is a PU -martingale. Then the
CAPM relation follows from combining (42), (43), and (46).


Appendix B Log utility

We study the portfolio choice problem for an agent with the log utility by taking the scaling limit of
Proposition 2 as   1.
   For the function f in (26), define h via

                                                            f (t,x)
                                                h(t, x) =    1- .

                                                            1
Then the agent's value function (after adding a constant - 1-  ) is

                                    W 1- e(1- )h - 1   e(1- )(log W +h) - 1
                              V =                    =                      .
                                        1-                    1-

As   1, the right-hand side converges to log W + h, which is the value function in the log utility case
with entropy cost in Maenhout (2004), Appendix B.
   From (27), we derive the equation satisfied by h:

                           2 2                        2
             0 =t h + 1
                      2 |u| xx h - x h + (1 -  )(x h)   -              
                                                                      1-   + (1 -  )x h u
                                                                1         h                                    (B.1)
                  + [r +  (µ - r - u) -     1                    e(1- )(-  )       1 (1- )x
                                                                                            |u|2
                                            2      ] +      1-                 +   2 e             = 0,

where
                                                   1
                            =                   (1-(1- )x h)2
                                                                       -1 (µ - r),                             (B.2)
                                 +   2 h+(1- )( h)2 - h+ 1 e(1- )x
                                     xx        x     x
                                                         
                                           1 - (1 -  )x h
                            u=   2 h + (1 -  )( h)2 -  h + 1 e(1- )x
                                                                      .                                        (B.3)
                                 xx             x      x   

Here we consider = 1 in the bequest utility. Then the terminal condition for h is

                                                  h(T, x) = 0.

                                                       40
   Now send   1 in (B.1), (B.2), and (B.3) to identify the limiting equation satisfied by h. We first
consider the limit of
                                                         1         h
                                              
                                           - 1-           e(1- )(-  ) .
                                                 +   1- 

When   1, up to the first order of 1 -  ,
                                                       1
                                              - +   (1 + (1 -  )(- h
                                                                              1

                                                                    ))
                            1         h                                      -     1   1
               
            - 1-    +    
                             e(1- )(-  )                                  =     -   -   h.
                        1-                                 1-               1-
                              1
                               -
By L'Hospital rule, lim 1    1-     =  log  . Then

                                                  1         h
                                     
                              lim - 1-             e(1- )(-  )   = - - h +  log .
                               1        +     1- 

Using the previous identity, we obtain the limit of (B.1), (B.2), and (B.3) as

                2 2                                                                 1 (1- )x
 0 = t h + 1                                                    1
           2 |u| xx h - x h - h -  +  log  + r +  (µ - r - u) - 2   +               2 e      |u|2   = 0, (B.4)

where
                                        2 h -  h + 1 e(1- )x
                                       xx      x               -1
                                   =      2           1 (1- )x  (µ - r ),                                (B.5)
                                     1 + xx h - x h +  e
                                               1
                                   u= 2                     .                                            (B.6)
                                     xx h - x h + 1
                                                  e
                                                    (1- )x


   From (B.5) and (B.6), we observe that the portfolio choice for the log utility agent is still dynamic.
The log utility agent still hedges against the future belief variation. This can be also seen from the
following identity,
                                                 u +  = µ - r,

which is obtained after combining (B.5) and (B.6). The variation of u drives the variation of  so that
the sum of u and  is always constant.




                                                           41
