                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      RISING BURDENS OF PROOFS AND THE GRAND BARGAIN OF WORKERS'
                          COMPENSATION LAWS

                                           Andy Yuan
                                        Price V. Fishback

                                       Working Paper 26980
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26980


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




Yuan: JD, PhD Candidate in Economics, University of Arizona; Fishback: Thomas R. Brown
Professor of Economics, University of Arizona & NBER. We thank seminar participants at
University of Arizona and the 29th Annual Meeting of the American Law and Economics
Association. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26980.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Andy Yuan and Price V. Fishback. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Rising Burdens of Proofs and The Grand Bargain of Workers' Compensation Laws
Andy Yuan and Price V. Fishback
NBER Working Paper No. 26980
April 2020
JEL No. J32,J38,K31,K4

                                         ABSTRACT

Nearly every state has amended workers' compensation laws in the last two decades and the
national averages of cash and medical benefits paid per covered worker have declined. As a
result, writers have suggested that the states might be cutting back on workers' compensation
benefits. We show that measures of the statutory benefits have been rising over time, a trend that
work against the declining trend in average payouts per covered worker. A decline in accident
rates at the national level has contributed to the decline in payouts. We then investigate the
impact of specific state laws related to burdens of proof and limits on medical coverage after
developing an annual panel data set for all states between 1997 and 2016. The results show that
state laws that ban liberal construction of the rules and apportion benefits based on pre-existing
conditions contribute to sharp declines in the states where they are enacted.


Andy Yuan
Economics Department
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721
USA
andyyuan@email.arizona.edu

Price V. Fishback
Department of Economics
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721
and TIAA-CREF Institute
and also NBER
pfishback@eller.arizona.edu
I    Introduction
The state workers' compensation laws have been described as a "Grand Bargain"
between employers, workers, and insurers. In the early 1900s states started enacting
laws in which workers gave up their rights to sue employers for negligence when
injured in return for a strict liability rule in which employers compensated them
for all accidents "arising out of and in the course of employment." Fishback &
Kantor(1998) found that a significant share of each set of stakeholders­employers,
workers, and insurance companies­gained from the passage of the laws.1
    Workers' compensation practitioners and scholars have expressed concerns that
this Grand Bargain has been eroded by new state laws over the last 20 years.2
Oklahoma, in particular, passed over 20 new laws between 2003 and 2013 that
reduced access to benefits, culminating with an opt-out option for employers in
2013 that was declared unconstitutional by the Oklahoma Supreme Court (Spieler
2016, 948-55). The concerns received more public attention when Michael Grabell
of ProPublica and Howard Berkes of NPR in March 2015 published an online article
titled "The Demolition of Workers' Comp." They performed a study of new state
workers' compensation laws between 2002 to 2014 and came to the conclusion that
states had "slashed workers' compensation benefits," and were in a "race to the
bottom."
    The downward trends in Figure 1 of real national cash wage replacement pay-
ments per covered worker and real medical payments per covered worker seem con-
sistent with this claim. However, most of the new state laws about dollar values of
benefits were small changes. We construct a measure of statutory benefits for the
period from state laws using methods developed by Allen (2015) and Fishback &
Kantor (1998) in Figure 2. The national average of this measure of real statutory
benefits has generally risen over the period, largely because weekly maximums have
been indexed to state average wages in most states since the early 1980s (Allen
2015).3
    1
      Fishback & Kantor(1998) found that many employers gained from a reduction in lawsuits and
because they could pass much of the higher costs of accident payments on to nonunion workers
through slower growth in wages. Many workers gained because they were better insured even
if they paid part of the cost. They received payments for all accidents, and the payments were
often higher than what they received under that actual operation of the negligence regime. Many
insurers gained because the coverage of the entire payroll helped resolve adverse selection problems
that allowed them to profitably sell more insurance, as long as there was no state monopoly on
insurance. In 1996 there were 6 states with exclusive state funds and 19 with state funds that
compete with private insurers.
    2
      For example, in fall 2015 a group of leading workers' compensation scholars and practitioners
met at a symposium titled "The Demise of the Grand Bargain." The Rutgers University Law Review
published a series of papers and commentaries on the issue including ones by Spieler (2016), Relkin
(2016), Morantz et al. (2016) and Williams (2016) that described new challenges faced by workers
in obtaining benefits.
    3
      The measure calculates expected benefits by calculating the payments for four kinds of accidents
and then getting a weighted average of the benefits by multiplying by the probability of each kind


                                                  2
    Since the payments per covered worker in Figure 1 fell, other changes that re-
duced payments per worker had to have more than counteracted the rise in real
statutory benefits. One change is beneficial to workers. There was a significant
decline in fatal and non-fatal accident rates in the workplace. Between 1995 and
2014 the annual fatality rate per million workers fell by roughly one-third, while the
workplace fatal accident rate fell by roughly 59 percent.4 Figure 3 documents the
downward trend in the national workplace fatal accident rate.
    The other reasons for the decline might come from legislative changes that in-
fluenced the probability of receiving any compensation and/or prevented workers
from getting full statutory compensation (Spieler 2016). A Department of Labor
(undated, 17) report suggested that such changes "had enormous, though perhaps
more hidden, impact on injured workers' access to benefits." To our knowledge, we
are one of the first to try to measure the impact of such changes. We focus on five
types of laws, all of which can plausibly influence both cash benefits and medical
benefits: (1) laws that prohibit the use of the liberal construction rule; (2) laws that
presume intoxication was the proximate cause of injuries to an intoxicated worker;
(3) laws that apportion benefits based on a workers' preexisting conditions;(4) laws
establishing medical fee schedules, and (5) laws establishing stat-wide net-works of
physicians to treat work-related injuries. The first three changes raise workers'
burdens of proof and inevitably require workers to seek additional evidence to
support their claims, which would impose additional costs on their attempts to obtain
benefits or even make obtaining benefits infeasible. The last two legal changes
primarily aim at reducing the medical costs. However, cash benefits might also be
plausibly affected by these two changes if they lead to shorter treatment periods of
work-related injuries (Bernacki et al. 2006).
    To measure the impact of these laws, we develop an annual panel data set for the
states between 1997 and 2016. We then estimate the relationship between benefits
per covered worker and a measure of statutory benefits, fatal accident rates, and
these five types of laws in a model with state and year fixed effects and state-
specific time trends. The relationships are identified by deviations from trend over
time within the same state while controlling for nationwide shocks to the systems,
changes in statutory benefits, and changes in accident rates.
    Our findings suggest that the laws prohibiting liberal construction and laws
apportioning benefits based on pre-existing conditions contributed to reducing both
cash benefits and medical benefits per worker covered. Benefits were also negatively
related to intoxication and physician network laws, but there is evidence of negative
relationships between benefits and the eventual adoption of the laws before the
of accident. See the data section below for discussions of the methods.
   4
     Fishback (2016) calculated these estimates from data in McLaren & Baldwin (2016). For
nonfatal accidents the BLS changed its definitions and reporting in 2002. The new methods led to
an accident rate measure that was about 7.5 percent lower than the old measure, so we scaled up
the 2014 estimate for nonfatal accidents by that 7.5 percent before calculating the change in the
rate between 1994 and 2015.


                                               3
laws were enacted. We do not find evidence suggesting any significant impacts of
establishing medical fee schedule laws on either cash or medical benefits payment
per worker covered.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews relevant
institutional features and the economic literature of workers' compensation pro-
grams. Section III provides detailed descriptions of each of the five types of laws we
empirically examine. Section IV describes the data source. Section V presents the
econometric models. Section VI and VII describe the main results and the results
of placebo tests respectively. Section VIII offers concluding remarks.


II     The Structure of Workers' Compensation
From their beginnings workers' compensation programs have been state programs.
Employers are liable for accidents to workers that "arise out of or in the course
of employment." Employers cover this liability by direct purchase of insurance or
by forming self-insured pools if they can document adequate resources.5 Workers'
compensation benefits generally consist of two types: medical benefits and cash
benefits. Medical benefits cover the entire scope of medical expenses incurred in
treating work-related injuries and illnesses. Cash benefits partially compensate for
lost earnings of workers related to the accident. Such benefits are available to workers
who became disabled due to workplace accidents or to the dependents of deceased
workers. The wage-replacement benefits typically have a duration limit and are
a fraction of workers' pre-injury wages, with maximum and minimum restrictions
usually tied to state average wages. Overall, the program is a multi-billion-dollar
safety net program. In 2015, the total amount of workers' compensation benefits
payments to non-federal employees amounted to $30 billion for medical payment
and $28 billion for wage replacement.
    Economic studies of workers' compensation focus on examining the impacts of
the following three key regulations: monetary benefits, non-monetary eligibility re-
quirements and medical-care restrictions. The main outcome variables are related
to workplace safety and the program costs. The empirical strategy typically ex-
ploits the inter-state and inter-temporal variation of regulations of state workers'
compensation programs.
    One large strand of literature used a variety of measures of the cash benefits for
wage replacement, which we refer to as "expected benefits." Allen (2015) and Fish-
back & Kantor (1995) developed measures of cash benefits to examine the political
   5
    In many states employers purchase from private insurance companies. In 2019 North Dakota,
Ohio, Washington, and Wyoming operate exclusive state compensation fund, although Ohio and
Washington allow self-insurance in limited cases. Some private insurance can be found in those
states in cases where group policies overlap state boundaries. Another 21 states have insurance funds
that compete with private insurers for workers' compensation coverage. For more see:https://
www.insureon.com/insurance-glossary/workers-compensation-state-fund.



                                                 4
economy of the states' choice of benefits across time and place. Studies used mea-
sures of cash benefits to examine their influence on injury rates (Butler & Worrall,
1983; Moore & Viscusi, 1989; Krueger, 1990; Ruser, 1993; Guo & Burton Jr, 2010).
Similarly, a few papers looked at the effects of cash benefits on program costs and
the estimated "benefit elasticity" of costs with respect to cash benefits (Krueger et
al., 1990; Guo & Burton Jr 2010). Overall, this strand of literature has focused on
the period from the 1970s to the 1990s. One of our contributions is to update the
estimate of the "benefit elasticity" using data of more recent time frame, from 1997
to 2016.
     A smaller strand of literature developed measures that capture non-monetary
eligibility requirements for injured workers to receive compensation benefits. Burton
& Spieler (2001) highlighted the legislative phenomenon initiated in the 1990s that
tightened the eligibility requirements for workers' compensation benefits. A few
studies documented significant impacts of imposing eligibility requirements on both
workplace safety and cash benefits payment (Boden & Ruser 2003; Guo & Burton Jr
2010; Gentry & Viscusi 2019). None of the studies to date have examined the
structure of medical payments nor have they examined how specific procedural issues
and burdens of proof might change the size of the benefits. What's more, prior work
typically focused on eligibility laws that were passed in the 1980s and 1990s.6
     One of our novel contribution comes from examining how benefit payments per
covered worker in the states are influenced by laws related to burden of proof and
proximate causes of injuries. Raising workers' burdens of proof is a more subtle pro-
cedural reform, instead of directly altering the amounts to be paid. Such procedural
modifications can be a powerful channel affecting substantive outcomes. Congres-
sional Representative John Dingell once said:"I'll let you write the substance...you
let me write the procedure, and I'll screw you every time."7 In a comprehensive
treatise on workers' compensation, Spieler (2016) argues that "issues of proof" and
the uses of legislative presumptions meant to streamline the administrative process
have reduced worker access to benefits. The U.S. Department of Labor (undated,
17 and 22) shares the same concerns:

       "Changes in the processing and adjudication of claims have had enor-
       mous, though perhaps more hidden, impact on injured workers' access
   6
     The exception is Gentry & Viscusi(2019) who used the Pro Publica index and developed two
dummies which reflect whether workers' compensation programs become more generous or stringent.
The dummy variables broadly include a wide range of eligibility rules that were passed in the recent
two decades. The Pro Publica index only focuses on the changes in laws between 2002 and 2014
and does not include laws of the same type that were in place at the start of the period. We
used the Pro Publica laws as a starting point and then did a comprehensive search of the workers'
compensation laws already in place at the start of our time period and then went through the
statutes that followed to double check the Pro Publica laws and to add any that they may have
missed.
   7
     Regulatory Reform Act: Hearing on H.R. 2327 Before the H. Subcomm. on Admin. Law and
Governmental Relations, 98th Cong. 312 (1983)


                                                 5
        to benefits."
        "New features of workers' compensation systems, such as higher burdens
        of proof for injured workers, serve to reduce access to benefits."

    We assess how large an effect these changes in laws have had on changes in
benefits per covered worker, both cash and medical.
    Another contribution is our updating of the studies of the impact of medical-care
restriction laws. Compared with injuries that occurred in non-work environments,
the medical costs of treating work-related injuries are much higher (Durbin et al.
1996; Butler & Worrall 1983). In response, states have been passing laws that re-
strict the use of medical care, such as imposing medical fee schedules and limiting
workers' free choice of treating physicians. Earlier studies have examined the ef-
fects of medical-care restriction laws on work-related injuries and medical benefits
payment but did not find evidence suggesting that the laws were effective (Boden
& Fleischman 1989; Pozzebon 1994; Boden & Ruser 2003). None of the existing
studies measured the impacts of medical-care restriction laws that were passed in
the past two decades. Our research also fills this gap by assessing how cash and
medical benefits are affected by medical fee schedule laws and physician network
laws.


III      Recent State Legislation
III.1     Overview
Under the workers' compensation system, the burden of proof usually rests upon the
injured worker to establish two types of causation: legal and medical. To establish
legal causation, workers are usually required to make a prima facie showing all
of the following three elements: (1) employees acted in the course of employment;
(2) employees suffered an injury from an accident arising out of and in the course
of employment; and (3) work activities contributed to the injury. To establish
medical causation, workers are generally required to show that the accident caused
the injury.8 Usually, the evidentiary standard required to show causation is by the
"preponderance of the evidence." If the worker fails to establish any of the three
elements of causation, the benefits can be reduced or eliminated. Showing causation
does not guarantee benefit payments. Employers could still avoid the payment by
raising statutory defenses, such as intoxication and pre-existing conditions.
    The workers' actual burdens are highly contextual and vary significantly based
on the type of injury, the workers' characteristics, and the governing state law. The
states have different presumptions of compensability, which affect the allocation of
burdens of proof between employers and workers. For example, Maine case law
  8
    The standard is elaborate in an Arizona Supreme Court decision, Grammatico v. Industrial
Commission of Arizona, 117 P.3d 786. For detailed review of the decision, see Wheeler (2006).


                                             6
establishes a presumption that work injuries are not caused by diseases unrelated to
employment. As a result, if employers attempt to escape compensation liability on
the ground that the injuries are caused by prior diseases, they bear the burden to
establish such a causal link.9 What's more, the workers' burdens of proof could also
change due to individual-specific characteristics, like the presence of a preexisting
medical condition. An injured worker with a preexisting condition might have to
show that the workplace accident was the major contributing cause of his injuries.
    In examining the laws identified by Pro Publica and through our own reading
of the statutes, we focus on five types of laws that influenced the likelihood of com-
pensation or might reduce the amount of compensation on a proportional basis: (1)
prohibitions on the use of the liberal construction rule; (2) presumption of workers'
intoxication as the proximate cause of their injuries; (3) apportionment of benefits
on the basis of workers' preexisting medical conditions; (4) the establishment of
medical fee schedules; and (5) laws that initialize and regulate physician network
to treat work-related injuries. Table 1 summarizes the states and times when each
type of the laws was passed.

III.2    Liberal Construction of Statutes
Awards of benefits involve the interpretation of a variety of statutes. The "liberal
construction rule" interprets the statute by presuming that workers prevail by de-
fault if there are ambiguities related to the merits of the claim. The countervailing
doctrine is the "strict construction rule," which requires adjudicators to resolve dis-
putes solely based on the evidentiary merits of the claims and opposes presuming
either party as the default winner.
    Statutes and case laws are the two main ways for states to adopt a liberal
construction rule. Ohio and Maryland, for example, have explicit statutes that
require the law to be liberally construed.10 The most commonly seen justification
favoring the liberal construction rule is the remedial nature of workers compensation
laws. For example, a Wisconsin decision held that a firefighter who died while saving
his family from a fire at night was acting within the scope of employment; therefore,
his family could receive workers' compensation death benefits. One justification for
the ruling is that the remedial purpose of the law requires the statutory term, "within
scope of employment," to be liberally interpreted to allow benefits payments.11
    On the other hand, states prohibiting the liberal construction rule argue against
the remedial nature of workers' compensation law. In those states, the goal of work-
ers' compensation laws is to strike a balance between workers' interests in obtaining
benefits and employers' interests in maintaining reasonably low costs of compensat-
  9
     Davidson v. Bancroft, 560 A2d 13
  10
     Ohio provision: R.C. § 4123.95; Maryland provision: MD LABOR EMPLY § 9-102
  11
     Town of Russell Volunteer Fire Dept. v. Labor and Industry Review Com'n, 223 Wis. 2d 723
(Ct. App. 1998)




                                             7
ing work injuries. Statutes in Florida12 and Minnesota13 explicitly say that workers'
compensation mutually renounces common law rights and defenses of workers and
employers. Thus, the liberal construction rule is disallowed because it unjustifiably
places workers' interests over employers' interests.
    Prior to 1997, the beginning of our sample period, seven states prohibited the
use of the liberal construction doctrine in resolving workers' compensation disputes.
During our sample period from 1997 to 2016, four states passed new statutes pro-
hibiting its use. A West Virginia amendment in 2003 stated:

        "the Legislature hereby declares that any remedial component of the
        workers' compensation laws is not to cause the workers' compensation
        laws to receive liberal construction that alters in any way the proper
        weighing of evidence as required..."14

  Similarly, Indiana legislation in 2006 implicitly prevented the adjudicator from
making a presumption favorable to workers in issues related to burdens of proof.15

III.3     Intoxication Presumed As a Proximate Cause of Injury
In most of the states, intoxication is a statutory defense to reduce or eliminate
compensation for an intoxicated worker injured on the job (Larson 1973). A worker's
intoxication could significantly undermine the claim that the suffered injures were
caused by the underlying risk of the employment. Whether intoxication is presumed
to be the proximate cause of work-related injuries has significant implications for the
workers' burdens of proof. If such presumption is not allowed, the employer bears
the burden of establishing that intoxication was the proximate cause of the injury to
avoid compensation liability. On the other hand, if such presumption is allowed, the
injured worker bears the burden to show that their injuries are independent from the
intoxication in order to receive compensation benefits. Allowing the presumption
that intoxication is a proximate cause plausibly reduces the probability the injured
worker will be compensated due to the added costs of collecting sufficient evidence
to rebut the presumption.
    A majority of the states disallow the presumption through common law prece-
dents, statutes or a combination of both. The Minnesota workers' compensation
statutes explicitly require employers to show intoxication is the proximate cause of
workers' injuries.16 A Virginia decision held that an injured worker, who suffered
  12
     West's F.S.A. § 440.015: Legislative Intent
  13
     M.S.A. § 176.001: Intent of the Legislature
  14
     WV ST § 23-1-1
  15
     IC 22-3-7-2:"The burden of proof is on the employee. The proof by the employee of an element
of a claim does not create a presumption in favor of the employee with regard to another element
of the claim."
  16
     M.S.A. § 176.021:"If...the intoxication of the employee is the proximate cause of the injury,
then the employer is not liable for compensation. The burden of proof of these facts is upon the
employer."


                                                8
fractures due to a fall from a forklift pallet while clearly intoxicated, was still en-
titled to workers' compensation benefits.17 The ruling stated that the proximate
cause of the injury was the backward movement of the forklift before lowering the
pallet and the employer failed to establish that intoxication was the proximate cause
of his injuries.
    Prior to 1997, there were seven states that allowed the presumption of workers'
intoxication as the proximate cause of injuries. During the sample period from 1997
to 2016, six additional states added new language allowing such a presumption.18
The new language in Missouri in 2006 stated:

        "The voluntary use of alcohol to the percentage of blood alcohol sufficient
        under Missouri law to constitute legal intoxication shall give rise to a
        rebuttable presumption that the voluntary use of alcohol under such
        circumstances was the proximate cause of the injury. A preponderance
        of the evidence standard shall apply to rebut such presumption."19

III.4     Benefits Apportionment Due to Preexisting Conditions
Preexisting conditions can potentially prevent injured workers from recovering the
full amount of compensation benefits. Workers with preexisting health conditions
are typically eligible for compensation benefits only if the job-related injuries signifi-
cantly aggravate the intensity of the preexisting conditions. Injured workers are not
eligible for compensation benefits if their symptoms are a "mere natural progression"
of their preexisting conditions.20
    Once "significant aggravation" of preexisting conditions is established, states
have adopted one of two compensation regimes. About half of the states pay work-
ers the full amount, which raises the financial burden on employers. To mitigate the
financial burdens and to provide more employment opportunities to workers with
preexisting conditions, some states have established "second injury funds" which
partially cover compensation benefits payments to workers with preexisting condi-
tions.
    The rest of the states pay workers the fraction of benefits that matches the
fraction of the condition that was solely induced by the workplace accident. These
states usually only apportion permanent disability benefits. Workers can usually
  17
     Wyle v. Professional Services Industries, Inc.,406 S.E.2d 410 (1991)
  18
     Arziona(1999-2005), Texas(2005), Missouri(2006), Mississippi(2012) and Nevada(2015). In
1999, Arizona initiated the use of such presumption in A.R.S § 23-1021 (D) which was later struck
down in 2005 by a state Supreme Court case, Grammatico v. Industrial Comm. The court held
that such presumption violates workers' state constitutional right to compensation. Illinois is of its
own category in the list.
  19
     MO ST 287.120
  20
     Bright v. Sheehan Pipeline, 960 P.2d 1009 (Wyo. 1998): Workers' injuries resulting from falling
against a pipe is uncompensable because they are a natural and normal process of his preexisting
conditions.


                                                  9
recover the full amount of temporary disability benefits, regardless of the status of
their preexisting conditions.21
    To some extent the apportioning of benefits substantively relates directly to the
amount of benefits paid. At the same time the apportionment also relates to burdens
of proof because workers have to show that their medical symptoms are 100 percent
attributable to the workplace accident in order to receive full benefits, and this often
is difficult. Before 1997, there were 21 states with laws that apportioned benefits
when workers had preexisting conditions. Over the sample period, three more states
joined the benefits apportionment list.22 In California, the new language in 2004
read:

        "(a)The employer shall only be liable for the percentage of permanent
        disability directly caused by the injury arising out of and occurring in the
        course of employment. (b)If the applicant has received a prior award of
        permanent disability, it shall be conclusively presumed that the prior per-
        manent disability exists at the time of any subsequent industrial injury.
        This presumption is a presumption affecting the burden of proof."23

III.5     Medical-Care Restriction Laws
The rapid increases in medical costs over the last 40 years have directly affected
the medical costs of treating workplace injuries under workers' compensation. As
a result, states have explored a variety of ways to control the costs while trying to
maintain appropriate medical treatment of injuries. The two most common forms of
medical legislation are laws that alter medical fee schedules and laws that establish
state-wide networks of physicians to treat work-related injuries.

III.5.1     Medical Fee Schedule Laws
Adoption of a medical fee schedule puts a limit on the workers' compensation pay-
ment to medical care providers for providing injured workers with various medical
services. The fee schedule is typically adopted by the state agency in charge of
administering the workers' compensation program.24
    In states where the medical fee schedule system does not exist, there are other
types of restrictions on medical benefit payments. Georgia state law requires the
  21
     For example, the following is a Colorado statutory provision about benefits apportionment :"(3)
An employee's temporary total disability, temporary partial disability, or medical benefits shall not
be reduced based on a previous injury;(4) An employee's recovery of permanent total disability
shall not be reduced ..." C.R.S.A Colo. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 8-42-104 (West)
  22
     California(2004), Kansas(2011) and Missouri(2006)
  23
     West's Ann.Cal.Labor Code § 4664 (a) - (b)
  24
     It's usually the commissioners of state workers' compensation commission. But there are ex-
ceptions. For example, in Oregon, it is the Director of Consumer and Business Service who is in
charge of promulgating rules for developing and publishing fee schedules for medical services.



                                                 10
State Board of Workers' Compensation to approve, on a case-by-case basis, the
payment of physician fees, hospital charges, charges of prescription drugs or other
costs of regulated medical items. All of the filed medical payments are reviewed on
the "reasonablenes" standard by a panel of experts composed of peer physicians and
hospital representatives.25
    Prior to 1997, there were 24 states that had adopted fee schedule systems for
medical service. During our sample period from 1997 to 2016, an additional 15
states adopted fee schedule provisions for medical service payments. For example,
Idaho adopted a fee schedule in 2005 by adding the following language:

       "The commission may adopt a fee schedule to determine the allowable
       payments to be made to medical providers under this chapter, including
       but not limited to, the fee schedule the commission has adopted to de-
       termine the allowable payments to be made to medical providers under
       the Idaho worker's compensation law."26

III.5.2    Physician Choice and Physician Network Laws
Choice of physicians is an important issue in the state workers' compensation pro-
grams. Employers and workers have competing self-interests in determining providers
of medical care. Employers want to treat workers' injuries in a way that minimizes
the medical costs. In contrast, if the medical services are covered, workers tend to
have their injuries treated with the "best-quality" medical care and are less con-
cerned about the costs. State laws developed various systems to account for the
legitimate interests of both employers and workers.
    In some states workers play a major role in determining medical care although
their choices are usually subject to some restrictions.27 In other states, medical care
is mainly determined by employers. State laws usually require employers to furnish
medical care and workers' choices are usually limited to what employers offer.28
    Physician networks normally consist of doctors specialized in treating occupa-
tional diseases or general fields of medicine.29 To join the network, medical care
providers typically need to apply and get approved by the state agency in charge of
administering the workers' compensation programs. Employers may choose to join
the network for treating workers' work-related injuries, but this is not a mandate.
  25
     § 34-9-205 (a)-(b)
  26
     ID ST § 72-1026
  27
     For example, in Hawaii, injured workers are free to choose any physician or surgeon who practice
on the island. However, workers need to comply with fee schedules and provide sufficient notice to
employers about the choice of physicians. See HI ST § 386-21.
  28
     In these states workers can only determine treating physicians under extraordinary circum-
stances, such as an emergency (See IN ST 22-3-3-4 and IA ST § 85.27) and an employers' failure
to provide medical care (ID ST § 72-432).
  29
     The physician network in California has the following website: https://www.dir.ca.gov/dwc/
mpn/dwc mpn faq.html


                                                 11
If the employers are in the network, the physician choices of injured workers are
constrained to choose a physician in the approved network.
    Our analysis focuses on assessing the impacts of state laws that initiate and
regulate physician networks to treat work-related injuries.30 Prior to 1997, three
states had authorized and regulated physician networks. Over our sample period
from 1997 to 2016, four states passed new laws that established such networks. For
example, California passed the following provision in 2005:

       " . . . an insurer, employer, or entity that provides physician network
       services may establish or modify a medical provider network for the
       provision of medical treatment to injured employees. The network shall
       include physicians primarily engaged in the treatment of occupational
       injuries. The administrative director shall encourage the integration of
       occupational and nonoccupational providers . . . "31


IV      Data
We construct a state-by-year panel dataset from 1997 to 2016 by putting together
data from the National Academy of Social Insurance (NASI), Bureau of Labor Statis-
tics (BLS), Social Security Administration (SSA), the ProPublica Website, and law
volumes for the states.

IV.1     Cash Benefits and Medical Benefits
The dependent variables in the analysis are the cash benefits per covered worker
and medical benefits per covered worker. The cash benefits are the payments to
replace lost earnings for injured or deceased workplace accident victims. Covered
workers refer to workers on employer payrolls who are eligible to receive benefits
when injured. The information comes from annual NASI reports titled Workers'
Compensation Benefits, Coverage, and Costs from 1997 through 2016.32 To obtain
measures in 2010 U.S. dollars, we deflate the cash benefits by the national Consumer
  30
     Private insurers also establish physician networks without the support of state regulation. For
example, "Omnet Gold"(OG) is a physician network for work-related injuries in Louisiana and was
developed entirely by a for-profit private insurer, Louisiana Workers' Compensation Corporation
(LWCC), with little involvement from the state bureaucracy. Bernacki et al. (2006) performed a
study that compared workers' compensation claims managed by the OG health-care providers to
claims managed by non-OG healthcare providers with the following results: (1) the average number
of reported lost days for closed OG claims is 53, lower than non-OG claims', 99; (2) the average
medical care costs for closed OG claims is 5855, signicantly lower than non-OG claims', 9850 and
(3) For closed OG claims, the average indemnity costs is 4864, lower than the non-OG claims',
7881.
  31
     CA LABOR § 4616
  32
     The reports can be downloaded from the following link: https://www.nasi.org/research/
workers-compensation



                                                12
Price Index for urban areas and medical benefits by the national Consumer Price
Index for medical care.33 Figure 1 shows the trends of these calculations at the
national level.

IV.2     Workers' Compensation Expected Benefits Index
To control for statutory changes in the payments for different types of accidents we
follow Allen (2015) and Kantor & Fishback (1995) in creating an "expected benefits
index." The state laws generally stipulate different payment schemes for various
accident outcomes. We divided injuries into four types: death, permanent total
disability, permanent partial disability, and temporary total disability. With a few
exceptions, the benefits payment schedules specify a weekly payment duration and a
weekly payment amount that is a percentage of usual weekly earnings up to a weekly
maximum and not below a weekly minimum. Most state laws index the weekly
maximums to the annual state-level average weekly wage. Weekly cash benefits are
determined by multiplying workers' weekly wage by a replacement percentage that
is specified in statutes, usually 2/3. The maximum weekly wage replacement data
are collected from the Social Security Administration34 as well as state statutes.
    For each accident type we calculate the present value of the stream of weekly
payments using a discount rate of 5 percent and the national average weekly wage
for that year.35 We chose the national average weekly wage to ensure that the
variation in the payments across states was driven only by statutory differences in
the state laws. We then calculated real present values in 2010 dollars using the
Consumer Price Index. Then, we calculated the weighted sum of the real present
values of the four types of accident payments with the accident probabilities as
weights.36 The expected benefit index offers a single value for the generosity of
workers' compensation cash benefits that incorporates information on the generosity
for all types of accidents. We held the accident rate weights constant across time so
that the only reasons for the changes in the state expected benefits is differences in
statutes and changes over time in the national average wage. Figure 2 shows that
the national average of these real expected benefit payments has a strong upward
trend. To get the downward trend in national average cash payments per covered
workers in Figure 1, there must be factors causing a strong downward trend that
more than offset the rising trend in benefits.
  33
     The Consumer Price Index data comes from the US Bureau of Labor Statistics and can be
downloaded from the following website: https://www.bls.gov/cpi/data.htm
  34
     The SSA maintains and regularly updates a chart of "States' Maximum Workers' Compen-
sation(WC) Benefits, which is publicly available and could be found from the following link:
https://secure.ssa.gov/poms.nsf/lnx/0452150045
  35
     SSA develops a national average wage index for benefits computation purpose. Our national
average wage is calculated by dividing the index by 52. The index data can be found in the following
website:https://www.ssa.gov/oact/cola/AWI.html
  36
     The accident probability data comes from Accident Facts, which was published by the National
Safety Council in 1997.


                                                13
IV.3      Fatal Accident Rate
One of the factors that has contributed to the decline in benefit payments per covered
worker in Figure 1 is the improvement of workplace safety, reflected by a decline in
accident rate. Information by state and year for the number of fatal accidents and
the number employed in private industry come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS).37 We then calculate the number of fatal workplace accidents per 100,000
workers in private industry for each year and state. Fatal injury information is
available in all of the states as reporting of workplace fatal injuries is mandatory. But
non-fatal injury information is only available in states that are willing participate
BLS Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illness, which is not federally mandated.
Due to substantial number of missing value issue for the non-fatal injury data, we
chose to use fatal injury data as the proxy of workplace safety environment. The
national average of the fatal accident rate in Figure 3 fell by about one-third between
1997 and 2016. This decline is potentially a reason for the declines in benefits per
covered worker seen in Figure 1. The national average for missed days due to
nonfatal injuries in the reporting states also showed a significant decline over the
study period.

IV.4      State Laws
The set of state laws collected by Pro Publica inspired our interest in studying the
issue, but Grabell and Qiu only collected new state laws between 2002 and 2014.38
We expanded on their work by using the statute volumes for the states from WestLaw
to establish the status quo as of 1997 and to add laws passed in other years through
2016. For each of the category of laws, we created dummy variables with a value
of one if the law was present in the state and zero otherwise.39 As shown in the
discussion of the state laws, some had versions of a law throughout the time period,
others added the law during the time frame and others did not. Table 1 summarizes
the states and years when each types of laws were passed.
   37
      BLS maintains and regularly updates data on state-level occupational injuries, illness and fatal-
ities. The data can be access using the following link: https://www.bls.gov/iif/state archive
.htm#AZ. The employment data come from the Current Employment Statistics (CES) in BLS. The
data are the seasonally adjusted number of employment in private industry at given state and year.
The data can be assessed from the following link: https://www.bls.gov/data/#employment
   38
      Their full study is in the following link: https://projects.propublica.org/graphics/
workers-comp-reform-by-state
   39
      We dropped Oklahoma in the empirical analysis due to unique and significant changes to the
state workers' compensation system, which are hard to quantify. In 2013, a new law allowed
employers to opt-out of the the state workers' compensation system, which was struck down as
unconstitutional in a 2016 Oklahoma State Supreme Court decision. See Vasquez v. Dillard's
Inc., 381 P.3d 768 (2016). NPR has extensive media coverage of the Oklahoma decision, refer
to the following link: https://www.npr.org/2016/09/13/493805684/oklahomas-top-court-says
-companies-cant-set-own-rules-for-injured-workers




                                                  14
V      Econometric Models
Our goal is to examine how the laws influence the total benefits paid out per cov-
ered worker, which is essentially every worker in the sectors covered by the workers'
compensation law. Thus, covered workers include the non-injured, the injured who
receive benefits, and the injured who do not receive benefits. Scholars and practi-
tioners predict that each of the five laws would reduce average benefits per covered
worker because fewer injured workers would obtain benefits or the benefits that
they receive would be reduced. There is a possibility that a change in the burden
of proof might lead to an increase in the average benefits paid per claim to injured
workers who actually receive benefits because of increases in "case quality." This
would happen if some injured workers stop pursuing claims altogether because the
costs of meeting the burden of proof are too high when there is a dispute.40 Average
benefits per covered worker would still fall when the fall in the number of injured
workers receiving benefits and the increase in the number of workers who accept
lower benefits in dispute settlements is large enough to offset the case quality ef-
fect. The final effect of all three possible changes is an empirical question that the
econometric analysis directly addresses.
    To estimate the relationships between average benefits per covered worker and
the laws, we employ the following fixed effects model as the main specification:


        Log Benef itsst = 0 + 1 Log Indexst + 2 Log F atal Accident Ratest
                                                                                                (1)
                        +3 Legislationst + s + t + s t + st
    The outcome variable is Log Benef itst , the natural logarithm of benefit pay-
ments per covered worker, either cash or medical, in state s at year t. Log Indexst
is the natural logarithm of workers' compensation expected benefits index in state
s at year t. The expected benefits index variable is only included for analyzing
cash benefits, as it does not capture any information related to medical benefits
payments. Log Accident Ratest is the natural logarithm of fatal accident rate in
state s year t.
    Legislationst is a vector that includes dummy variables for the 5 different types
of state laws. Each dummy has a value of one if the law is in place and zero otherwise.
Thus, states with the relevant law as of 1997 have a value of one throughout the
time period. Once a state passes the law the dummy has a value of one thereafter.
  40
     The issue of increased case quality through selection arose in empirical studies evaluating the
causal impact of the heightened pleading standard introduced by Bell Atlantic v. Twombly, 550
U.S. 544 (2007) and Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 129 S.Ct. 1937 (2009). Twombly and Iqbal replaced the
previous "no-set-of-fact" pleading standard with a new "plausibility" standard, which raised the
evidentiary bar for litigated cases to survive a motion to dismiss. In empirical studies the new
standard had little impact on the probability of granting motions to dismiss (Hubbard 2013, 2017)
or of surviving summary judgment (Gelbach, 2016). Gelbach (2011) developed an economic model
that outlines the channels through which higher quality cases are selected into litigation through
decisions by defendants and plaintiffs in the settlement process.


                                                15
s is a vector of state fixed effects, controlling for time-invariant and state-specific
unobserved characteristics, such as workers' demographics and industry composi-
tion. t is a vector of year fixed effects, accounting for national shocks like changes
in federal OSHA regulations. We also include a vector of state-specific time trends,
s t, to account for state-specific trends. It is necessary to include a state-specific
time trend in the main specification to avoid spurious correlation because both cash
and medical benefits per covered worker tended to have downward trends. Standard
errors are clustered at the state level (Bertrand et al., 2004).
    The variation used to estimate the relationships comes from deviations from
trend over time within the same state after controlling for national shocks. For
the law coefficients to be causal estimates, the law dummies must be uncorrelated
with the error term, st , after controlling for the expected benefits index, the fatal
accident rate, time-invariant features of the states, trends in the states, and national
shocks. If there is endogeneity bias based on reverse causation related to the political
economy of the laws, we anticipate in each case that it will be positive. States are
more likely to adopt measures to limit benefits of both kinds in settings where
benefits are high and rising faster than anticipated. If this prediction holds, the
coefficient estimates would understate the impact of the laws on benefit payments
per covered worker.
    To test the strength of our identification, we implement the following lead-lag
placebo test, which imposes a slight modification to the main model :


       Log Benef itsst = 0 + 1 Log Indexst + 2 Log F atal Accident Ratest
                                                                                    (2)
                     +i Legislationst+i + s + t + s t + st

    Compared with Model(1), Model(2) adds leads or lags to the dummies in the
Legislationst vector. i index the lags or leads and take integer values from -3 to
3. For example, if i is -2, the Legislation coefficient measures the relationships
between benefits and the law while pretending the law had been adopted 2 years
prior to the actual year of adoption. If there is no selection bias associated with
the state adopting the law, the coefficient i will be statistically indistinguishable
from zero. Similarly, if i is 3, the coefficient measures the impact by pretending
the passage of the law was delayed by 3 years. The estimates in the i then tell us
whether the legislative effects are contemporaneous or are delayed over time. We
performed separate placebo tests one by one for leads of -3, -2 and -1 years and lags
of 1, 2 and 3 years.


VI     Main Results
Our main results are based on regression specifications that include all five types
of the laws, which are reported in Tables 2 and 3. In addition, we also separately
estimate the effects of each type of law, which are reported in the Appendix.

                                          16
     Table 2 shows the OLS estimates of how cash benefits payments are affected by
various workers' compensation laws. The preferred specification is in Column (4)
which includes state fixed effects, year fixed effects and state-specific linear time
trend. The results suggest that cash benefits payments are lower in states that
adopted these types of laws. The cash benefits are 9.8 percent lower in states that
prohibit the use of the literal construction rule, 11.7 percent lower in states with
intoxication laws, 17 percent lower in states where benefits can be apportioned based
on workers' preexisting conditions, 2.5 percent lower in states that adopted medical
fee schedules and 15.3 percent lower in states with physician network laws. All of
law coefficients are statistically significant except the one for medical fee schedules.
     Another key finding is that there is a strong relationship between the cash bene-
fits payment and expected benefits index. As both the payment and the index are in
natural logarithm forms, the estimated coefficient is the elasticity of actual benefit
payments per covered worker with respect to statutory benefits, which is similar
to the "benefit elasticity" in the literature. The results suggest that a 1 percent
increase in the expected benefits index is associated with a 1.15 percent increase in
the cash benefits payment. The estimated elasticity is slightly larger than 1 and
consistent with the estimate by Krueger et al. (1990) where they found an one unit
increase in workers' compensation benefits is approximately associated with an one
unit increase of employers' costs in paying workers' compensation claims. Finally,
although we expected a positive coefficient for the fatal accident rate, the elasticity
is very small at -0.007 and statistically insignificant.
     Our main goal is to try to describe which changes are most closely related to
the decline in the national average of cash benefits per covered worker between 1997
and 2016. Using the means for the variables for 1997 and 2016 and the coefficients,
we developed a decomposition to see how much weight to give to the laws (Oaxaca
& Ransom 1994). Table 4 shows the results of decomposition analysis for cash
benefit payments. The mean of the natural log of cash benefits per worker fell
from 5.38 in 1997 to 5.01 in 2016. While the mean of the log of expected benefits
rose, the log of the fatal accident rate fell, and the share of states with each of
the laws rose. After multiplying by the coefficients in Column (4) of Table 2, the
decomposition shows that the rise in the log expected benefit measure was associated
with raising the log benefit per covered worker by 53.2%. The drop in the log
fatal accident rate explains very little. The new laws banning liberal construction
accounted for 2.1% of the national drop, the ones for intoxication accounted for 2.5%
of the drop, the apportionment laws for prior conditions accounted for 1.9% of the
drop, the physician network laws accounted for 3.3% of the drop and the preexisting
condition laws accounted for 0.9% of the drop. In total, the five types of workers'
compensation laws can explain 10.7% of the declines of the national average of cash
benefits payments per covered worker.
     Table 3 shows the OLS estimates of how medical benefits are affected by the
workers' compensation laws. Again, Column (4) is the preferred specification. The


                                          17
results show the medical benefits per covered worker were significantly lower in
states that adopted each type of the law. They are 4.4% lower in states that banned
liberal constructions, 8% lower in states with new intoxication legislation, 19% lower
in states that apportioned benefits based on preexisting conditions, 1.6% lower in
states that adopted medical fee schedule laws and 20% lower in states that adopted
physician network laws. The point estimate for medical fee schedule laws is the
only one that is not statistically significant. This set of results is consistent with
our finding in cash benefits payment, suggesting the laws negatively affected both
cash and medical benefits payments in similar ways. The result for medical fee
schedule laws is consistent with Pozzebon (1994), who did not find evidence that
having medical fee schedule is negatively correlated with medical benefits payment.
It is plausible that states, without formal medical fee schedules, might have other
types of restrictions on reimbursement of medical care expenses, such as some form
of administrative review. In addition, as expected, the fatal injury rate is positively
correlated with medical benefits payment, but the coefficient of 0.02 is relatively
small and statistically indistinguishable from 0.
    Again, using the means for the variables in 1997 and 2016 and the coefficients,
we developed an another decomposition analysis to see how much of the decline in
the national medical benefits payment per covered worker can be explained by the
passage of workers' compensation laws. The results are in Table 5. The mean of the
natural log of the medical benefits per covered worker fell from 5.41 in 1997 to 5.13 in
2016. Using the estimated coefficients in Column (4) of Table 3, our decomposition
exercise suggests that the laws banning liberal construction can explain 1.2% of
the drop in the national medical benefits payment, the intoxication laws can explain
2.1% of the drop, laws allowing benefits apportionment due to preexisting conditions
can explain 2.7% of the drop, medical fee schedule laws can explain 0.7% of the drop
and physician network laws can explain 6.5% of the drop. In total, the new workers'
compensation laws can explain 13.3% of the declines in the national average of
medical benefits payment per covered worker.


VII      Placebo Test Results
To further investigate the strength of the identification, we perform a series of
placebo tests by estimating Equation (2). To perform the tests, we generate a
series of "placebo" laws by shifting the timing of the laws forward and backward by
one year, two year and three years. Statistically insignificant effects of the "placebo"
laws provide additional support that the coefficients on cash and medical benefits
payments are driven by the changes of workers' compensation laws, instead of un-
observed underlying trends. However, it is also plausible that the "placebo" laws
could yield statistically significant effects. For example, if impacts of the laws are
persistent or the implementation of the laws takes time, we should see significant
"placebo" effects in the regressions where the timing of the laws are lagged. Sim-


                                          18
ilarly, if people started responding the laws earlier in anticipation that the laws
would pass in the future, we should see statistically significant "placebo" effects in
regressions where we add leads to the timings of the laws. Table 6 and Table 7 show
the placebo tests results on the effects of workers' compensation laws on cash and
medical benefit payments respectively. The column labeled "No Change" in Table
6 shows the estimates for the actual timing of the laws from column (4) in Table 2,
while the "No Change" column in Table 7 shows the estimates for the actual timing
from column (4) in Table 3.
    For the laws that prohibit liberal construction, the first row of Table 6 shows
no sign that the negative relationship between the eventual adoption of the law and
benefits per covered worker was present prior to its actual implementation. When
the placebo law is introduced three years early, two years early, or one year early,
the coefficient is positive, the opposite sign, and statistically insignificant. When we
artificially delay the law by one, two, or three years, the effects of the law become
more negative, which suggests that it might have taken some time before the negative
effects were fully manifested. The results for medical benefits per covered worker
in Table 6 also show statistically insignificant effects when we artificially move the
passage of the law earlier in time. When we delay the law artificially, the coefficients
of the delayed laws are more negative than under the "No Change" column but they
are not statistically significant.
    The placebo test results for apportionment laws also show no sign that there was
a negative relationship of cash benefits per covered worker prior to the adoption
of the laws. When we set the placebo laws earlier in Table 6, two of the three
coefficients are positive, the opposite sign, and the coefficient for the one-year lead
is much smaller than the actual law coefficient and not statistically significant. When
we push the timing of the law later than the true timing, the coefficients become
somewhat more negative. The results are similar in Table 7 for medical benefits per
covered worker with the exception that artificially delaying the laws by two or three
years leads to less negative coefficients.
    The results in Tables 6 and 7 for the intoxication laws raise some questions about
the negative impact we found for the actual timing of the laws in Tables 2 and 3.
When we artificially move the laws earlier in Table 6, the coefficients are negative
and statistically significant and of similar size to the -0.116 coefficient for the actual
timing of the law. Similarly, pushing the law forward for medical benefits per covered
worker in Table 7 leads to a negative and statistically significant coefficient of -0.0942
for the artificial law one year earlier that is larger than the -0.0758 coefficient for
the actual timing.
    There is some question raised about the negative effects of the physician network
laws as well in Tables 6 and 7. The results follow a similar pattern as for the
intoxication laws. In both Tables 6 and 7 there is at least one coefficient for an
artificially early law that is statistically significant and roughly the same size as the
coefficient for the actual timing of law.


                                           19
    The results for the placebo tests for the medical fee schedule laws in Tables 6
and 7 are essentially the same as the results in Tables 2 and 3. The coefficients are
small and statistically insignificant in all but one case.
    The results of the placebo tests show that we can comfortably make claims
that the bans on liberal construction and the apportionment of benefits based on
preceding conditions contributed to a drop in both average cash benefits and average
medical benefits per covered worker. Although we found negative relationships
found for the intoxication law and the physician network law, the presence of lower
benefits prior to the eventual adoption of the law leaves uncertainty about their
ultimate impact.


VIII      Conclusion
Over the past two decades most states have amended their workers' compensation
laws and the national average of benefits per covered worker have fallen sharply
for both cash and medical benefits. These trends raised concerns that workers
were receiving less from the Grand Bargain associated with the laws. We show
here that statutory benefits have actually risen during this time frame, pushing
workers' compensation payments in the opposite direction. So what has been driving
payments per covered worker down?
    We provide a partial answer to the puzzle by empirically investigating how ben-
efit payments are influenced by state laws that make it more difficult to obtain
benefits based on burden of proof and by controlling access to expensive medical
treatments. We examine the impact of five types of laws: prohibit the use of liberal
construction rules, assume intoxication as the proximate cause of work-related in-
juries, apportion benefits on the basis of preexisting condi-tions, impose medical fee
schedules, and establish state-wide physician networks to treat work-related injuries.
    The two laws that had negative effects that survive placebo tests are the laws
that ban liberal construction rules and that apportion benefits based on pre-existing
conditions. In the states where they were enacted, the bans on liberal construction
rules was associated with a drop of 9.8 percent in cash benefits per covered worker
and 4.4 percent in medical benefits per covered workers. The percentage drops
associated with the apportionment laws in the states where they were adopted were
17 and 19 percent, respectively. The results show that changes in burden of proof
can have substantial impact on the payments to workers' compensation.
    One goal of the paper has been to examine how much of the change in national
average benefits per covered worker between 1997 and 2016 in Figures 1 can be
attributed to these laws. These are large drops in the states involved, but their
impact on the national averages were smaller because only four states adopted the
liberal construction ban and three adopted apportionment between 1997 and 2016
(Table 1). The bans on liberal construction contributed 2.1 percent and apportion-
ment laws contributed 1.8 percent of the drop in national average cash benefits per


                                         20
covered workers in Figure 1, while they contributed 1.2 percent and 2.7 percent of
the drop in the national medical benefits in Figure1.


References
Allen, S. K. (2015). Struggle for regulatory power between states and the us federal
  government: The case of workers compensation insurance 1930-2000. Journal of
  Economics and Political Economy , 2 (3), 351­373.

Bernacki, E. J., Tao, X. G., & Yuspeh, L. (2006). An investigation of the effects of
  a healthcare provider network on costs and lost time in workers' compensation.
  Journal of occupational and environmental medicine , 48 (9), 873­882.

Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., & Mullainathan, S. (2004). How much should we
  trust differences-in-differences estimates? The Quarterly Journal of Economics ,
  119 (1), 249­275.

Boden, L. I., & Fleischman, C. A. (1989). Medical costs in workers' compensation:
  trends and interstate comparisons. Workers Compensation Research Institute.

Boden, L. I., & Ruser, J. W. (2003). Workers' compensation "reforms," choice of
  medical care provider, and reported workplace injuries. Review of Economics and
  Statistics , 85 (4), 923­929.

Burton, F., & Spieler, E. (2001). Workers' compensation and older workers.

Butler, R. J., & Worrall, J. D. (1983). Workers' compensation: Benefit and injury
  claims rates in the seventies. The Review of Economics and Statistics , 580­589.

Durbin, D. L., Corro, D., & Helvacian, N. (1996). Workers' compensation medical
 expenditures: Price vs. quantity. Journal of Risk and Insurance , 13­33.

Fishback, P. V. (2016). Long-term trends related to the grand bargain of workers'
  compensation. Rutgers UL Rev., 69 , 1185.

Fishback, P. V., & Kantor, S. E. (1995). Did workers pay for the passage of workers'
  compensation laws? The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 110 (3), 713­742.

Fishback, P. V., & Kantor, S. E. (1998). The adoption of workers' compensation
  in the united states, 1900­1930. The Journal of Law and Economics , 41 (2),
  305­342.

Gelbach, J. B. (2011). Locking the door to discovery-assessing the effects of twombly
 and iqbal on access to discovery. Yale LJ , 121 , 2270.

Gelbach, J. B. (2016). Material facts in the debate over twombly and iqbal. Stan.
 L. Rev., 68 , 369.

                                         21
Gentry, E., & Viscusi, K. (2019, 07). Asymmetric effects on fatality rates of changes
 in workers' compensation laws. American Law and Economics Review . Retrieved
 from https://doi.org/10.1093/aler/ahz007 (ahz007) doi: 10.1093/aler/
 ahz007

Guo, X., & Burton Jr, J. F. (2010). Workers' compensation: Recent developments
 in moral hazard and benefit payments. ILR Review , 63 (2), 340­355.

Hubbard, W. H. (2013). Testing for change in procedural standards, with application
 to bell atlantic v. twombly. The Journal of Legal Studies , 42 (1), 35­68.

Hubbard, W. H. (2017). The effects of twombly and iqbal. Journal of Empirical
 Legal Studies , 14 (3), 474­526.

Kantor, S. E., & Fishback, P. V. (1995). Nonfatal accident compensation and the
 common law at the turn of the century. JL Econ. & Org., 11 , 406.

Krueger, A. B. (1990). Incentive effects of workers' compensation insurance. Journal
  of Public Economics , 41 (1), 73­99.

Krueger, A. B., Burton Jr, J. F., et al. (1990). The employers' costs of workers' com-
  pensation insurance: Magnitudes, determinants, and public policy. The Review
  of Economics and Statistics , 72 (2), 228­240.

Larson, A. (1973). Intoxication as a defense in workmen's compensation. Cornell
  L. Rev., 59 , 398.

McLaren, C. F., & Baldwin, M. L. (2016). Workers' compensation: Benefits, cover-
 age, and costs,(2015 data). National Academy of Social Insurance: Washington,
 DC .

Moore, M. J., & Viscusi, W. K. (1989). Promoting safety through workers' compen-
 sation: The efficacy and net wage costs of injury insurance. The RAND Journal
 of Economics , 499­515.

Morantz, A., Bodson, J., Levine, S. M., & Palsson, M. V. (2016). Economic incen-
 tives in workers' compensation: A holistic, international perspective. Rutgers UL
 Rev., 69 , 1015.

Oaxaca, R. L., & Ransom, M. R. (1994). On discrimination and the decomposition
 of wage differentials. Journal of Econometrics , 61 (1), 5­21.

Pozzebon, S. (1994). Medical cost containment under workers' compensation. ILR
  Review , 48 (1), 153­167.

Relkin, E. (2016). The demise of the grand bargain: Compensation for injured
  workers in the 21st century. Rutgers UL Rev., 69 , 881.

                                         22
Ruser, J. W. (1993). Workers' compensation and the distribution of occupational
 injuries. Journal of Human Resources , 28 (3).

Spieler, E. A. (2016). (re) assessing the grand bargain: Compensation for work
  injuries in the united states, 1900-2017. Rutgers UL Rev., 69 , 891.

Wheeler, T. M. (2006). Grammatico v. industrial commission: Invalidating statutes
 making alcohol or drug use a bar to workers' compensation claims in arizona.
 Ariz. L. Rev., 48 , 211.

Williams, R. F. (2016). Can state constitutions block the workers' compensation
 race to the bottom. Rutgers UL Rev., 69 , 1081.




                                       23
Figures and Tables

Figure 1: National Cash and Medical Benefit Payments Per Covered Workers in
2010 Dollars




 Source: State-by-year level data of cash benefit payments, medical benefit payments and the
 number of covered workers come from the annual workers' compensation reports issued by
 National Academy of Social Insurance (NASI). The nominal cash benefits are deflated by
 the urban Consumer Price Index (CPI) and the medical benefits are deflated by the medical
 Consumer Price Index collected from Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).




                                             24
Figure 2: National Workers' Compensation Expected Caah Benefits Index in 2010
Dollars




 Source: State-level weekly maximum benefits and national level average wage index data come
 from Social Security Administration (SSA). The nominal benefits are deflated by CPI data
 from BLS.




                                             25
                      Figure 3: National Fatal Accident Rate




Source: Fatal accident rate is defined as the number of fatal accidents per 100,000 workers
in private industry. The measure is calculated with the following two strands of state-level
data from BLS: seasonally adjusted employment and total counts of reported occupational
fatalities.




                                            26
                                  Table 1: Timing of States' Passages of Workers Compensation Laws


                                          Existed Prior to 1997                             Passed Between 1997 and 2016
       Liberal Construction Bans          Florida, Main, Minnesota, Montana, New            West Virginia (2003), Indiana (2006),
                                          Mexico, North Dakota, Wyoming                     Louisiana (2012), Tennessee (2013)
            Intoxication Laws             Arkansas, Colorado, Florida, Georgia,             Arziona(1999-2005), Texas(2005), Mis-
                                          Lousiana, Nevanda, North Dakota                   souri(2006),    Illinois(2011),   Missis-
                                                                                            sippi(2012), Nevada(2015)
       Prexisting Condition Laws          Alabama, Arkansas, Colorado, Connecti-            California(2004),    Kansas(2011) Mis-
                                          cut, Delaware, Florida,Georgia, Hawaii,           souri(2006)
                                          Idaho, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Mary-
                                          land, Minnesota, Mississippi, Nebraska,




27
                                          North Carolina, North Dakota, Virginia,
                                          Washington, West Virginia
       Medical Fee Schedule Laws          Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, Connecti-             Alaska(2005),           California(2003),
                                          cut, Florida, Hawaii, Kansas, Kentucky,           Delaware(2007),     Idaho(2010),      Illi-
                                          Louisiana, Maryland, Michigan, Min-               nois(2006), Maine(2011), Michigan(2011),
                                          nesota, Mississippi, Montana, Nevada,             Nebraska(2007), New York(2007), Ok-
                                          New Mexico, North Carolina, North                 lahoma(2005),     Rhode     Island(2010),
                                          Dakota, Oklahoma, Oregon, Texas, Wash-            South Carolina(2012), Tennessee(2004),
                                          ington, West Virginia, Wyoming                    Vermont(2007), Virginia(2016)
         Physician Network Laws           Florida, Michigan, Nevada Texas, Utah             California(2005),          Illinois(2011),
                                                                                            Texas(2005), Washington(2011)
     Source: This summary is based on ProPublica publication of state-level workers' compensation reform and our own research using the Westlaw
     database. The ProPublica publication reform can be assessed in the following link: https://projects.propublica.org/graphics/workers
     -comp-reform-by-state. Westlaw consists of the workers' compensation statutes for all of the states.
Table 2: The Effects of Workers' Compensation Laws on Cash Benefit Payments
Per Covered Worker When All Laws Are Included in Specification


                                      (1)           (2)        (3)        (4)

   Expected Benefits Index (log)    -0.0897       -1.347     1.693      1.139
                                    (0.520)        (0.371)   (0.422)    (0.225)

   Fatal Injury Rate (log)           -0.154       0.0599     -0.00968   -0.00785
                                    (0.104)       (0.0344)   (0.0416)   (0.0211)

   Liberal Construction Ban         0.0522        -0.330     -0.239     -0.0963
                                    (0.150)        (0.151)   (0.120)    (0.0535)

   Intoxication Laws                -0.240        -0.195      -0.134    -0.116
                                    (0.142)       (0.0801)   (0.0952)   (0.0443)

   Apportionment Laws               -0.0377        -0.137     -0.136     -0.178
                                    (0.130)       (0.0707)   (0.0815)   (0.0969)

   Medical Fee Schedule Laws         0.136         0.0229     0.0803     -0.0129
                                    (0.130)       (0.0570)   (0.0554)   (0.0408)

   Physician Network Laws            -0.205        -0.121    -0.0618    -0.152
                                    (0.225)       (0.0925)   (0.107)    (0.0483)
   State Fixed Effects                               X          X           X
   Year Fixed Effects                                           X           X
   State-specific Time Trend                                                X
   R2                                0.097         0.280      0.429       0.765
   N                                 1000          1000       1000        1000
Note: Standard errors are in parenthesis and clustered at state level. Significance Levels:

 p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                             28
Table 3: The Effects of Workers' Compensation Laws on Medical Benefit Payments
Per Covered Worker When All Laws Are Include in Specification


                                    (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)

   Fatal Injury Rate (log)       0.219       0.107        0.00136      0.0199
                                 (0.0758)    (0.0387)     (0.0347)    (0.0215)

   Liberal Construction Ban       0.0985     -0.201      -0.0963      -0.0429
                                 (0.0908)    (0.0338)     (0.0443)    (0.0250)

   Intoxication Laws             -0.197      -0.258       -0.217      -0.0758
                                 (0.0857)    (0.0968)     (0.0810)     (0.0352)

   Apportionment Laws             0.0432      0.0762       0.0645     -0.191
                                 (0.0724)    (0.0821)     (0.0643)    (0.0373)

   Medical Fee Schedule Laws      0.0511     0.00166      0.0828      -0.00832
                                 (0.0674)    (0.0435)     (0.0423)    (0.0269)

   Physician Network Laws         -0.0322    -0.283      -0.210       -0.233
                                  (0.163)    (0.0675)    (0.0723)     (0.0456)
   State Fixed Effects                           X           X            X
   Year Fixed Effects                                        X            X
   State-specific Time Trend                                              X
   R2                              0.194         0.193     0.390        0.659
   N                               1000          1000      1000         1000
Note: Standard errors are in parenthesis and clustered at state level. Significance Levels:

 p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                            29
                          Table 4: Decomposition Analysis for Cash Benefit Payments Per Covered Worker


                                                          (1)              (2)              (3)         (4)              (5)
                                                      Mean (1997)      Mean (2016)      Difference   Coefficient    Decomposition
      Cash Benefits Per Covered Worker (log)             5.38             5.01            -0.37         NA              NA

      Expected Benefits Index (log)                       4.34             4.51            0.17         1.139            -53.2%

      Fatal Injury Rates (log)                            1.88             1.50           -0.38         -0.008           -0.8%

      Liberal Construction Bans                           0.14             0.22            0.08         -0.096            2.1%




30
      Intoxication Laws                                   0.14             0.22            0.08         -0.116            2.5%

      Preexisting Condition Laws                          0.42             0.46            0.05         -0.178            1.9%

      Medical Fee Schedule Laws                           0.46             0.72            0.26         -0.013            0.9%

      Physician Network Laws                              0.06             0.14            0.08         -0.152            3.3%
      Note: Column (1) and (2) are the means of each variable in 1997 and 2016. Column (3) shows the difference between 2016 and 1997.
     Column (4) has the regression coefficients for each variable in Column (4) of Table 2, with state fixed effects, year fixed effects and
     state-specific time trend included in the regression model. Column (5) follows Oaxaca & Ransom (1994) and shows the decomposition
     results on how much of the change in cash benefit payments is explained by the change in each variable. A negative value means the
     variable change pushed the payments in the opposite direction of the change in the actual payment.
                        Table 5: Decomposition Analysis for Medical Benefit Payments Per Covered Worker


                                                            (1)               (2)              (3)          (4)             (5)
                                                         Mean (1997)      Mean (2016)      Difference    Coefficient   Decomposition
      Medical Benefits Per Covered Worker (log)             5.41             5.13            -0.29          NA             NA

      Fatal Injury Rates (log)                                1.88             1.50           -0.38         0.02             2.6%

      Liberal Construction Bans                               0.14             0.22           0.08         -0.043            1.2%

      Intoxication Laws                                       0.14             0.22           0.08         -0.076            2.1%




31
      Preexisting Condition Laws                              0.42             0.46           0.05         -0.191            2.7%

      Medical Fee Schedule Laws                               0.46             0.72           0.26         -0.008            0.7%

      Physician Network Laws                                  0.06             0.14           0.08         -0.233            6.5%
      Note: Column (1) and (2) are the means of each variable in 1997 and 2016. Column (3) shows the difference between 2016 and 1997.
     Column (4) has the regression coefficients for each variable in Column (4) of Table 3, with state fixed effects, year fixed effects and
     state-specific time trend included in the regression model. Column (5) follows Oaxaca & Ransom (1994) and shows the decomposition
     results on how much of the change in medical benefit payments is explained by the change in each variable. A negative value means
     the variable change pushed the payments in the opposite direction of the change in the actual payment.
             Table 6: Placebo Test Results on The Effects of Workers' Compensation Laws on Cash Benefit Payments


                                             (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)

                                        3-year lead     2-year lead     1-year lead    No Change       1-year Lag     2-year Lag     3-year Lag
      Liberal Construction Bans           0.0599          0.0374          0.00485       -0.0963         -0.170         -0.185         -0.171
                                          (0.105)        (0.0942)        (0.0684)       (0.0535)        (0.0515)       (0.0522)       (0.0502)

      Intoxication Laws                   -0.0818         -0.130          -0.109         -0.116        -0.0789           -0.0107        0.0182
                                          (0.0429)        (0.0491)       (0.0546)        (0.0443)       (0.0232)        (0.0318)       (0.0502)




32
      Apportionment Laws                  0.193           0.104           -0.0327         -0.178        -0.228         -0.264         -0.241
                                          (0.0483)        (0.0378)       (0.0890)        (0.0969)       (0.0290)       (0.0382)       (0.0460)

      Physician Network Laws               -0.0321         -0.0772       -0.133          -0.152         -0.139           -0.0785        -0.0540
                                          (0.0673)        (0.0498)       (0.0541)        (0.0483)       (0.0561)        (0.0585)       (0.0704)

      Medical Fee Schedule Laws            0.0293         -0.00489       -0.00925         -0.0129        -0.0174         -0.0200        -0.0365
                                          (0.0368)        (0.0365)       (0.0385)        (0.0408)       (0.0407)        (0.0356)       (0.0295)
      R2                                    0.706           0.729          0.745           0.765          0.770           0.762          0.755
      N                                      850             900            950            1000            950             900            850
     Note: All of the specifications include state fixed effects, year fixed effects and state-specific time trend. Standard errors are clustered
     at state level and in parenthesis. Significance Levels:  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
            Table 7: Placebo Test Results on the Effects of Workers' Compensation Laws on Medical Benefit Payments


                                             (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)

                                        3-year lead     2-year lead     1-year lead    No Change       1-year Lag     2-year Lag     3-year Lag
      Liberal Construction Bans          -0.00757         -0.0186        -0.00891       -0.0429          -0.0552         -0.176        -0.0993
                                         (0.0257)        (0.0297)        (0.0319)       (0.0250)        (0.0463)        (0.145)       (0.0898)

      Intoxication Laws                    0.0190          -0.0487       -0.0942        -0.0758          -0.0301         -0.0130        0.0151
                                          (0.0303)        (0.0499)       (0.0505)        (0.0352)       (0.0377)        (0.0190)       (0.0123)




33
      Apportionment Laws                   0.0767          0.0430         -0.0800        -0.191         -0.233         -0.165         -0.113
                                          (0.0559)        (0.0962)       (0.0937)        (0.0373)       (0.0724)       (0.0494)       (0.0232)

      Physician Network Laws              -0.0971        -0.217          -0.249          -0.233         -0.166           -0.0824        -0.0131
                                           (0.0453)      (0.0533)        (0.0505)        (0.0456)       (0.0590)        (0.0684)       (0.0906)

      Medical Fee Schedule Laws           -0.00499        -0.00321       0.01000         -0.00832        -0.0251       -0.0756          -0.0353
                                          (0.0293)        (0.0533)       (0.0373)        (0.0269)       (0.0233)        (0.0335)       (0.0317)
      R2                                    0.505           0.560         0.610            0.659          0.664           0.660          0.649
      N                                      850             900           950             1000            950             900            850
     Note: All of the specifications include state fixed effects, year fixed effects and state-specific time trend. Standard errors are clustered
     at state level and in parenthesis. Significance Levels:  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
Appendix

A      Additional Results on the Effects of Each Type of
       the Laws
This Appendix reports the more detailed results on how cash and medical benefit
payments are affected by each of the five different types of law we empirically ex-
amine. For each type of the laws, we show the results of its effects on cash and
medical benefit payments across different regression models with state fixed effects,
year fixed effects and state-specific time trend. Overall, the results are fairly robust
across various specifications.

A.1     Laws Prohibiting Liberal Construction Rule

   Table 1: The Effects of Liberal Construction Bans on Cash Benefits Payments


                                      (1)           (2)        (3)        (4)

   Expected Benefits Index (log)     0.122        -1.442     1.842      1.160
                                    (0.482)        (0.398)   (0.423)    (0.219)

   Fatal Injury Rates (log)          -0.144       0.0677      -0.0160   -0.00953
                                    (0.104)       (0.0381)   (0.0466)   (0.0213)

   Liberal Construction Bans        0.0595        -0.321     -0.233     -0.0922
                                    (0.137)        (0.152)   (0.116)    (0.0541)
   State Fixed Effects                                X         X           X
   Year Fixed Effects                                           X           X
   State-specific Time Trend                                                X
   R2                                0.026         0.231      0.397       0.752
   N                                 1000          1000       1000        1000
Note: Standard errors are in parenthesis and clustered at state level. Significance Levels:

 p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                             34
   Table 2: The Effects of Liberal Construction Ban on Medical Benefits Payment


                                   (1)           (2)       (3)         (4)

   Fatal Injury Rates (log)      0.211      0.132       -0.00725     0.0195
                                (0.0809)    (0.0439)    (0.0416)    (0.0220)

   Liberal Construction Bans     0.101      -0.197       -0.0854     -0.0389
                                (0.0832)    (0.0340)     (0.0428)   (0.0263)
   State Fixed Effects                          X            X          X
   Year Fixed Effects                                        X          X
   State-specific Time Trend                                            X
   R2                             0.143         0.073     0.306       0.636
   N                              1000          1000      1000        1000
Note: Standard errors are in parenthesis and clustered at state level. Significance Levels:

 p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                           35
A.2     Laws Presuming Intoxication as the Proximate Cause of In-
        juries

        Table 3: The Effects of Intoxication Laws on Cash Benefits Payment


                                         (1)               (2)            (3)           (4)

   Expected Benefits Index (log)     0.0950          -1.536          1.784          1.127
                                     (0.427)          (0.370)        (0.544)        (0.217)

   Fatal Injury Rates (log)          -0.104          0.0659           -0.0197       -0.00741
                                    (0.0962)         (0.0379)        (0.0483)       (0.0216)

   Intoxication Laws                 -0.254          -0.256           -0.183        -0.164
                                     (0.128)         (0.0945)         (0.100)       (0.0737)
   State Fixed Effects                                   X               X             X
   Year Fixed Effects                                                    X             X
   State-specific Time Trend                                                           X
   R2                                 0.063               0.217          0.390       0.756
   N                                  1000                1000           1000         1000
Note: Standard errors are in parenthesis and clustered at state level. Significance Levels:

 p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01


       Table 4: The Effects of Intoxication Laws on Medical Benefits Payment


                                   (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)

   Fatal Injury Rates (log)     0.251          0.131             -0.00630        0.0212
                                (0.0754)       (0.0430)          (0.0406)       (0.0221)

   Intoxication Laws             -0.178        -0.303            -0.250         -0.135
                                (0.0947)        (0.135)           (0.118)       (0.0665)
   State Fixed Effects                             X                 X             X
   Year Fixed Effects                                                X             X
   State-specific Time Trend                                                       X
   R2                            0.169          0.116             0.347          0.641
   N                             1000           1000              1000            1000
Note: Standard errors are in parenthesis and clustered at state level. Significance Levels:

 p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01



                                               36
A.3     Benefits Apportionment Laws Due to Preexisting Conditions

           Table 5: The Effects of Apportionment Laws on Cash Benefits


                                         (1)              (2)           (3)           (4)

   Expected Benefits Index (log)     0.129          -1.537         1.874          1.196
                                    (0.460)          (0.406)       (0.499)        (0.216)

   Fatal Injury Rates (log)          -0.129          0.0616         -0.0245      -0.00983
                                    (0.100)         (0.0373)       (0.0483)      (0.0213)

   Apportionment Laws               -0.0323         -0.267         -0.195         -0.265
                                    (0.126)         (0.0565)       (0.0547)        (0.111)
   State Fixed Effects                                  X              X              X
   Year Fixed Effects                                                  X              X
   State-specific Time Trend                                                          X
   R2                                0.025            0.202          0.382          0.756
   N                                 1000             1000           1000           1000
Note: Standard errors are in parenthesis and clustered at state level. Significance Levels:

 p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01


          Table 6: The Effects of Apportionment Laws on Medical Benefits


                                   (1)              (2)           (3)           (4)

   Fatal Injury Rates (log)     0.228          0.133             -0.0107       0.0194
                                (0.0804)       (0.0443)         (0.0416)      (0.0217)

   Apportionment Laws            0.0288        -0.165           -0.0980       -0.270
                                (0.0766)       (0.0642)         (0.0561)      (0.0305)
   State Fixed Effects                            X                 X             X
   Year Fixed Effects                                               X             X
   State-specific Time Trend                                                      X
   R2                            0.134          0.058            0.305          0.644
   N                             1000           1000             1000           1000
Note: Standard errors are in parenthesis and clustered at state level. Significance Levels:

 p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                               37
A.4     Medical Fee Schedule Laws

   Table 7: The Effects of Medical Fee Schedule Laws on Cash Benefits Payments


                                      (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)

   Expected Benefits Index (log)    0.0730        -1.611       1.902        1.189
                                    (0.505)        (0.409)     (0.476)      (0.219)

   Fatal Injury Rates (log)          -0.151       0.0716        -0.0152    -0.00906
                                    (0.102)       (0.0351)     (0.0447)    (0.0215)

   Medical Fee Schedule Laws         0.112         0.0129       0.0823       -0.0135
                                    (0.118)       (0.0572)     (0.0564)     (0.0429)
   State Fixed Effects                               X            X             X
   Year Fixed Effects                                             X             X
   State-specific Time Trend                                                    X
   R2                                0.037         0.183        0.381         0.751
   N                                 1000          1000         1000          1000
Note: Standard errors are in parenthesis and clustered at state level. Significance Levels:

 p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01


Table 8: The Effects of Medical Fee Schedule Laws on Medical Benefits Payments


                                    (1)            (2)         (3)          (4)

   Fatal Injury Rates (log)      0.220        0.136          -0.00236      0.0199
                                 (0.0761)     (0.0422)       (0.0368)     (0.0218)

   Medical Fee Schedule Laws      0.0634       -0.0175       0.0856       -0.00931
                                 (0.0673)     (0.0407)       (0.0422)     (0.0275)
   State Fixed Effects                            X             X             X
   Year Fixed Effects                                           X             X
   State-specific Time Trend                                                  X
   R2                              0.140          0.048       0.315         0.636
   N                               1000           1000        1000          1000
Note: Standard errors are in parenthesis and clustered at state level. Significance Levels:

 p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                             38
A.5     Physician Network Laws

     Table 9: The Effects of Physician Network Laws on Cash Benefits Payment


                                         (1)              (2)           (3)           (4)

   Expected Benefits Index (log)    0.0894          -1.514         1.891         1.186
                                    (0.477)          (0.397)       (0.504)       (0.207)

   Fatal Injury Rates (log)          -0.153          0.0624         -0.0230       -0.0108
                                    (0.104)         (0.0381)       (0.0485)      (0.0215)

   Physician Network Laws            -0.242           -0.183       -0.0953       -0.181
                                    (0.220)          (0.123)       (0.132)       (0.0573)
   State Fixed Effects                                  X             X              X
   Year Fixed Effects                                                 X              X
   State-specific Time Trend                                                         X
   R2                                0.045            0.199         0.376          0.756
   N                                 1000             1000          1000           1000
Note: Standard errors are in parenthesis and clustered at state level. Significance Levels:

 p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01


   Table 10: The Effects of Physician Network Laws on Medical Benefits Payment


                                   (1)              (2)           (3)           (4)

   Fatal Injury Rates (log)     0.225          0.116             -0.0117       0.0181
                                (0.0798)       (0.0427)         (0.0405)      (0.0215)

   Physician Network Laws       -0.0638        -0.328           -0.230        -0.258
                                (0.176)         (0.131)         (0.132)       (0.0497)
   State Fixed Effects                             X               X              X
   Year Fixed Effects                                              X              X
   State-specific Time Trend                                                      X
   R2                            0.135          0.124            0.337          0.651
   N                             1000           1000             1000           1000
Note: Standard errors are in parenthesis and clustered at state level. Significance Levels:

 p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                               39
