                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             RISK SHARING EXTERNALITIES

                                        Luigi Bocola
                                       Guido Lorenzoni

                                     Working Paper 26985
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26985


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2020




We thank for useful comments Adrien Auclert, Aniket Baksy, Javier Bianchi, Eduardo Dávila,
Sebastian Di Tella, Alessandro Dovis, Mark Gertler, Alberto Martin, Adriano Rampini, Chris
Tonetti and seminar participants at Princeton, Yale, Boston University, EIEF, Columbia,
Stanford, Boston College, AEA meetings and the SED conference. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Luigi Bocola and Guido Lorenzoni. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Risk Sharing Externalities
Luigi Bocola and Guido Lorenzoni
NBER Working Paper No. 26985
April 2020
JEL No. E44,G01,G11

                                          ABSTRACT

Financial crises typically arise because firms and financial institutions choose balance sheets that
expose them to aggregate risk. We propose a theory to explain these risk exposures. We study a
financial accelerator model where entrepreneurs can issue state-contingent claims to consumers.
Even though entrepreneurs could use these contingent claims to hedge negative shocks, we show
that they tend not to do so. This is because it is costly to buy insurance against these shocks as
consumers are also harmed by them. This effect is self-reinforcing, as the fact that entrepreneurs
are unhedged amplifies the negative effects of shocks on consumers' incomes. We show that this
feedback can be quantitatively important and lead to inefficiently high risk exposure for
entrepreneurs.


Luigi Bocola
Department of Economics
Landau 342
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
lbocola@stanford.edu

Guido Lorenzoni
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Dr
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
guido.lorenzoni@northwestern.edu
1     Introduction
The exposure of financial institutions to risks from the subprime mortgage market is widely
seen as a root cause of the financial crisis of 2008-2009. This exposure created the poten-
tial for shocks in the housing market to be heavily amplified, as recognized early on by
Greenlaw, Hatzius, Kashyap, and Shin (2008). Why did banks not do more to protect
their balance sheet from these risks, say by shedding some of their riskier positions or by
choosing a safer funding structure? More generally, why were these risks not better spread
across the economy?
    Spurred by the global financial crisis, economists have developed models in which bal-
ance sheet losses of financial institutions can negatively affect firms' hiring and investment
decisions--for example, Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010), Jermann and Quadrini (2012), He and
Krishnamurthy (2013) and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014). These contributions pro-
vide the framework now commonly used to quantify the importance of financial factors
over the business cycle, and to design appropriate policy responses. However, these mod-
els sidestep the questions raised above, by assuming that the "specialists"--the agents that
represent financial institutions--have very limited risk-management tools. In particular,
a common assumption in these models is that specialists hold only one risky asset and
issue non-state-contingent debt, so that their risk exposure is mechanically linked to their
leverage. In this paper, we break this tight link by allowing specialists to issue fully state-
contingent debt and we study why they choose to be exposed to aggregate risk, whether
this exposure is socially efficient, and if not what is the appropriate policy response.
    Our paper makes two contributions. First, we offer a theory of why specialists are
exposed to aggregate risk. Our mechanism builds on a general equilibrium effect: when
the net worth of specialists falls and the economy experiences a financial crisis, the income
of all other agents contracts as well. Due to this feature, insuring these states of the world
ex-ante is costly, and this reduces the specialists' incentive to hedge. Second, we show that
equilibrium risk-management is sub-optimal from the point of view of social welfare, and
we study optimal corrective policies. In our model, specialists issue too much debt indexed
to crisis states because they fail to internalize the general equilibrium effect of their choices
on aggregate volatility. Optimal policy taxes debt indexed to crisis states, so as to reduce
the exposure of specialists to aggregate risk. Interestingly, we show that in our framework
simple taxes on leverage--such as those commonly considered in the literature--are not
effective in reducing the risk exposure of specialists.
    We develop these arguments in the context of a model with two groups of agents, con-
sumers and entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs are the specialists, and we can think of them


                                               1
as representing a sector that consolidates financial institutions and the non-financial firms
that borrow from them. Entrepreneurs borrow from consumers to finance their purchases
of factors of production, capital and labor. The source of risk in the economy is a shock that
affects the "quality" of capital held by the entrepreneurs, as in Gertler and Karadi (2011)
and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014). Due to limited commitment, the entrepreneurs
face an upper bound on their ability to raise debt from consumers. This implies that reduc-
tions in the aggregate net worth of the entrepreneurs can lead to a contraction in economic
activity and in the labor income of consumers. This is the general equilibrium effect, or
"macro spillover" at the core of our positive and normative results.
  Facing the limited commitment constraint mentioned above, the entrepreneurs issue a
full set of state-contingent claims. This assumption is meant to capture a variety of ways in
which financial institutions can make their balance sheet less exposed to aggregate shocks
(for example, by choosing between debt and equity financing, by choosing debt of different
maturities, debt denominated in different currencies, taking derivative positions, etc.). By
appropriately using state-contingent claims, the entrepreneurs can hedge fluctuations in
their net worth. For example, they can promise smaller payments to consumers when the
economy is hit by a negative shock. This would imply that consumers bear more aggregate
risk, and would stabilize entrepreneurs' net worth. A more stable net worth would then
reduce the process of financial amplification in the economy.
  We start by studying the positive implications of the model, focusing on the equilibrium
allocation of risk between consumers and entrepreneurs and the effects that it has on the
stability of entrepreneurs' net worth. We show that the elasticity of entrepreneurs' net
worth to aggregate shocks depends on two key model ingredients: the strength of the
macro spillover described above, and the risk aversion of consumers. The macro spillover
implies that states of the world in which the entrepreneurs have low net worth are also
states in which the consumers have low labor income. Risk aversion implies that consumers
demand a premium for bearing risk in these states of the world. These two ingredients,
combined, make it costly for entrepreneurs to hedge.
  We first show this result theoretically, in a special case of our model that is analytically
tractable. Next, we show that this mechanism can be quantitatively strong and produce
a large exposure of entrepreneurs to aggregate risk. Specifically, under plausible calibra-
tions our economy with state-contingent debt produces an elasticity of entrepreneurial net
worth to aggregate shocks and a degree of financial amplification that is quantitatively
comparable to those obtained in an economy where entrepreneurs can only issue non-state
contingent debt. These results are not driven by the type of aggregate shocks we consider,
as we obtain very similar results when the aggregate shock affects the pledgeability of


                                              2
capital as in Jermann and Quadrini (2012), rather than the capital stock.
  The presence of the macro spillover not only hinders risk sharing between consumers
and entrepreneurs, but also generates a pecuniary externality that makes the privately
optimal portfolio choices of the agents socially inefficient. To understand the source of this
externality, consider the problem of consumers. When choosing their financial assets, they
do not understand that any payment received in a given state of the world increases the
debt of entrepreneurs, reduces entrepreneurs' net worth and negatively affects the current
and future wages of consumers when the collateral constraint binds. Because consumers
fail to internalize these negative spillovers, they tend to overvalue payments received in
these states relative to what a social planner would do. This pushes down the interest
rate for debt instruments indexed to these states, and induces entrepreneurs to take on
excessive risk relative to the social optimum.
  In the last part of the paper, we study numerically the optimal policy of a social planner
that can impose Pigouvian taxes on the state-contingent claims issued by the entrepreneurs.
We show that the optimal policy does not tax debt uniformly. Rather, it levies higher taxes
on debt instruments indexed to states in which collateral constraints are tighter. These
policies are successful in reducing the risk exposure of the entrepreneurs, and the resulting
equilibrium features a substantially weaker financial amplification.
  We finally contrast the optimal policy with a policy that taxes all debt instruments uni-
formly. These taxes could reduce the risk exposure of entrepreneurs because they reduce
their incentives to issue debt. However, entrepreneurs respond by cutting mostly debt in-
dexed to good states of the world, so their overall risk exposure changes little. That is,
these tools are effective in reducing leverage, but they generate an incentive to substitute
toward riskier types of debt. These substitution effects provide a cautionary tale for macro-
prudential tools that target leverage uniformly.


Literature. This paper is related to the large literature on the role of financial factors in the
amplification and propagation of aggregate shocks. This literature goes back to the seminal
contributions of Bernanke and Gertler (1986), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) and Bernanke,
Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999), and has been very active following the global financial crisis.
The logic of financial amplification in these models builds on two main assumptions: the
presence of a financial constraint and incomplete financial markets. The first assumption
implies that aggregate shocks affecting the net worth of specialists propagate to the rest of
the economy, while the second assumption restricts the ability of the specialists to hedge
aggregate shocks ex ante.
  Important contributions in this literature show that the assumed incompleteness of fi-

                                                 3
nancial markets is critical for financial amplification. Krishnamurthy (2003) introduces
state-contingent claims in a three period version of Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) and shows
that the amplification mechanism disappears, as specialists perfectly hedge their net worth.
Di Tella (2017) shows an analogous result in the context of a dynamic model similar to Brun-
nermeier and Sannikov (2014). Our incomplete hedging results may appear surprising in
light of these contributions. However, as argued above, our results require two ingredients:
risk averse consumers and an active macro spillover. One or both of these ingredients are
muted in these papers.1 Other papers that find limited amplification in more quantitative
models are Carlstrom, Fuerst, and Paustian (2016), Dmitriev and Hoddenbagh (2017) and
Cao and Nie (2017). The mechanism identified in our paper is potentially at work in those
models, but--as we discuss in Section 4--their calibrations make it quantitatively weak.
  Some papers have proposed other mechanisms to explain why specialists are exposed
to aggregate risk even when they can hedge it. Di Tella (2017) shows that the incentive to
hedge depends on the source of shocks: aggregate shocks to idiosyncratic volatility lead to
imperfect hedging and amplification in his model. Another type of aggregate shock that
produces a related result is studied in Dávila and Philippon (2017), who introduce shocks
to the degree of financial market completeness. Rampini and Viswanathan (2010) show that
specialists do not hedge their net worth if their motive for investing are so strong that their
financial constraint binds for every state-contingent claim and if the amount that specialists
can pledge does not vary much with the states of the world. Asriyan (2018) introduces
information and trading frictions in a three period version of Kiyotaki and Moore (1997)
with risk neutral agents and state-contingent claims. He shows that these frictions can
distort state prices away from their actuarially fair values so that specialists do not perfectly
hedge their net worth in equilibrium.
  Our welfare analysis is related to the large literature on inefficiencies and pecuniary ex-
ternalities in models with financial market imperfections, going back to Geanakoplos and
Polemarchakis (1986) and Kehoe and Levine (1993). The pecuniary externality that mat-
ters in our model is "distributive"--using the language introduced by Dávila and Korinek
(2018)--and works through wages and labor income. This connects our paper to Caballero
and Lorenzoni (2014), Bianchi (2016) and Itskhoki and Moll (2019), although we are the
first to explore the implications that this type of pecuniary externality has on risk sharing.
  A number of papers study models in which constrained inefficiency takes the form of
excessive leverage (e.g., Lorenzoni (2008) and Bianchi (2011)) and derive implications for
macroprudential policy. See Bianchi and Mendoza (2018) and reference therein. Unlike
those papers, we study an environment where the specialists can issue multiple types of
   1 See   also the discussion in Section 3.


                                               4
debt rather than just a non-contingent bond. In an open economy setting, Korinek (2018)
performs a similar exercise and finds that the optimal policy targets specific types of debt.
Our contribution to this debate is to show that, in presence of state-contingency, some
simple policies, like a restriction on total leverage, may be ineffective in reducing risk
taking or can even backfire and lead to increased risk.
    Finally, the macro spillover that plays a central role in this paper was also present in our
previous work on self-fulfilling currency crises (Bocola and Lorenzoni, 2019). However, the
analysis of how that spillover affects amplification and efficiency is entirely novel to this
paper.


Layout. The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the model. Section 3 stud-
ies a special case that is analytically tractable, and characterizes the risk sharing problem
between consumers and entrepreneurs. Section 4 presents numerical results in a calibrated
version of the full model, while Section 5 discusses the welfare analysis and its implications
for the design of macro-prudential policies. Section 6 concludes.



2     Model
We consider an economy populated by two groups of agents of equal size: consumers
and entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs accumulate capital that is used together with labor to
produce the final good, and they issue financial claims. Consumers earn labor income and
buy financial claims from entrepreneurs. Financial claims are state-contingent promises
to repay one unit of consumption in the next period. We now describe the details of the
environment and define an equilibrium.


2.1    Environment

Technology and shocks.         Time is discrete and indexed by t = 0, 1, 2 . . .. Uncertainty is
described by a Markov process that takes finite values in the set S . We denote by st the
state of the process at time t, and by st = (s0 , s1 , . . . , st ) the history of states up to period t.
The process for st is given by the transition matrix  (st+1 |st ).
    The capital stock is subject to random depreciation captured by the stochastic parameter
ut . Namely, k t-1 units of capital accumulated at the end of time t - 1 yield ut k t-1 units of
capital that can be used in production at time t and a residual stock of (1 - )ut k t-1 units
of capital after production. The parameter ut depends on the state of the Markov process


                                                   5
according to the function ut = u(st ), and is the only exogenous source of uncertainty in the
model. The variable ut is similar to the capital-quality shock used in Gertler and Karadi
(2011) and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014).
  Entrepreneurs have exclusive access to the technology that allows capital accumulated
in period t - 1 to be productive in period t, so all capital is held by entrepreneurs in
equilibrium. The entrepreneurs use capital and labor services provided by consumers to
produce final goods according to the Cobb-Douglas production function:

                                                              1- 
                                      y t = ( u t k t -1 )  l t   .

The labor market is perfectly competitive, and the wage rate is wt . We assume that en-
trepreneurs need to pay a fraction  of the wage bill before their revenues are realized.
This assumption ensures that the financial conditions of entrepreneurs can have a contem-
poraneous effect on labor demand, see Jermann and Quadrini (2012).
  All equilibrium variables are in general functions of the history st , but whenever no
confusion is possible we leave this dependence implicit in the subscript t.


Preferences. Entrepreneurs have log-preferences over consumption streams {ce,t }, so they
maximize
                                              
                                     Et        te log(ce,t )      .
                                           t =0

  Consumers have Epstein-Zin preferences, so their utility is defined recursively as

                                                                             1
                                                                      1-    1- 
                                          1-                 -        1- 
                        Vt =    (1 -  ) x t       +  Et (Vt1
                                                           +1 )                   ,


where xt is given by
                                                          1+ 
                                                  l
                                       xt = ct -  t .
                                                 1+
This specification of the consumers' utility eliminates the wealth effect on labor supply as
in Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huffman (1988).


Financial markets and limited commitment.               Each period agents trade a full set of one-
period state-contingent claims. We let q(st+1 |st ) be the price at time t of a claim that pays
one unit of consumption at t + 1, conditional on history st+1 = (st , st+1 ). We denote by
a(st ) the claims held by consumers at the beginning of period t. Similarly, b(st ) denote the


                                                   6
claims owed by entrpreneurs at the beginning of the period. Market clearing requires that

                                                    a(st ) = b(st )

for every history st .
   Entrepreneurs enter period t with ut k t-1 units of capital (in efficiency units) and with
debt bt . Each period t is divided in three stages. In the first stage, entrepreneurs hire
workers and issue within-period debt to pay for a fraction  of their wage bill wt lt . In
the second stage, production takes place, goods are sold, entrpreneurs pay the remaining
fraction of the wage bill (1 - )wt lt and decide whether to repay their total liabilities bt +
wt lt or to default. If they default, entrepreneurs can hide the firms' profits and a fraction
1 -  of the undepreciated capital stock and start anew with initial wealth

                             yt - (1 - )wt lt + (1 -  )(1 - )ut k t-1 .

In the third and last stage, entrepreneurs issue new liabilities b(st+1 ) and use these re-
sources along with their net worth to buy capital goods.
   Notice that we assume that an entrepreneur who defaults is not excluded from financial
markets.2 It follows that the entrepreneur chooses repayment if and only if

           yt - wt lt - bt + (1 - )ut k t-1  yt - (1 - )wt lt + (1 -  )(1 - )ut k t-1 .

Making explicit the dependence on the state of the world, this constraint is equivalent to
the state-contingent collateral constraint

                           b ( s t ) +  w ( s t ) l ( s t )   (1 -  ) u ( s t ) k ( s t -1 ).            (1)


2.2   Competitive equilibrium

In a competitive equilibrium, consumers choose sequences for consumption, labor supply
and state-contingent claims to maximize their utility subject to the budget constraint

                         c(st ) +    q ( s t +1 | s t ) a ( s t +1 ) = w ( s t ) l ( s t ) + a ( s t )
                                    s t +1

    2 A similar assumption is made in Rampini and Viswanathan (2010) and Cao, Lorenzoni, and Walentin

(2019).




                                                             7
for each history st and a no-Ponzi-game condition. The first order condition for a(st+1 )
takes the form
                                                                                                         -
                                                                      x (st )             RW (st )
                        q(st+1 |st ) =  (st+1 |st )                                                          ,         (2)
                                                                     x ( s t +1 )         V ( s t +1 )

                                                       1/(1-)
where RW (st ) = Et V (st , st+1 )1-                            . Optimal labor supply requires

                                                          l ( s t )  = w ( s t ).                                      (3)


  Entrepreneurs choose sequences for consumption, capital, labor demand and state-
contingent claims to maximize their utility subject to the collateral constraints (1) and their
budget constraint
                                 ce (st ) + k (st ) = n(st ) +           q ( s t +1 | s t ) b ( s t +1 ),
                                                                        s t +1

where n(st ) denotes the net worth

                    n ( s t ) = y ( s t ) - w ( s t ) l ( s t ) + (1 -  ) u ( s t ) k ( s t -1 ) - b ( s t ).          (4)


  Denoting by µ(st+1 ) the Lagrange multiplier on the collateral constraint in state st+1 , we
can write the entrepreneurs' first-order conditions for b(st+1 ) as

                                                1                                  1
                        q ( s t +1 | s t )        t
                                                     =  ( s t +1 | s t )  e                + µ ( s t +1 ) .            (5)
                                             ce (s )                        c e ( s t +1 )

This condition is a standard intertemporal Euler equation with state-contingent debt and a
collateral constraint that limits the amount of claims that an entrepreneur can issue, state
by state.
  The optimality conditions for labor and capital take the following form:

                      1
                            (1 - )[u(st )k(st-1 )] l (st )- - w(st ) = wt µ(st )                                       (6)
                   ce (st )

                                                                                    1- 
           1                         1                              l ( s t +1 )
                 = Et       e                 u ( s t +1 )                                + (1 -  ) u ( s t +1 )   +
        ce (st )              c e ( s t +1 )                          k (st )
                                                                                 +Et [ (1 - )u(st+1 )µ(st+1 )].        (7)

The first condition shows that there is a wedge between the marginal product of labor and
the real wage if the collateral constraint is binding, because hiring labor requires some


                                                                    8
capacity to borrow. The second condition is a standard intertemporal condition for capital
accumulation. Relative to a frictionless economy, investing in capital has the additional
benefit of relaxing the collateral constraints, which is captured by the last term on the
right-hand side.3
   The advantage of assuming log preferences for entrepreneurs is that their consumption
function is linear in net worth, ce (st ) = (1 -  e )n(st ), irrespective of whether the collateral
constraint is binding or not. This property, proved in Online Appendix A, simplifies the
analysis of the equilibrium.
   An equilibrium is given by sequences of quantities {c(st ), ce (st ), k (st ), l (st ), a(st ), b(st )}
and prices {w(st ), q(st+1 |st )} such that the quantities solve the individual optimization
problems above and markets clear. In Online Appendix A we give a formal definition of a
recursive competitive equilibrium and describe the global numerical algorithm that we use
to compute it.


2.3    Discussion

Before moving on, let us discuss some of the simplifying assumptions we made.
   First, our model does not feature endogenous asset prices, as the price of capital is
always 1. This mutes a canonical feed-back between asset prices and entrepreneurial net
worth, which may lead to inefficiently high levels of risk taking, as shown for example in
Lorenzoni (2008). In the current paper, we abstract from this channel in order to isolate
the novel mechanism that works via the endogeneity of labor income. We do not expect
endogenous asset prices to substantially change the mechanism investigated here.
   Second, the main driving force in the model is a shock to the quality of capital. In our
framework, this shock substitutes for the missing volatility of asset prices and allow us to
generate sizable movements in the value of assets held by entrepreneurs. As we will see in
Section 4, our mechanism does not rely on this specific source of risk, and is still present
with different aggregate shocks.
   Finally, entrepreneurs and consumers are assumed to be distinct agents, a fairly common
assumption in the literature. There are different ways to interpret this assumption. One is to
view the entrepreneurs as the controlling shareholders of the financial firms they represent
and to interpret all equity financing they raise as part of the state-contingent claims issued.
The other one is to interpret the entrepreneurs as all the shareholders of these firms, with
consumers being barred from holding shares. In the second interpretation, it would be
   3 This does not mean that more capital is invested relative to an economy without the collateral constraints
because, in equilibrium, the collateral constraints also affect the internal rate of return of entrepreneurs.


                                                      9
interesting to allow for the possibility of issuing shares to all agents, subject to some friction
(as for example in Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010)), something we leave to future work.



3     Equilibrium risk sharing and financial amplification
In this section and the next we characterize the risk sharing problem of consumers and
entrepreneurs, and show how it affects the economy's response to aggregate shocks. In
particular, we study to what extent the effects of the capital quality shocks are amplified due
to the presence of the collateral constraint, and how this "financial amplification" depends
on the equilibrium allocation of aggregate risk between consumers and entrepreneurs. In
this section we consider a simplified version of the model and focus on analytical results.
In the next section we go back to the full model and derive numerical results.
    Consider a special case of our economy in which all uncertainty is resolved in one pe-
riod. The economy starts at date 0 with u0 = 1. At t = 1 the capital quality u1 is drawn
from a continuous distribution with density f (u1 ). From t = 2 on, the capital quality is
deterministic and equal to ut = 1. We make some additional simplifying assumptions:
entrepreneurs and consumers have the same discount factor,  e = , the elasticity of in-
tertemporal substitution is infinite,  = 0, there is no working capital requirement,  = 0,
and labor supply is inelastic at lt = 1.
    Given the assumptions above, we can characterize an equilibrium in two steps. First, we
study the equilibrium from date 1 on. Next, we go back to date 0 and study the equilibrium
in the market for contingent claims.


3.1    Continuation equilibrium

From date 1 on, the economy follows a deterministic path. Since there is no uncertainty
and  = 0, the interest rate is constant and equal to 1/  - 1. Given that there is no
working capital constraint, firms are unconstrained in hiring labor and wages are equal to
the marginal product of labor
                                     wt = (1 - )(ut k t-1 ) .

    The dynamics of k t and nt are characterized as follows. For a finite number of periods J ,
the collateral constraint is binding and the dynamics of investment and net worth are:

                               nt
                    kt =               ,     n t +1 =  k t + (1 -  )(1 -  ) k t .              (8)
                           1 -  (1 - )


                                               10
The first equation comes from the fact that entrepreneurs save a fraction  of their wealth
and can lever it at most by the factor 1/[1 -  (1 - )]. The second is obtained by com-
bining the definition of net worth in equation (4), the wage derived above, and the binding
collateral constraint (1). After J periods the collateral constraint is slack, nt stays constant
in all following period, and the capital stock reaches the first-best level, that is, the level it
would achieve if entrepreneurs did not face financial constraints,

                                                               1/(1-)
                                              
                                  k =                                   .                          (9)
                                          1 -  (1 -  )

  The number of periods J that the economy spends in the constrained region depends
on the initial value of n1 : if n1 is above the threshold n = k [1 -  (1 - )]/ , then the
entrepreneur has enough resources to finance k . Thus, J = 0 and the economy reaches the
first-best allocation in period 1. Else, J > 0, and the economy evolves according to (8) until
net worth exceeds n .
  Given  = 0, we can use the consumers' intertemporal budget constraint to compute the
expected utility of consumers at t = 1:

                                                        
                                V1 = (1 - )      a1 +     t -1 w t          .
                                                        t =1

The expected present value of labor income in this expression can be split in two parts:
w1 = (1 - )(u1 k0 ) , and W         t =2 
                                          t-1 (1 -  ) k  . In the continuation equilibrium
                                                        t -1
described above, W is only a function of n1 . In particular, a higher value of initial net worth
n1 implies a (weakly) higher path for the capital stock and, therefore, a (weakly) higher
path of wages for consumers.
  The next lemma summarizes these properties of the continuation equilibrium.

Lemma 1 (Continuation equilibrium). There is a unique continuation equilibrium that only
depends on the state variables k0 , u1 , n1 and does not depend on the parameter . In the continuation
equilibrium the collateral constraint is binding for a finite number of periods J, with J = 0 iff
n1  n . The present value of wages is given by

                                            w1 + W ( n 1 )

where W (n1 ) is strictly increasing for n1 < n and constant for n1  n .




                                                 11
3.2   Risk sharing at date 0

The continuation equilibrium depends on entrepreneurs' net worth at date t = 1. This, in
turn, is determined by the portfolio choices of consumers and entrepreneurs at date t = 0
which, for the purposes of this section, we denote by a1 (u1 ) and b1 (u1 ).
   Let us focus on the special case in which the collateral constraint b1 (u1 )   (1 - )u1 k0
is not binding at date 0, so µ1 (u1 ) = 0 for all u1 . The optimality conditions for state-
contingent claims (2) and (5) can then be combined with the market clearing condition
a1 (u1 ) = b1 (u1 ) to obtain
                                                              
                                 RW0                                   n0
                                                                 =               for all u1 ,    (10)
               (1 - )[b1 (u1 ) + w1 (u1 ) + W (n1 (u1 ))]            n1 ( u1 )

where we use the proportionality between consumption and net worth for entrepreneurs
and the expression for net worth at date 1,

                            n1 (u1 ) = (u1 k0 ) + (1 - )u1 k0 - b1 (u1 ).

Equation (10) is a standard risk sharing condition that equalizes the ratio of the marginal
utilities of the two agents across states of the world.
   From (10) we can derive the equilibrium sensitivity of entrepreneurs' net worth to the
capital quality shock, as shown in the next proposition. Let  denote the period 1 ratio
of entrepreneurs' wealth to total wealth in the economy, including the human wealth of
consumers, that is,
                                                    n1
                                                                     .
                                          n1 + a1 +   t =1 
                                                            t -1 w
                                                                   t


Proposition 1. If in equilibrium µ1 (u1 ) = 0 for all u1 , then the sensitivity of entrepreneurial net
worth to the u1 shock is

                                                           -1 
                  n1 ( u1 ) =              1
                                                         u1  k 0 + (1 -  ) k 0 .                 (11)
                                 + (1 -  )  -  W ( n1 )



Proof. Using the definition of net worth, we can write equation (10) as follows

                  n1 (u1 ) =  [(u1 k0 ) + (1 - )u1 k0 - n1 (u1 ) + W (n1 (u1 ))] ,

where  > 0 is a constant, independent of u1 . Differentiating with respect to u1 and
rearranging, gives (11).

                                                   12
                                                     a. Net worth




                                                     b. Investment




      Figure 1: Net worth and investment as functions of the capital quality shock u1

   Equation (11) and the analysis in Section 3.1 can be used to identify the forces that
determine financial amplification. As a benchmark, notice that in the first-best case with
no collateral constraints we have k t = k for all t  1, implying that the shocks to capital
quality would not affect aggregate investment.4 Therefore, any response of k1 to the u1
shock is a form of financial amplification.
   Suppose first that consumers are risk neutral, so  = 0. In this case, (11) implies that n1
is independent of u1 . That is, all aggregate risk is absorbed by the consumers, so the shock
u1 has no effects on entrepreneurs' net worth. By implication, we know from the char-
acterization of the continuation equilibrium that also k1 is independent of u1 . Therefore,
the presence of state-contingent claims eliminates financial amplification, in the sense that
the response of investment to the capital quality shock is equal to zero as in the economy
without the collateral constraint.5 This echoes the baseline result in Krishnamurthy (2003).
   Figure 1 shows the relation between entrepreneurs' net worth and the capital quality
shock (top panel) and the choice of capital (bottom panel), when consumers are risk averse
    4 This  is due to the assumption that consumers have linear preferences after t = 1 and the capital quality
shock is iid.
     5 The level of k may be different from the first-best, because entrepreneurs may still be constrained if their
                     1
initial level of net worth n0 is small enough.


                                                        13
( > 0). The first relation comes from equation (11), the second from Lemma 1. With
risk averse consumers, the aggregate shock is shared by both agents, so the net worth
of entrepreneurs is positively related to u1 . If n1  n , k1 is still independent from u1 .
However, a sufficiently negative capital quality shock at t = 1 leads net worth to fall below
the threshold n and reduces k1 .
  This discussion emphasizes that the degree of financial amplification depends on the
equilibrium sensitivity of net worth to u1 . Equation (11) identifies two key determinants of
this elasticity:  and W . We now discuss the role of these two elements in detail.
  The expression in parentheses on the right-hand side of (11) represents the effect of u1 on
the economy's resources. How much of that effect is borne by the entrepreneurs depends
on the ratio
                                                   
                                                    1
                                                                  .
                                          + (1 -  )   -  W ( n1 )
To interpret this ratio, let us consider separately the cases n1  n and n1 < n .
  If n1  n then W (n1 ) is zero, and the ratio above is just

                                                      1
                                                            1
                                                              .
                                                  + (1 -  ) 

Define the risk tolerance as the inverse of the coefficient of relative risk aversion. Then the
risk tolerance of the entrepreneurs is 1--due to log preferences--and the average risk toler-
ance in the economy, weighted by the agents' wealth shares, is  + (1 -  )1/. Therefore,
we obtain the standard result that agents share aggregate risk in proportion to their risk
tolerance: the less risk tolerant are consumers, the higher the sensitivity of entrepreneurial
net worth to the aggregate shock in equilibrium. See Gârleanu and Panageas (2015) for
example.
  Equation (11) highlights a second determinant of the equilibrium risk taking behavior
of entrepreneurs, which operates only when the collateral constraint in the continuation
equilibrium binds, n1 < n . Because W (n1 ) > 0 in this constrained region, we can see from
equation (11) that the share of the shock borne by entrepreneurs is larger.6 The intuition for
the last result is that a reduction in n1 in the constrained region reduces consumers' lifetime
labor income, making them more willing to purchase state-contingent claims that pay off in
that contingency. In equilibrium, this makes it harder for the entrepreneurs to smooth their
net worth in those states of the world, increasing the sensitivity of n1 to u1 . In other words,
the response of n1 increases the background risk perceived by consumers endogenously,
making it costlier for the entrepreneurs to insure against the aggregate shock.
   6 This   is the reason why in Figure 1 the relation between n1 and u1 is steeper when n1 < n .


                                                      14
    The importance of endogenous labor income in the results above can also be seen com-
paring our model to a different environment with an "AK" technology. With this produc-
tion function, consumers do not earn labor income and their consumption is only financed
by holdings of financial assets. In Online Appendix B we show that such model features
no financial amplification relative to the first-best economy even when consumers are risk-
averse, as long as they have the same CRRA preferences as entrepreneurs. This case is
closely related to the no-amplification result in Di Tella (2017), who also considers an econ-
omy with an "AK" technology.



4     Quantitative analysis
In the previous section, we have seen that the presence of state-contingent claims may
or may not dampen the degree of financial amplification in the economy, depending on
the relative risk tolerance of consumers and entrepreneurs and on the size of the general
equilibrium spillovers of entrepreneurial net worth on consumers' labor income. We now
go back to the fully fledged stochastic model and ask how sizable is financial amplification
in our economy under plausible calibrations of the model parameters.
    We compare our benchmark model with two other economies: a first best economy,
equivalent in all respects to the benchmark with the exception that entrepreneurs do
not face the collateral constraints (1); and an incomplete markets economy, in which en-
trepreneurs can only issue non-state-contingent bonds, so the following additional con-
straint is present:
                                                   ¯ (st )
                                 b((st , st+1 )) = b                  ( s t , s t +1 ).

In the incomplete markets economy, the limited enforcement friction implies the financial
constraints
                        ¯ ( s t ) +  w ( s t +1 ) l ( s t +1 )   (1 -  ) u ( s t +1 ) k ( s t )
                        b                                                                         (12)

for all (st , st+1 ).


4.1     Calibration

Table 1 reports the model parameters that we use in our simulations. A period in the model
corresponds to a quarter. We set the following parameters to standard values: the capital
income share  is 0.33, the depreciation of capital is 2.5%, the discount factor of consumers
 is 0.99, and the Frish elasticity of labor supply  is 1. In addition, we choose  so that
worked hours equal 1 in the deterministic steady state of the model. We further set  to 1,

                                                         15
so that consumers have a unitary elasticity of intertemporal substitution as entrepreneurs.
The parameter  represents the fraction of the wage bills that needs to be paid in advanced
by entrepreneurs. We set it to 0.50, in the mid range of values considered in the literature.7
Conditional on the above parameters,  e and  control the steady state level of the capital to
net worth ratio (k ss /nss ) and the equilibrium return to capital. We choose  e and  so that
the former equals 4 and the latter is 50 annualized basis points above the risk-free rate.8
This gives us  e equal to 0.984 and  equal to 0.818. We assume that the capital quality
shock takes two possible values, ut = {u H , u L } with u H = 1. Thus, the calibration of this
process consists in choosing values for u L and for transition probabilities. In line with
Gertler and Karadi (2011), we set u L = 0.925 and P(ut+1 = u L |ut = u L ) = 0.66. We further
set P(ut+1 = u H |ut = u H ) = 0.99, so that financial crises in the model are rare events. The
remaining parameter is the risk aversion of consumers, . Rather than choosing a specific
value, we will vary it across numerical experiments in the plausible range of [1, 10].


4.2     Results

In Table 2 we report statistics computed on model simulated data using three different
values of the consumers' coefficient of relative risk aversion:  = 1,  = 5, and  = 10. In
each case, we report results for the first best economy (FB), the economy with incomplete
financial markets (IM), and the baseline economy with state-contingent claims (CM).
   For each specification we simulate the model for T = 200, 000 periods and select the
periods in which the capital quality shock switches from H to L between t - 1 and t. Panel
A in the table reports the average percentage change in entrepreneurial net worth when the
switch occurs, and the average percentage change in

                                      ~ t =  ( 1 -  ) u t k t - 1 - bt - 1 ( u t ) ,
                                      n

a variable that measures the entrepreneurs' maximum capacity to issue intra-period loans
to finance working capital. Both variables are relevant to understand how financial factors
affect the demand for capital and labor by entrepreneurs. Panel A also reports the average
    7 For example, Jermann and Quadrini (2012) set this parameter to 1 in their sensitivity analysis, while
Bianchi and Mendoza (2018) set it to 0.16. The key results presented in this section survive when using
smaller or larger values for  within this range.
    8 The entrepreneurs in our model consolidate financial and non-financial firms. Using US data, Gertler and

Karadi (2011) target an average leverage ratio of 4 for the consolidated financial and non-financial corporate
sector. The excess returns to capital that arise in the deterministic steady state reflect deviations from arbitrage
induced by the presence of binding collateral constraints. Garleanu and Pedersen (2011) and Bocola (2016)
document that these arbitrage rents were sizable during the global financial crisis of 2008-2009, but they
typically average few basis points in advanced economies in normal times. We chose 50 basis points to be
consistent with this evidence.


                                                           16
                                 Table 1: Model parameters

             Parameter                Concept                              Value
                                      Capital income share                 0.330
                                      Capital depreciation                 0.025
                                      Discount factor, consumers           0.990
                                      Frisch elasticity                    1.000
                                      Disutility of labor                  1.980
                                      Inverse IES, consumers               1.000
                                      Fraction of wages paid in advance    0.500
             e                        Discount factor, entrepreneurs       0.984
                                      Fraction of pleadgeable assets       0.818
             uL                       Capital quality in low state         0.925
             Pr (u = u L |u = u L )   Transition probability               0.660
             Pr (u = u H |u = u H )   Transition probability               0.990



percentage change in labor, investment and output. Panel B reports indicators for the
entrepreneurs' balance sheet in the period immediately preceding the L shock: the average
net worth, the average value of n  ~ t-1 , the average leverage ratio, and the average ratio
between bonds issued in period t - 1 contingent on the L state realizing at time t and those
contingent on the H state, denoted respectively bL,t and b H,t . In the incomplete market
economy this ratio is always equal to 1 by construction.
  Let us start with the case  = 1 and look at the differences between the three economies.
  In the first best economy, a negative capital quality shock lowers the marginal product
of labor, leading to a reduction in labor demand and a fall in hours worked. The direct
effect of the shock, coupled with the reduction in labor input, leads to a fall in output. The
persistence of ut implies that capital quality is expected to be low also in future periods,
reducing the incentive to accumulate capital and leading to a fall in investment.
  In the incomplete market economy, the shock has larger effects on labor, investment,
and output. The differences are due to the financial amplification mechanism. In the
incomplete market economy, entrepreneurs issue non-state-contingent claims and face the
collateral constraint (12). The first ingredient implies that their balance sheet is exposed to
aggregate risk: a negative capital quality shock reduces the value of the capital held but
                                                             ~ t fall (on average by 25% and
not the value of entrepreneurs' liabilities. So, both nt and n
97% respectively). The second ingredient implies that these balance sheet effects depress


                                              17
                 Table 2: Entrepreneurs' balance sheet and financial amplification

                                 =1                       =5                     = 10
                         FB      IM         CM     FB      IM     CM     FB       IM                     CM
                                                   Panel A: Quantities
       (log nt )               -25.21      -3.12         -25.23 -6.75           -25.29                 -16.71
       (log n
            ~ t)               -97.98      16.26         -97.56 -14.35          -97.73                 -73.31
       (log lt )         -1.89 -4.81       -1.66 -1.89 -4.60 -6.37 -1.89 -4.17                         -11.10
       (log it )         -6.60 -16.26      -6.00 -7.60 -17.09 -10.30 -9.16 -18.36                      -17.69
       (log yt )         -3.77 -5.73       -3.62 -3.77 -5.59 -6.78 -3.77 -5.30                          -9.94
                                          Panel B: Entrepreneurs' balance sheet
       n t -1                    7.89      6.32           7.86   6.28            7.80                   6.69
       ~ t -1
       n                         2.29      0.95           2.29   0.97            2.28                   1.57
       k t -1 / n t -1           3.09      3.95           3.09   3.94            3.08                   3.55
       b L,t / b H ,t            1.00      0.91           1.00   0.93            1.00                   0.97

 Notes: Each economy is simulated for T = 200, 000 periods. For each simulation, we select every j such that
 u j-1 = u H and u j = u L . We then compute a given statistic x j and average across j. In panel A the changes in the
 variables are multiplied by 100, so to obtain percentage changes.



the demand for capital and labor by entrepreneurs. The combination of these two forces
leads to a deeper recession relative to the first best.
  When entrepreneurs can issue state-contingent claims, the fall in labor, investment, and
output are comparable to those of the first best economy. That is, the financial amplification
mechanism is muted. Unlike in the incomplete market case, entrepreneurs can now insure
against the capital quality shock by reducing their contingent liabilities in state L. Panel B
of Table 2 shows that this is precisely what they do in equilibrium: the ratio bL,t /b H,t is on
average 0.91, meaning that entrepreneurs promise to pay less in the L state. This liability
                                   ~ t are less affected by the negative capital quality shock,
structure implies that both nt and n
eliminating the first step of the amplification mechanism described above. These results
mirror the findings in Carlstrom, Fuerst, and Paustian (2016), Dmitriev and Hoddenbagh
(2017) and Cao and Nie (2017). They study financial accelerator models with endogenous
labor income and log utility for consumers, and show that in their economies financial
amplification is muted when debt contracts can be indexed to aggregate shocks.
  Financial amplification, however, increases substantially if consumers have a coefficient
of relative risk aversion greater than one. Table 2 shows that the behavior of the first best
and of the incomplete market economies does not change much once we increase , a


                                                          18
   2                                       2                                      1

                                           0                                      0
   0
                                                                                  -1
                                          -2
  -2
                                                                                  -2
                                          -4
  -4                                                                              -3
                                          -6
                                                                                  -4
  -6
                                          -8
                                                                                  -5
  -8                                     -10                                      -6

 -10                                     -12                                      -7
       0       5          10        15         0       5         10         15         0      5           10        15

              (a) Labor                            (b) Investment                            (c) Output

                                   Figure 2: Impulse response functions
Notes: We compute 2 × M simulations of length T. We initialize the simulations at t = 0 setting each state variable
at the mean of the ergodic distribution. In the first M simulations, we set u1 = u L , in the others we set u1 = u H .
To obtain impulse response functions, we take the difference between the first and second set of simulations, averaging
across M. We set M = 5000 and T = 15. We plot impulse response functions in percentage deviations from the first
best economy.


result related to the findings in Tallarini (2000). The economy with state-contingent claims
behaves differently: the average ratio bL,t /b H,t increases to 0.93 when  = 5 . Entrepreneurs
use state contingent debt less to protect their net worth against a negative shock and,
                                       ~ t to the shock increases. The larger fall in these
as a result, the sensitivity of nt and n
two variables constrains entrepreneurs' demand of labor and capital, leading to a deeper
recession. With  = 5 the fall in labor and output in the economy with complete markets
is comparable to that of the economy with incomplete markets.9 Increasing  further leads
to more risk taking by entrepreneurs and to stronger financial amplification.
   Figure 2 gives a more complete representation of the dynamics following the shock,
plotting impulse response functions for labor, investment, and output. To isolate the fi-
nancial amplification mechanism, we plot impulse response functions in deviations from
the first best. When  = 1, the complete market economy features essentially no financial
amplification. As we increase , all three series respond by more than in the first best.
Quantitatively, the responses are comparable to those of the economy with incomplete
markets for plausible levels of .
   Why do entrepreneurs choose a riskier balance sheet as  increases? To provide some
intuition, in Figure 3 we plot how asset prices and entrepreneurs' borrowing choices change
as we vary . The top left panel reports the average value of the ratio q(st+1 |st )/(  (st+1 |st )),
    9 Thishappens despite the fact that with complete markets the fall in net worth is smaller than with
incomplete markets. The reason is that the economy with incomplete markets starts from a higher level of
net worth in equilibrium, so the post-shock levels of net worth in the two economies are quantitatively similar.


                                                           19
                                                                    0.96
  1.4

  1.3                                                               0.94
  1.2
                                                                    0.92
  1.1

    1                                                                0.9
        0       2         4         6         8         10                 0       2         4         6         8         10




    4                                                                  0

  3.9                                                                 -5

  3.8                                                                -10
  3.7
                                                                     -15
  3.6
                                                                     -20
        0       2         4         6         8         10                 0       2         4         6         8         10




                        Figure 3: Asset prices and entrepreneurs' balance sheet
Notes: For each value of , we simulate the complete market economy for T = 200, 000 periods, and we compute
average values of q(st+1 |st )/(  (st+1 |st )) (panel a), of bL,t /b H ,t (panel b), of k t /nt (panel c), and of the percentage
change in net worth after a negative capital quality shock (panel d).


for st+1 = H and for st+1 = L. The ratio measures how much it costs to buy insurance
against state st+1 , relative to the actuarially fair price that would be charged by a risk neu-
tral insurer. A high value of the ratio reflects a high insurance premium on state st+1 , or,
equivalently, a low risk premium, as agents are willing to receive a low rate of return on
assets that pay in that state. The remaining panels report the average bL,t /b H,t ratio, the
average entrepreneurs' leverage, and the average percentage change in net worth after a
negative capital quality shock.
   After a low capital quality shock, consumers' current and future labor incomes decline,
increasing their marginal utility. When  is close to one, consumers are not concerned
about the negative shock, and the insurance premium is small--q(st+1 |st )/(  (st+1 |st ))
is on average close to 1. For higher values of , consumers are willing to pay a higher
premium to insure against this shock. Facing this higher premium, entrepreneurs have a
stronger incentive to sell debt contingent on the low shock. This endogenously makes the
entrepreneurs' net worth more sensitive to the shock and, in general equilibrium, makes
consumers' incomes even more procyclical, reinforcing the initial effect on risk premia.10
   10 The   self-reinforcing nature of the mechanism suggests that multiple equilibria may be possible. We have


                                                              20
   Notice that there is also a countervailing force at work. As entrepreneurs take on more
aggregate risk, they partly adjust by reducing their investment in capital, thus reducing
their leverage k t /nt , as seen in the bottom-left panel. This force however only partly offsets
the mechanism described above.
   It is useful to remark that high values of  in the range considered are more realistic
choices in terms of the risk premia they produce. For instance, the expected excess return
on the capital stock in the model is 0.3% when consumers have log preferences ( = 1),
while it equals 0.7% when  = 10.


4.3    Isolating the general equilibrium spillover on labor income

The mechanism just described contains two steps: first, risk averse consumers are willing
to pay high insurance premia for insuring a bad realization of the capital quality shock;
second, high insurance premia endogenously make consumers' incomes more sensitive to
the shock, reinforcing the first step.
   The results in Table 2 and Figure 2 show that the combined effect of these two steps can
be quantitatively relevant. We now attempt a decomposition to evaluate the importance of
the second step, that is, to evaluate how much the macro spillover in our model reinforces
the direct effect of consumers' risk aversion.
   We consider an economy that is identical to that of Section 2, except that consumers earn
the counterfactual wage that would arise in the first best economy.11 Wages still respond
to the capital quality shock--as they do in the first best--but they are not affected by the
changes in investment and labor demand that are due to the presence of the collateral
constraint. By construction, in this economy there is no spillover from entrepreneurs' net
worth to consumers' labor income. For brevity, we call it the "no spillover" economy.
   Table 3 reports the average response of key variables to the low capital-quality shock
in the first best economy, in the benchmark economy with state-contingent claims, and
in the economy with no spillover. In all cases, we set  = 5. The first two columns
reproduce results in Table 2. The third column shows that the amplification mechanism is
substantially reduced if we shut down the macro spillover. Net worth falls by 3.24% instead
of 6.75% and the responses of labor, investment, and output are comparable to those of the
first best economy.
   Panel B of the Table helps understand this result. Absent the spillover, labor income falls
constructed examples where this happens, but they require very large responses of wages to the net worth or
very large levels of risk aversion.
   11 See Online Appendix C for a detailed description of this version of the model.




                                                    21
                        Table 3: Quantifying the general equilibrium spillover

                                       First best Complete markets No spillover
                                              Panel A: Quantities
                       (log nt )                         -6.75            -3.24
                       (log lt )         -1.89           -6.37            -1.66
                       (log it )         -7.60          -10.30            -9.89
                       (log yt )         -3.77           -6.78            -3.61
                              Panel B: Prices and entrepreneurs' balance sheet
                       (log LIt )        -3.77          -12.75            -3.77
                       q L,t /  L,t                       1.20             1.03
                       q H ,t /  H ,t                     1.00             1.00
                       k t -1 / n t -1                    3.94             3.95
                       b L,t / b H ,t                     0.93             0.91

 Notes: See Table 2.



by 3.2% after the L shock, substantially less than the 12% of the benchmark model. Thus,
even if consumers are more risk averse than entrepreneurs, they do not bid up as much
the price for insuring a low realization of the capital quality shock: q L,t /(  L,t ) is 1.03 in
the no spillover economy, compared to 1.20 in our benchmark economy. Given these state
prices, entrepreneurs have a better incentive to stabilize their net worth by reducing their
contingent debt in the L state.
  In summary, to generate quantitatively meaningful financial amplification in our model,
we need both consumers to be more risk averse than entrepreneurs and labor income to be
sufficiently responsive to entrepreneurs' net worth.


4.4    A shock to the pleadgeability of capital

So far, we have focused on capital-quality shocks. To conclude this section, we ask whether
the mechanism in this paper also operates for other types of shocks. In particular, we look
at a shock that is also widely used in models of financial amplification: a shock to the
financial constraint.
  Following Jermann and Quadrini (2012), we consider shocks to the parameter  that
determines the fraction of the capital stock that can be pledged in financial contracts. We
assume that  can take two values,  (st )  { L ,  H }, with transition matrix  (st |st-1 ).


                                                 22
We parametrize the transition probabilities following Jermann and Quadrini (2012), and
consider a symmetric Markov chain with Pr( = s | = s ) = 0.97. We set  H = 0.82, as in
the previous sections, while  L is set to 0.72.12 All remaining parameters are the same as in
Table 1.
   A shock to t , unlike a shock to ut , has no effects on the first-best allocation. Therefore,
we focus on comparing the complete market and the incomplete market economies. Fig-
ure 4 reports impulse response functions to a negative shock to t . Let us start with the
incomplete market economy, with  = 1.13 A fall in t does not directly affect the balance
sheet of the entrepreneur: neither the value of the assets, nor debt payments change. Thus,
on impact, net worth does not change. However, the shock affects the borrowing capacity
of the entrepreneur leading to a contemporaneous fall in the demand of capital and to a
fall in the demand of labor in future periods. The net worth of entrepreneurs increases in
the periods following the shock, because of the higher profits made by the entrepreneurs
when the collateral constraint binds. The increase in net worth mitigates the reduction in
t , so the effects of the shock on output essentially go away after the first two periods.
   Consider now the economy with state-contingent claims. When  = 0, entrepreneurs
use contingent claims to partly insure against the shock to t : entrepreneurial net worth
increases on impact after the shock because contingent debt payments are lower. The in-
crease in net worth on impact immediately dampens the contraction in t , so the reduction
in investment and labor are less pronounced relative to the incomplete market economy.
As in the model with capital-quality shocks, the combination of complete markets and low
consumers' risk aversion dampens financial amplification.14
   As we increase , consumers are less willing to bear risk and the degree of financial
amplification in the economy increases. With  = 10 (dotted line in the figure), net worth
actually falls after the t : consumers are willing to pay a premium for hedging the fall
in their future labor income when t =  L , and entrepreneurs provide this insurance by
issuing more debt that pays in those states of the world. The associated fall in net worth
implies a stronger decline in the demand of labor and capital, larger even than in the
economy with incomplete markets.
   12 Jermann    and Quadrini (2012) construct a time series for t using US data. A fall of 0.1 is in line with the
fall observed in this time series during the Great Recession.
    13 As in the case of u shocks, the responses to  shocks in the incomplete market economy are minimally

affected by .
    14 It is worth noting that the economy still features a substantial degree of financial amplification even with

risk neutral consumers. Unlike for the capital quality shock, a shock to t does not have a negative effect
on entrepreneurs' net worth, so entrepreneurs have weaker incentives to insure against it. This is related to
results in Di Tella (2017) and Dávila and Philippon (2017), that show that the nature of the shock matters for
hedging incentives.



                                                        23
                                        10
    0.8

                                          5
 0.75

                                          0
    0.7
          0        5    10       15           0      5        10       15


      0                                   2                                    0
     -1
                                          0                                   -1
     -2
     -3                                  -2                                   -2

     -4
                                         -4                                   -3
          0        5    10       15           0      5        10       15          0      5        10        15


                             Figure 4: Impulse response functions:  shocks
Notes: See the note to Figure 2 for the calculation of impulse response functions. Net-worth, labor, investment, and
output are in percentage deviations from pre-shock values.


    Summing up, the mechanism emphasized in our paper seems to play a relevant role also
in models with shocks to the collateral constraint.



5         Welfare analysis
We now turn to the welfare implications of the model, proceeding in two steps. In Section
5.1 we use the special case of Section 3 to show that the competitive equilibrium can be
constrained inefficient. In particular, in equilibrium entrepreneurs may use state contingent
claims less than it is socially efficient, because they do not internalize the stabilizing effects
of their risk mitigation strategies on consumers' incomes. In Section 5.2 we go back to the
general model--calibrated as in Section 4--and study numerically an optimal policy aimed
at correcting this externality.


5.1           Inefficient risk sharing

Consider the simplified model of Section 3 with a binary distribution for u1 , with values
u H and u L and probabilities, respectively,  H and  L . Let us focus on an economy that
satisfies the following two properties in equilibrium:

                                                         24
   a. In period 0, the collateral constraint is slack for both H -contingent and L-contingent
      debt, that is, µ1 (u1 ) = 0 for u1 = {u H , u L };

   b. In period 1, the collateral constraint is binding in state L and slack in state H , µ2 (u L ) >
      0 and µ2 (u H ) = 0.
                                                                               H = b (u )
   Consider a social planner who can manipulate the entrepreneurs' choices of b1    1 H
     L = b ( u ) at date 0. The planner has no other way to intervene and is subject to the
and b1    1 L
same limited enforcement constraints (1) faced by the agents in the economy. Given that
                                                                      H and reduce b L at the
the collateral constraint is slack at t = 0 the planner can increase b1             1
                                                    H > 0 and db L < 0, what are the
margin. Suppose the planner chooses small changes db1           1
effects on the expected utility of consumers and entrepreneurs, V0 and Ve,0 ?
   To make the analysis more transparent, we assume that the planner intervenes at the
end of date 0, after agents have already traded the laissez-faire equilibrium state contingent
claims and have already made their consumption and investment choices, without expect-
ing any government intervention.15 At the end of the period, unexpectedly, the planner
intervenes by re-opening the market for financial claims, changing the entrepreneurs' port-
folio choice and implementing a unilateral transfer dT from consumers to entrepreneurs.
This intervention, by construction, only affects allocations from period 1 onward. More-
over, the changes in state prices dq L,1 and dq H,1 caused by the intervention only have second
                                                               H and db L made after the plan-
order effect, because they only affect the additional trades db1       1
ner's intervention. So the feasible set of interventions, that satisfy both the entrepreneurs'
and the consumers' budget constraints at t = 0, is given by the following equation:

                                            H           L
                                    q H,1 db1 + q L,1 db1 + dT = 0,                                 (13)

where qs,1 are the laissez-faire equilibrium state prices.
                                       H and db L have general equilibrium consequences.
   From period 1 onward, the changes db1       1
In particular, they affect the net worth of entrepreneurs at date 1 and, via this channel, they
affect the equilibrium path of capital and wages if the collateral constraint binds. Given
that the collateral constraint is not binding following the H shock, the wage path is only
affected following the L shock. Moreover, thanks to the assumptions that  = 0 and that
there is no uncertainty after t = 1, the interest rate is unaffected by the intervention and
is equal to 1/  - 1. These observations imply that the effect of the intervention on the
  15 Alternatively,
                  we could assume that the planner has sufficient instruments to keep the consumption and
investment choices at date 0 at their competitive equilibrium value.




                                                   25
expected utility of a consumer is:

                                       -                         -                          L
                                                                                          dwt
                 dV0 =  H  V1H               H
                                           db1 +  L  V1L              1-           t -1     L
                                                                                          dn1
                                                                                                L
                                                                                              db1 ,                (14)
                                                                           t =1

where  is a constant factor, not relevant for our derivations below. The direct welfare
                                                                                             -
effects of changing bond holdings in state s are given by s  V1
                                                              s                                       s , these are the
                                                                                                    db1
effects that are internalized by the consumers' private portfolio decisions. The presence of
the second term in square brackets captures a pecuniary externality. If entrepreneurs make
larger payments to consumers in the L state, entrepreneurs' net worth is lower, and the
capital stock and labor income are lower in all future periods. This reallocates resources
from consumers to entrepreneurs in proportion to the wage changes.16
   The pecuniary externality just described implies that consumers in the competitive equi-
librium overvalue payments received in state L relative to the planner, because they do not
take into account that receiving a payment from entrepreneurs in state L depresses their
own future labor income. If consumers internalized these effects they would be willing to
trade the L-contingent bond for the H -contingent bond at a rate lower than the equilibrium
relative price, since

                                 -                     dw L
                        L V1L         1 - t =1 
                                                t -1 t
                                                    dn L             L V1L
                                                                             -
                                                                                          q L,1
                                                           1
                                          -                     <          -        =           .
                                    H V1H                            H V1H                q H,1

                                              H , db L ) on the entrepreneurs' expected utility:
   Similar calculations give the effect of (db1     1

                                                                            cL        L
                                       1                 1                          dwt
                    dVe,0 =   - H  H db1
                                  ce,1
                                       H
                                               - L       L
                                                        ce
                                                                1-       t-1 e,1
                                                                             L
                                                                            ce        L
                                                                                    dn1
                                                                                          L
                                                                                        db1 .                      (15)
                                                           ,1      t =1        ,t

Also this expression includes a pecuniary externality, for the same reason as for equation
(14).17 Therefore, entrepreneurs also tend to overvalue payments in state L. However,
the crucial observation is that the terms in square brackets in equation (14) and (15) are
different. In particular, the fact that entrepreneurs are constrained at least for a period
                                    L < c L for t = 2, 3, .... As a consequence, entrepreneurs
following the L shock implies that ce ,1 e,t
   16 Inequation (14), the expression dwt L / dn L denotes the general equilibrium effect on wages of changing
                                                1
the initial net worth of entrepreneurs at t = 1. The effect of db1  L on dn L is mechanically equal to -1. It is
                                                                            1
useful to note that this expression is identical to the macro spillover W (n1 ) identified in Section 3. Here it's
useful to express it as a sum, for comparison to equation (15) below.
   17 Apart from this term, the formula contains no additional terms due to changes in the paths of capital

and debt from period 1 onward. This follows because debt and investment choices are individually optimal
and an envelope argument applies.


                                                       26
discount more than consumers the effects on future wages, so the degree of overvaluation
of L claims is relatively weaker for them:

                                                  L
                                                 ce      L                           L
                                                    ,1 dwt                         dwt
                                          t -1    L dn L
                                                 ce
                                                              <             t -1     L
                                                                                   dn1
                                                                                       .
                                  t =1              ,t 1           t =1

                                                     L < 0 < db H such that both consumers
   Given the inequality above, there exists a pair db1         1
and entrepreneurs are better off, i.e., dV0 > 0 and dVe,0 > 0. The logic of this result is that
by shifting the debt composition away from the L state and towards the H state, the benefit
for the entrepreneurs dominates the cost for the consumers, due to the fact that consumers
are partly compensated by higher future wages in state L, and that higher future wages are
paid in periods in which the entrepreneurs are, in relative terms, less constrained.
                   H , db L ) that makes both agents better off, we can use the budget con-
   Given a pair (db1     1
                                                L
                                            L /ce ,1         q L,1                 H > 0 > db L that makes the
straint (13) to obtain dT . Because             H
                                            H /ce
                                                       =     q H ,1 ,   any pair db1         1
                                                  ,1
                                             H + q db L < 0. Therefore the transfer dT needs
entrepreneur better off must satisfy q H,1 db1    L,1 1
to be positive.
   We have proved the following result.

Proposition 2 (Constrained inefficiency). Consider a competitive equilibrium of the simplified
economy that satisfies conditions (a) and (b). There exists a small perturbation to the state contingent
         L , db H , and a transfer dT from consumers to entrepreneurs at date 0, that yield a Pareto
bonds, db1     1
improvement.


5.2   Optimal policy

Having established that the competitive equilibrium may be inefficient, we now study the
optimal policy of a planner that can tax borrowing and investment choices of entrepreneurs.
Here we have two objectives. First, to give a quantitative assessment of the taxes needed to
correct the externality and of their effects on the equilibrium allocation. Second, to compare
the policy that uses state contingency tools with a blunter policy that taxes borrowing
equally in all states of the world. The latter policy is a simple leverage constraint of the
type usually studied in existing models of macroprudential policy.
   We start from the laissez-faire equilibrium studied in Section 4 and consider a planner
who intervenes for one period only: the planner sets proportional taxes or subsidies on
capital purchases and on state-contingent claims issued by entrepreneurs at time t. In
addition, the planner can make a lump-sum transfer at date t to redistribute the efficiency
gains between consumers and entrepreneurs. We assume the planner intervenes in the last

                                                           27
stage of period t, after production has taken place, at the moment in which entrepreneurs
choose their capital investment and consumers and entrepreneurs trade state-contingent
claims (see the model timing on page 7). In this way, the planner is not allowed to relax the
working capital constraint in period t and must satisfy the working capital and collateral
constraints in period t + 1. So all welfare gains are solely due to the planner inducing
different choices of capital and of state-contingent debt.18
   Let s = [u, K, B] denote the aggregate state variables, in line with the definition of re-
cursive equilibrium in Online Appendix A. In recursive notation, the problem of the en-
trepreneur is to choose consumption ce , capital k , labor demand l , and state contingent
claims b (s ) to maximize

                                    log(ce ) +  e Es V e b (s ), k ; s       ,

subject to

                                    n = (uk ) l 1- - w(s)l + (1 - )uk - b
                ce + [1 + k (s)] k       n +  1 - b s |s                q s |s b (s ) + Te (s)
                                                   s
                 b (s ) + w(s )l          (1 -  ) u k ,

where k is a proportional tax on capital, b is a tax on sales of state-contingent claims, Te is
a lump-sum transfer, and V e (.) is the value function of entrepreneurs, expressed as function
of the individual state variables (b, k ) and of the aggregate state variables [u, K, B].19
   The problem of the consumer is to choose consumption c, labor l , and state contingent
claims a (s ), to maximize

                                                 1-                                     1- 
                                  l 1+                                            1-    1- 
                     (1 -  ) c -                       +  Es V a ( s ); s                     ,
                                  1+

subject to the constraint

                                q     s |s a (s ) + c  w(s)l + a + Tc (s),
                                s
   18 The  assumption that the planner only intervenes for one period means that we look at the effect of
policies for values of the state variables in the ergodic distribution of our calibrated equilibrium. Clearly, this
exercise provides a lower bound to the welfare gains that optimal policy can achieve in our environment. We
find it useful to focus on one period interventions because the fact that they do not alter the ergodic state
distribution make the results easier to interpret.
   19 For ease of exposition, here we use entrepreneurs' debt B as a state variable, while in Online Appendix

A we use the transformed variable N    ~ , which is more convenient for the numerical solution of the model.



                                                        28
where Tc is a lump sum transfer, and V (.) is the value function of consumers, expressed
as a function of the individual state variable a and of the aggregate state variables. Note
that V and V e are the value functions in the laissez-faire competitive equilibrium because
the planner only intervenes for one period.
  A competitive equilibrium with one-period government intervention at date t is given by
taxes, prices, and allocations such that consumers and entrepreneurs solve the optimization
problems just defined, a (s ) = b (s ) = B , k = K , the labor market clears and the
government budget constraint holds.
  To evaluate the benefits of state-contingent borrowing taxes, we also consider the case of
a planner that must tax all contingent claims at the same rate, that is, a planner subject to
the constraint that b (s |s) be the same for all s .
  We consider a planner that maximizes the utility of the consumers subject to keeping
the entrepreneurs at their laissez-faire utility level. We solve the planner's problem numer-
ically, for all states in our grid, and report the response of the economy to a negative capital
quality shock in Table 4, which is analogous to Table 2.20 Specifically, we simulate the econ-
omy for many periods, select all the periods in which the shock switches from u H to u L
between t - 1 and t, and report statistics regarding the entrepreneurs' balance sheet and
the behavior of macroeconomic variables, assuming that the planner intervened at t - 1.
We compare four different cases: the first best (FB), the laissez-faire equilibrium (CE), the
equilibrium under optimal policy (PL), and the equilibrium under the constrained policy
(PL-c). For this illustration, we set  to 10.
  First, let us consider the behavior of quantities in Panel A. The lassaiz-faire competitive
equilibrium features on average a much larger fall in labor, investment and output com-
pared to the first best economy because of the financial amplification mechanism discussed
in Section 4. Under the optimal policy, the planner is able to substantially reduce financial
amplification, as the fall in labor and output are closer to those in the first-best. In addition,
comparing columns PL and PL-c, we see that the ability to tax differently different types of
debt is critical for this result: the optimal policy of a planner that is restricted to impose a
uniform tax on debt does not curtail financial amplification.
  Panels B and C report the average taxes set by the planner and average statistics on the
entrepreneurs' balance sheet. At the optimal policy, the planner subsidizes investment,
and the size of the subsidy is similar in PL and PL-c. This result is not related to a macro-
prudential motive and arises because the collateral constraint distorts down the level of
capital in this economy relative to the first best. So, the planner can achieve efficiency gains
  20 See   Online Appendix D for a description of the planner's problem.



                                                     29
                                                Table 4: Optimal policy

                                           FB      CE      PL   PL-c
                                         Panel A: Quantities
                               (log nt )         -16.71 -16.22 -16.52
                               (log n
                                    ~ t)         -73.31 -54.47 -72.86
                               (log lt )  -1.89 -11.10 -2.29 -11.13
                               (log it )  -9.16 -17.69 -19.30 -21.27
                               (log yt )  -3.77 -9.94 -4.01 -9.93
                                           Panel B: Taxes
                               1 - b (u L )        1.00    0.80    1.01
                               1 - b (u H )        1.00    1.00    1.01
                               1 + k               1.00    0.98    0.99
                                 Panel C: Entrepreneurs' balance sheet
                               nt                          5.66    5.68    5.98
                               ~t
                               n                           0.75    0.90    0.75
                               k t /nt                     3.55    3.56    3.56
                               b L,t / b H ,t              0.97    0.96    0.97

 Notes: See note to Table 2.



with a subsidy on capital.21 The PL and PL-c economy, however, differ substantially on the
optimal debt taxes.
   In the PL economy, the planner imposes on average a tax of 20% on sales of L-contingent
bonds and a zero tax on H -contingent bonds. As a result, entrepreneurs reduce their
reliance on L-contingent debt, so the ratio bL,t /b H,t is lower relative to the CE case. This
implies that entrepreneurs' borrowing capacity at the beginning of period t, n    ~ t , is higher,
reducing the effect of the shock on labor demand and output. Turning to the case in which
the planner can only impose a non-state-contingent tax on borrowing, the table shows that
the optimal tax is close to zero on average. Consistently with this, balance sheets and
aggregate effects in the PL-c economy are similar to those in the CE economy.
   The result of a near zero tax in the PL-c economy may appear surprising in light of
many papers in the literature that report sizable optimal debt taxes in similar models with
    21 Incidentally, this explains why investment falls more in the planner solution than in the laissez-faire

equilibrium in panel A. Since the planner can only intervene at t - 1, the investment subsidy is only present
at date t - 1, driving down investment between t - 1 and t. In the laissez-faire equilibrium this policy effect
is absent.


                                                          30
 17.5                                                             0.98


 17.4

                                                                 0.975
 17.3


 17.2
                                                                  0.97
 17.1


  17
                                                                 0.965
 16.9


 16.8
                                                                  0.96

 16.7


 16.6                                                            0.955
    -0.8   -0.6   -0.4   -0.2   0   0.2   0.4   0.6                  -0.8   -0.6   -0.4   -0.2   0   0.2   0.4   0.6




                                Figure 5: Tax on debt, leverage and risk taking
Notes: The left panel reports the equilibrium levels of bL,t-1 and b H,t-1 when varying b . When constructing the
figure, we set ut-1 = 1 and set the other state variables at t - 1 at the ergodic mean. In addition, the tax on capital and
the transfers are set so that the level of capital remains at its optimal level in the constrained planner problem and the
entrepreneur achieves the same utility as in the laissez-faire competitive equilibrium. The right panel is constructed in a
similar fashion.


non-state-contingent debt. To better understand the intuition behind the result, Figure
5 reports entrepreneurs' debt in the PL-c economy when the planner varies b . The left
panel shows that as b increases entrepreneurs reduce their contingent debt in both states
of the world, but much more in state H , so the ratio of L-contingent to H -contingent debt
increases (right panel). Thus, a uniform tax on borrowing is not particularly effective in
reducing the risk taking of entrepreneurs, because entrepreneurs substitute a lower level of
leverage with less state-contingency in future debt payments. Because of this feature, the
planner chooses essentially not to engage in macroprudential policy. In models without
state-contingent-debt the private sector cannot respond to a tax by lowering leverage and
at the same time reducing the degree of state contingency, so a uniform tax on debt is more
effective.
   We summarize the discussion above in two observations. First, when borrowers have
means to adjust the state-contingency of their liabilities, the welfare benefits of a uniform
tax on leverage may be overstated. Second, the ability of regulation to reduce financial
amplification and improve welfare rests crucially on the ability to discourage the riskier

                                                           31
forms of borrowing with targeted instruments.
    In this section, we have developed these arguments in terms of Pigouvian taxes. How-
ever, it is possible to derive similar results by considering a planner that imposes quanti-
tative restrictions on leverage. A restriction on debt state-by-state corresponds to the PL
case, while a restriction on the total value of debt to the PL-c case. A restriction on the
total value of debt that includes different weights on L-contingent and H -contingent debt
can mimic the PL case. So, in this sense, our result points to the importance of choosing
appropriate risk-weights when regulating the liability side of balance sheets.



6     Conclusion
In this paper we have asked why financial institutions tend to be exposed to aggregate
risk despite the availability of several instruments to hedge this exposure. To answer this
question, we have used a canonical financial accelerator model in which agents trade fully
state-contingent claims. We have obtained two main results.
    First, we showed that entrepreneurs may not hedge negative aggregate shocks in equi-
librium because insuring these states can be too costly for them. We have isolated the im-
portance of two factors for this result: the general equilibrium spillover of entrepreneurs'
net worth on consumers' labor income and the risk aversion of consumers. Under plausi-
ble calibrations of our model, these two effects are strong enough to make the productive
sector as exposed to aggregate risk as it would be in a corresponding economy where only
a non-state-contingent bond can be used for risk-management. These results show that
it is feasible to introduce risk-management considerations in this class of models without
compromising their ability to generate financial amplification.
    Second, we showed that the resulting competitive equilibrium is constrained inefficient
and it features too much exposure of entrepreneurs to aggregate risk. In the optimal policy,
a planner reduces this exposure by taxing only certain debt instruments, specifically those
whose payments are indexed to the negative aggregate shocks. On the contrary, uniform
taxes on all debt instruments, despite reducing overall leverage, are not effective in limiting
the entrepreneurs' risk exposure because they incentivize a substitution toward riskier debt
instruments. More generally, our results emphasize that macroprudential policies targeted
toward certain debt instruments can be substantially more effective than policies that dis-
courage leverage tout court--a common prescription of the incomplete market models used
in the literature.
    These policy prescriptions are obtained in an environment where a full set of state-


                                              32
contingent claims is available. In future research on macroprudential policy, it may be
useful to consider models in between the two extremes of no state contingency and full
state contingency, to capture more realistically the set of risk-management tools available
to financial institutions.



References
Asriyan, Vladimir. 2018. "Balance Sheet Channel with Information and Trading Frictions."
  Unpublished manuscript, CREI.

Bernanke, Ben S and Mark Gertler. 1986. "Agency costs, collateral, and business fluctua-
  tions." Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bernanke, Ben S, Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist. 1999. "The financial accelerator in a
  quantitative business cycle framework." Handbook of Macroeconomics 1:1341­1393.

Bianchi, Javier. 2011. "Overborrowing and systemic externalities in the business cycle."
  American Economic Review 101 (7):3400­3426.

------. 2016. "Efficient bailouts?" American Economic Review 106 (12):3607­59.

Bianchi, Javier and Enrique G Mendoza. 2018. "Optimal time-consistent macroprudential
  policy." Journal of Political Economy 126 (2):588­634.

Bocola, Luigi. 2016. "The Pass-Through of Sovereign Risk." Journal of Political Economy
  124 (4):879­926.

Bocola, Luigi and Guido Lorenzoni. 2019. "Financial Crises, Dollarization, and Lending of
  Last Resort in Open Economies." Unpublished manuscript, Stanford University.

Brunnermeier, Markus K and Yuliy Sannikov. 2014. "A macroeconomic model with a fi-
  nancial sector." American Economic Review 104 (2):379­421.

Caballero, Ricardo J and Guido Lorenzoni. 2014. "Persistent appreciations and overshoot-
  ing: A normative analysis." IMF Economic Review 62 (1):1­47.

Cao, Dan, Guido Lorenzoni, and Karl Walentin. 2019. "Financial frictions, investment, and
  Tobin'sq." Journal of Monetary Economics 103:105­122.

Cao, Dan and Guangyu Nie. 2017. "Amplification and asymmetric effects without collateral
  constraints." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 9 (3):222­66.

Carlstrom, Charles T, Timothy S Fuerst, and Matthias Paustian. 2016. "Optimal contracts,


                                              33
  aggregate risk, and the financial accelerator." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
  8 (1):119­47.

Dávila, Eduardo and Anton Korinek. 2018. "Pecuniary externalities in economies with
  financial frictions." The Review of Economic Studies 85 (1):352­395.

Dávila, Eduardo and Thomas Philippon. 2017. "Incompleteness shocks." Unpublished
  manuscript, NYU Stern.

Di Tella, Sebastian. 2017. "Uncertainty shocks and balance sheet recessions." Journal of
  Political Economy 125 (6):2038­2081.

Dmitriev, Mikhail and Jonathan Hoddenbagh. 2017. "The financial accelerator and the
  optimal state-dependent contract." Review of Economic Dynamics 24:43­65.

Gârleanu, Nicolae and Stavros Panageas. 2015. "Young, old, conservative, and bold: The
  implications of heterogeneity and finite lives for asset pricing." Journal of Political Economy
  123 (3):670­685.

Garleanu, Nicolae and Lasse Heje Pedersen. 2011. "Margin-based asset pricing and devia-
  tions from the law of one price." The Review of Financial Studies 24 (6):1980­2022.

Geanakoplos, John D and Heraklis M Polemarchakis. 1986. "Existence, regularity, and
  constrained suboptimality of competitive allocations." Essays in Honor of Kenneth J. Arrow:
  Volume 3, Uncertainty, Information, and Communication 3:65.

Gertler, Mark and Peter Karadi. 2011. "A Model of Unconventional Monetary Policy."
  Journal of Monetary Economics 58 (1):17­34.

Gertler, Mark and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. 2010. "Financial intermediation and credit policy in
  business cycle analysis." In Handbook of monetary economics, vol. 3. Elsevier, 547­599.

Greenlaw, David, Jan Hatzius, Anil K Kashyap, and Hyun Song Shin. 2008. "Leveraged
  losses: lessons from the mortgage market meltdown."

Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Gregory W Huffman. 1988. "Investment, capacity
  utilization, and the real business cycle." The American Economic Review :402­417.

He, Zhiguo and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2013. "Intermediary asset pricing." American
  Economic Review 103 (2):732­70.

Itskhoki, Oleg and Benjamin Moll. 2019. "Optimal development policies with financial
  frictions." Econometrica 87 (1):139­173.




                                                34
Jermann, Urban and Vincenzo Quadrini. 2012. "Macroeconomic effects of financial shocks."
  American Economic Review 102 (1):238­71.

Kehoe, Timothy J and David K Levine. 1993. "Debt-constrained asset markets." The Review
  of Economic Studies 60 (4):865­888.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore. 1997. "Credit cycles." Journal of political economy
  105 (2):211­248.

Korinek, Anton. 2018. "Regulating capital flows to emerging markets: An externality view."
  Journal of International Economics 111:61­80.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind. 2003. "Collateral constraints and the amplification mechanism."
  Journal of Economic Theory 111 (2):277­292.

Lorenzoni, Guido. 2008.      "Inefficient credit booms."    The Review of Economic Studies
  75 (3):809­833.

Rampini, Adriano A and S Viswanathan. 2010. "Collateral, risk management, and the
  distribution of debt capacity." The Journal of Finance 65 (6):2293­2322.

Tallarini, Thomas D. 2000. "Risk-sensitive real business cycles." Journal of monetary Eco-
  nomics 45 (3):507­532.




                                                35
        Online Appendix to "Risk Sharing Externalities"
                                    by Luigi Bocola and Guido Lorenzoni



A      Recursive equilibrium and numerical solution
                                         ~ ], where K denotes the aggregate capital stock and
The aggregate state vector is s = [u, K, N
N~ is defined by
                                                   ~ =  (1 - )uK - B,
                                                   N                                                                  (A.1)

with B being the total claims entrepreneurs need to pay to consumers. The state follows the
law of motion (.) with transition matrix  (s |s) and both consumers and entrepreneurs
observe this. By a slight abuse of notation, w(s) denotes the wage as a function of the state
s and q(s |s) the price of an Arrow-Debreu security that pays one unit of consumption next
period if the state is s .
    The representative consumer's problem is then

                                                                                                                1
                                                                 1-                                     1-     1- 
                                                     l 1+                                               1- 
    V ( a; s) = max             (1 -  ) c -                            +  Es V ( a ( s ); s )1-                      s.t.
               c,l , a ( s )                        1+

                                         c +  q ( s | s ) a ( s )  w ( s ) l + a.
                                               s

    The representative entrepreneur's problem is

                      V e ( b, k ; s ) =       max              log(ce ) +  e ES V e (b (s ), k ; s )         s.t.
                                           c e ,k ,l ,b ( s )

                                    n = (uk) l 1- - w(s)l + (1 - )uk - b
                               ce + k    n +  q(s |s)b (s )
                                                    s
           b (s ) + w(s )l                (1 -  ) u k .

    We can now define a recursive competitive equilibrium.

Definition A-1. A recursive competitive equilibrium is given by value functions and policy func-
tions for consumers and for entrepreneurs and pricing functions {q(s |.), w(.)} such that (i) con-
sumers' and entrepreneurs' policies solve their decision problems taking prices as given; (ii) the labor
market and the markets for contingent claims clear; (ii) the law of motion (.) is consistent with
agents' optimization.


                                                                   1
   The following result simplifies the numerical computation of the equilibrium

Lemma A-1. The consumption function of entrepreneurs' is linear in net worth,

                                     c e ( b, k ; s ) = (1 -  e ) n ( s ).




Proof. Consider the problem of entrepreneurs, and suppose that we know the optimal pol-
                   ~ = b/(uk ) and l
icy for the ratios b               ~ = l /(uk ). Under the optimal policy, these ratios must
                                                                           ~ (s ) and l
satisfy the collateral constraint in the entrepreneur's problem. So, given b          ~(s), we
can solve for the optimal consumption/investment problem of the entrepreneur by solving

                                 V e (k; s) = max log(ce ) +  e ES V e (b (s ), k ; s )        s.t.
                                                     c e ,k


   ce + 1 -  q(s |s)b (s )u b
                            ~ (s ) k                  ~(s)1- - w(s)l
                                                      l            ~(s) + (1 - ) - b
                                                                                   ~ uk,
                 s


   This is an optimal saving problem with log utility and a single asset that pays the
stochastic return
                            ~(s )1- - w(s )l
                            l              ~(s ) + (1 - ) - b~ (s ) u
                                                                      .
                                                        ~ (s )
                                   1 - s q(s |s)b (s )u b

   Following standard arguments, we can then show that the optimal consumption policy
satisfies
                                          c e = (1 -  e ) n ( s ),

where
                                ~(s)1- - w(s)l
                         n(s) = l            ~(s) + (1 - ) - b
                                                             ~ uk.




   We solve for a competitive equilibrium using a global solution algorithm. Let {si } be
a set of points in the state space, and let {Ki , Vi , q Li , q Hi } be an initial guess for each col-
location point i for the next period capital stock, the consumers' value function and the
price of Arrow-Debreu securities paying one unit of consumption next period if u = u L
and u = u H respectively. Our algorithm updates this guess until a convergence criterion
is satisfied.
   Before discussing the details of the algorithm, let us first explain how we can update an
initial guess.


                                                       2
Updating the initial guess. In order to update Ki we can use the Euler equation for capital
(7), which we report here for convenience

                                  Ni
                1 =  e  si            u    ^  -1 ( L )1-  + (1 -  ) u s
                                       s ( Ki )     si                            +
                           s      Nsi
                                             +(1 -  e ) Ni  (1 - )  si us µsi .            (A.2)
                                                                     s

In the above notation, si is the conditional probability of u = us given that today we are
                ^ i is the updated choice of capital. Note that we have made use of Lemma
in state si and K
A-1 and substituted for entrepreneurs' consumption.
                     ^ i from this expression we need ( Ni , N , L , µ ) at each collocation
  In order to obtain K                                        si si si
point si and each realization of the of the capital quality shock tomorrow u = us . Below
we explain how we can obtain these variables using the initial guess and the equilibrium
conditions of the model.
  To compute Ni , we can first compute aggregate labor at si using the expression
                                                                               
                                                            1             1
                                      (1 - )(u K )
                                              i i
                                                            +       ~i
                                                                    N    1+    
                      Li       = min                            ,                 .        (A.3)
                                                                               

The first expression in the "min" is aggregate labor when the collateral constraint does not
bind, and it is obtained by equating (3) and (6) for µt = 0. The second expression is labor
when the constraint binds, and it follows from the definition of N~ , the collateral constraint
                                       1+ 
(1), and the fact that Wi Li equals  Li      from the consumers' optimal labor supply (3).
  Given this expression for labor, we have that aggregate net worth is given by

                                     -         1+ 
                    Ni = (ui Ki ) L1
                                   i   -  Li                                ~ i,
                                                     + (1 - )(1 -  )ui Ki + N              (A.4)

                                     ~.
where we have used the definition of N
  The values for ( Nsi , Lsi , µsi ) depends on whether the collateral constraints bind or not at
u = us . First, we guess that both constraints do not bind. Setting µsi = 0, we can compute
Nsi for s = { L, H } using the risk-sharing conditions (5), the value for Ni obtained earlier
and the guess for the price of state-contingent claims,

                                                       e Ni
                                          Nsi = si          .
                                                      qsi




                                                  3
In addition, if the constraints do not bind, we have that
                                                                       1
                                            (1 - )(us Ki )             +
                                      Lsi =                                 .
                                                 

To verify our guess, we can compute Bsi from the definition of net worth,

                    Bsi = (us Ki ) ( Lsi )1- - ( Lsi )1+ + (1 - )us Ki - Nsi ,

and our guess is verified if Bsi   (1 - )us Ki - ( Lsi )1+ . If the guess is verified, we
                                          ^ using the unconstrained Euler equation of
can update the policy function of capital K i
entrepreneurs,
                                   Nsi
                       e  si           u    ~ -1 ( L )1- + (1 - )us = 1.
                                        s ( Ki )    si
                            s      Nsi

  If Bsi >  (1 - )us Ki - ( Lsi )1+ for some s, we need to solve for the next period
constrained allocation conditional on u = us . This is done by solving a fixed-point problem
in Nsi . To do so, we can write

                                                             qsi Nsi
                                     (1 -  e ) Nsi µsi =              -1                       (A.5)
                                                              e si Ni

using equation (5). Using the demand and supply of labor, we can express Lsi as a function
of Nsi and of the initial guess for capital Ki ,

                                                                                   1
                                                                                   +
                                                (1 - )(us Ki           )
                                L ( Nsi ) =                 qsi Nsi
                                                                                       .       (A.6)
                                                1+          si  e Ni   -1

The fixed-point problem consists in choosing Nsi so that the following equation is satisfied

             Nsi = (us Ki ) L ( Nsi )1- - (1 - ) L ( Nsi )1+ + (1 -  )(1 - )us Ki .


  Once we have found Nsi , we can compute (µsi , Lsi ) using equations (A.5) and (A.6). We
                                                                        ^.
can then use equation (A.2) to obtain an update of next period capital, K                  i
  Note that as a by-product of this previous step we also obtain an expression for Bsi at
each collocation point and each state s = { L, H } given the initial guess {Ki , qsi }. Given Bsi
and the initial guess K , we can compute N~ using equation (A.1).
                        i                          si
  Let's now move to the update of {Vi , q Li , q Hi }. Using the fact that entrepreneurs' con-
sumption is linear in net worth, we can get the aggregate consumption of consumers from

                                                        4
the resource constraint

                                          -
                         Ci = (ui Ki ) L1
                                        i   + (1 - )ui Ki - (1 -  e ) Ni - Ki .                       (A.7)

                                                          ~i , is then given by
   The update for the value function of consumers at si , V

                                                                                       1
                                                    1- 
                      
                                            1+ 
                                           Li
                                                                                1-     1- 
                                                                si (Vsi )1-
                                                                                1- 
               ^i =
               V         (1 - ) Ci -                      +                                  ,
                                           1+                                         

                                                       ~ ), is obtained by interpolation using
where Vsi , the value function at the point (us , Ki , Nsi
the initial guess Vi .
   The update for the price of Arrow-Debreu securities, {q      ^ Hi } is obtained similarly
                                                         ^ Li , q
using equation (2) in the main text. This step requires interpolating the policy function for
capital in order to obtain Csi .


Numerical algorithm.           We can now describe the numerical algorithm for the obtaining a
competitive equilibrium:

      Step 0: Defining the grid. First, let U = [u L , u H ]. Set upper and lower bounds on the
      state variables (K, N    ~ ), and construct for each of these a set of points K = [K1 , . . . , K N ],
                                                                                                         K

      N~ = [N ~ 1, . . . , N
                           ~ N ]. The grid S is constructed by taking the Cartesian product of
                           ~
                           N
             ~.
      U , K, N

      Step 1: Equilibrium conditions at the candidate solution. Start with a guess at each
      collocation point {Ki , Vi , q Li , q Hi }. Following the steps outlined earlier, update the
      guess {K ^ ,V
                  ^i , q      ^ Hi }.
                       ^ Li , q
                  i

      Step 2: Iteration. Compute the Euclidean distance between the initial and updated
      guess at every collocation point, and let r to be the maximum distance. If r  10-6 ,
      stop the algorithm. If not, update the guess and repeat Step 1-2.

   The specifics for the algorithm are as follows. The upper bound on K is 15% above its
value in a deterministic steady state while the lower bound is 200% below this value. The
           ~ are between [0, 5]. We let NK = 61 and N ~ = 41. So, we have a total of 5002
points for N                                                     N
collocation points. The initial guess for {Ki , Vi , q Li , q Hi } is obtained from the solution of the
first-best economy. After every iteration, the new guess for variable xi is

                                         x i =  x i + (1 -  ) x
                                                              ^i ,


                                                     5
                 ^i is computed as described above.
where  = 0.8 and x



B     The "AK" economy
We consider two modifications to the model of Section 2. First, we assume that the produc-
tion function is linear in capital,
                                               y t = u t k t -1 ,

with ut being an iid stochastic process. Because labor is not a factor of production, con-
sumers do not earn labor income and the collateral constraint is as in equation (1) with
 = 0. Second, we assume that consumers and entrepreneurs have the same CRRA prefer-
ences,
                                                           c ( s t )1- 
                                         u(c(st )) =                    .
                                                             1-
    Let us denote
                                         At = ut [1 + (1 - )].

We make the following restrictions on the distribution of At ,

                                                                            1
                     -                                              -               
            E     A1                   + (1 -  )  e E            A1
                                                                            
                   t +1     1,                                    t +1                         1.          (A.8)
                                                                                 + (1 -  )  e

These assumptions are satisfied for any distribution of u when  = 1.
    The next proposition characterizes the competitive equilibrium of this economy.

Proposition A-1. Suppose that the restrictions in (A.8) are satisfied. Then, there is a stationary
equilibrium in which

              bt + 1 =  A t k t   k t =  A t k t -1        ce,t = hAt k t-1         c t = f A t k t -1 .   (A.9)




Proof. To prove the proposition, we verify that the allocation in (A.9) satisfies the necessary
and sufficient conditions for an equilibrium for some ( , h, f ).
    First, given the allocation in (A.9), we can write the resource constraint as

                                              f +  + h = 1.

Thus, we need to show that there exists  > 0 and h > 0 that satisfy the optimality
conditions of consumers and entrepreneurs, and such that  + h < 1.

                                                       6
  Given the allocation in (A.9) the growth rate of consumption of entrepreneurs and con-
sumers is given by  At+1 . Because  >  e , we have that the risk-sharing conditions are
satisfied with the collateral constraint binding in every state of the world,

                                    µt+1 ce,t = (  -  e )( At+1  )- .

Using this expression, we can write the Euler equation for capital, (7), as follows

                   1 = Et        ( At+1  )- + (1 -  )  e ( At+1  )- At+1 .

Solving for  , we obtain,

                                                           -
                                   = ( + (1 -  )  e )E[ A1
                                                         t +1 ] < 1                          (A.10)


  The budget constraint of entrepreneurs can be written as

                                                                         -
                                                                c t +1
                      k t + c e,t = (1 -  ) A t k t -1 + Et                   A t +1 k t .
                                                                  ct

Substituting the allocation in (A.9) in the above equation and rearranging terms we obtain

                                                        e
                             h = (1 -  ) 1 -                             < 1.                (A.11)
                                                     + (1 -  )  e

Given the restrictions in (A.8), we can easily verify from equations (A.10) and (A.11) that
 + h < 1.


  Given the allocation in (A.9), we can obtain the impulse response function of capital to
a percentage increase in At ,
                                      Et [log k t+ j ]
                                                       =1       j  0.
                                        log At
It is straightforward to verify that this is the same impulse response function that would
arise in a version of the model without the collateral constraint. In other words, the "AK"
economy with state-contingent claims features no financial amplification relative to the
first-best economy.




                                                    7
C      Model without general equilibrium spillover
In this section we explain how we eliminate the general equilibrium spillover on wages. In
the first best economy, labor income can be written as

                                                                           1+ 
                                                                           +
                                                       (1 - )(uK f b )
                                 LI (u, K f b ) =                                .                       (A.12)
                                                                 

    To eliminate the general equilibrium spillover of entrepreneurs' net worth on consumers'
labor income we proceed as follows. We assume that consumers solve the same decision
problem as in Section 2, with the exception that their wages are the ones of the first best.
That is, consumers supply labor as if they were working for firms operating in an economy
without the collateral constraints (1), and their labor income is given by (A.12).
                                                  ~ , K, K f b ], we can write the consumers'
    Letting the aggregate state vector be s = [u, N
problem as

                                                                                                 1
                                                           1-                             1-     1- 
                                          LI (u, K f b )                                  1- 
     V ( a; s) = max        (1 -  ) c -                          +  Es V ( a s ; s )1-                  s.t.
                c, a s                        1+                                                


                                   c +  q(s |s) as  LI (u, K f b ) + a,
                                          s

where we have substituted for the optimal labor supply of consumers if they were to face
the wage process of the first best economy.
    The entrepreneurs, instead, solve the same decision problem as before. One way of in-
terpreting this extension is that there are two consumers in the economy: hand to mouth
consumers that work for entrepreneurs and supply labor optimally, and Ricardian con-
sumers that work for a sector that does not face the collateral constraints (1) and that trade
contingent claims with entrepreneurs.
    In equilibrium, we require that i) the supply of labor by the hand to mouth consumers to
equal the demand of labor by entrepreneurs; and ii) the supply of bonds by entrepreneurs
equal the demand of bonds by the Ricardian consumers. Note that the resource constraint
in this economy will not be satisfied because the labor income earned by Ricardian con-
sumers differ from the payments for labor services by entrepreneurs.
    To solve numerically for an equilibrium, we proceed in two steps. In the first step,
we solve the equivalent first best economy and obtain the policy function K                        f b ( u, K f b ).

This policy function is relevant because it allows to forecasts the future labor income of


                                                           8
Ricardian consumers according to equation (A.12). In the second step, we solve for the
decision problem of consumers and entrepreneurs and make sure that the entrepreneurs'
labor market and the market for contingent claims clear.



D     Solving the planner's problem
In this section we explain how we solve numerically for the competitive equilibrium with
                      ~ ] be a point in the state space, and consider the following problem
taxes. Let s = [u, K, N

                                               1-                                              1- 
                                     L 1+                                                1-    1- 
           max          (1 -  ) C -                  +  Es                  ~ ( s ), K
                                                             V A ( s ); u , N
                 ~ (s )
       C,Ce ,K , N                   1+

subject to

                                      C + Ce + K         = (uK ) L1- + (1 - )uK
 log(Ce ) +  e Es V e B (s ), K ; u , N
                                      ~ ( s ), K        V e ( B, K ; s )
                                                                                                           
                                                                                     1                1
                                                                (1 - )(uK )          +       ~
                                                                                             N       1+    
                                                     L = min                             ,
                                                                                                           
                                                                     ~ ( s ),
                                  B ( s ) = A ( s ) =  (1 -  ) u K - N

where V and V e are the value function of the competitive equilibrium without taxes.
  The solution to this problem delivers an upper bound to the utility that consumers
achieve in the competitive equilibrium with taxes defined in Section 5.2, because the latter
must satisfy all the above constraints. It is also possible to show that a solution to the above
problem can be implemented as a competitive equilibrium with an appropriate choices of
taxes and transfers. Thus, we can find the optimal policy by solving the social planner
problem above.
  In what follows, we first explain how we solve this problem numerically. Next, we
show how to construct the taxes and transfers that implement the optimal allocation as a
competitive equilibrium.


Solving the planner's problem numerically.               To solve the planner's problem, let's fix a
point in the state space si , and let    Vie
                                         be the value of entrepreneurs in the competitive
                                                                            ~ ,N
equilibrium with taxes at si . Construct a grid of feasible values for [K , N   ~ ]. For each
                                                                              H  L
point in the grid, we perform the following steps in order to evaluate the objective function:



                                                     9
                                      ~ ,N
    i Given a point in the grid, [K , N   ~ ], compute the continuation values of entrepreneurs
                                        H  L
      by interpolating V e . Choose Ce so that entrepreneurs get as much utility as in the
      competitive equilibrium without taxes, Vie .
                 ~ ,N
   ii Given [K , N   ~ ] and Ce , compute C using the resource constraint and the expres-
                   H  L
      sion for labor in the constraint set.
                 ~ ,N
  iii Given [K , N   ~ ], use V to interpolate the continuation values for consumers.
                   H  L


  Given these three steps, we can evaluate the welfare of consumers at any point in the
grid. We then choose the point that maximizes consumers' welfare. We repeat this proce-
dure for all the points in the state space {si }.


Implementing the allocation as a competitive equilibrium with taxes and transfers. Let
        p              ~ )p, (N
                              ~ ) p } be the allocation that achieves the optimum in the planner's
{C p , Ce , (K ) p , ( N
                   H           L
problem at si . Using the policy functions of the laissez-faire competitive equilibrium and
         ~ s ) p ), we can compute the next period consumption, labor, and the value functions
(K p , ( N
of consumers for any u = us . Let us label those (Cs , Ls , Vs ). For consumers to be willing to
choose (C p , L p , Cs , Ls ) in the competitive equilibrium, the price of state-contingent claims
that pays if u = us must satisfy
                                                             1+ 
                                                                       
                                                   Cp -  L
                                                         1+                RW     -
                               qs = si                                                ,
                                                          ( L s )1+        Vs
                                                  Cs -      1+ 


where si is the conditional probability of u = us given si .
                                                   p              ~ )p, (N
                                                                         ~ ) p } and the policy
  Let us now consider entrepreneurs. Using {C p , Ce , (K ) p , ( N H     L
functions of the competitive equilibrium, we can calculate the implied future net worth
for any u = us , Ns , and the implied value for the Lagrange multiplier, µs . A necessary
                 p              ~ s ) p } to be chosen by the entrepreneurs is that the taxes on debt
conditions for {Ce , (K ) p , ( N
and capital satisfy

                                           p
                        e si           Ce
     1 - b (s) =                                + Ce µs                for s = { H , L}               (A.13)
                        qs         (1 -  e ) Ns
                                                     p
                                                   Ce
        1 + k =  e                   si
                                               (1 -  e ) Ns
                                                            u        p  -1
                                                             s (( K ) )    ( L s )1-  + (1 -  ) u s   +
                          s={ H , L}

                                        si us µsi .
                        p
                 +     Ce  (1 - )                                                                     (A.14)
                                       s


  The taxes defined in (A.13) and (A.14) guarantee that the entrepreneurs' first order con-

                                                          10
ditions are satisfied at the planner's allocation. The transfers ( Tb , Te ) can then be chosen so
that the budget constraint of entrepreneurs, consumers and the government is satisfied.




                                               11
