                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 THE WEALTH DECUMULATION BEHAVIOR OF THE RETIRED ELDERLY IN ITALY:
   THE IMPORTANCE OF BEQUEST MOTIVES AND PRECAUTIONARY SAVING

                                        Luigi Ventura
                                     Charles Yuji Horioka

                                     Working Paper 26986
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26986


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2020


We are grateful to Ali Akkemik, Marianna Brunetti, Elena Capatina, Javier Gardeazabal, Thesia
Garner, Shoshana Grossbard, Tatsuo Hatta, Takashi Kurihara, Anne Laferrere, Ran Sun Lyng,
Eric D. Ramstetter, Paolo M. Silva, Timothy Smeeding, Xiaonan Sun, Tien Manh Vu, Midori
Wakabayashi, Junmin Wan, Takashi Yamashita, other participants of the Osaka University
Conference on Household Economics, the Staff Seminar of the Asian Growth Research Institute,
the Annual Meeting of the Society of Economics of the Household (SEHO), the Econometric
Society Australasian Meeting (ESAM), the General Conference of the International Association
for Research in Income and Wealth (IARIW), and the International Workshop on the Socio-
economics of Ageing (IWSEA), three anonymous referees, and especially Yoko Niimi for their
valuable comments. This work was supported by JSPS (Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science) KAKENHI Grant Numbers 15H01950 and 18H00870, a project grant from the Asian
Growth Research Institute, a grant from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, and Science
and Technology (MEXT) Joint Usage/Research Center at the Institute of Social and Economic
Research, Osaka University, and grant n. RP116154D0309987 from Sapienza, University of
Rome. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Luigi Ventura and Charles Yuji Horioka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Wealth Decumulation Behavior of the Retired Elderly in Italy: The Importance of Bequest
Motives and Precautionary Saving
Luigi Ventura and Charles Yuji Horioka
NBER Working Paper No. 26986
April 2020
JEL No. D12,D14,D15,D64,E21,J14

                                         ABSTRACT

In this paper, we analyze the wealth accumulation and saving behavior of the retired elderly in
Italy using micro data from the "Survey of Italian Households' Income and Wealth," a panel
survey of households conducted every two years by the Bank of Italy. We find that, on average,
the retired elderly in Italy are decumulating their wealth (dissaving) but that their wealth
decumulation rates are much slower than expected. Moreover, we also find that more than 40
percent of the retired elderly in Italy are continuing to accumulate wealth and that more than 80
percent are doing positive amounts of saving. Thus, the Wealth Decumulation Puzzle (the
tendency of the retired elderly to decumulate their wealth more slowly than expected) appears to
apply in the case of Italy, as it does in most other countries, before as well as after the Global
Financial Crisis. Moreover, our regression analysis of the determinants of the wealth
accumulation and saving behavior of the retired elderly in Italy suggests that the lower than
expected wealth decumulation rates and dissaving of the retired elderly in Italy is due largely to
intergenerational transfers (bequests and inter vivos transfers) and saving for precautionary
purposes, especially the former.


Luigi Ventura
Department of Economics and Law
Sapienza, University of Rome
Rome
Italy
luigi.ventura@uniroma1.it

Charles Yuji Horioka
Research Institute for Economics
and Business Administration
Kobe University
2-1, Rokkodai, Nada
Kobe 657-8501
JAPAN
and NBER
horioka@rieb.kobe-u.ac.jp
1. Introduction


The central tenet of the life-cycle model is that people work, earn income, and save
(accumulate wealth) when young and retire and dissave (decumulate wealth) when old.
However, previous studies for most countries have found that the elderly continue to
accumulate wealth (save) or that they decumulate their wealth (dissave) but that their rate
of wealth decumulation is slower than predicted by the simple life cycle model with no
lifespan uncertainty and no bequest motives. For example, the country studies in Poterba
(1994) show that median saving rates remain positive well beyond retirement in virtually
all countries.


At least two explanations have been proposed for this so-called "Wealth Decumulation
Puzzle" (see Mirer, 1979, for an early exposition of this puzzle). The first explanation is
that the retired elderly are continuing to accumulate wealth or are decumulating their
wealth (dissaving) more slowly than expected because they are worried about longevity
risk (lifespan uncertainty) and the possibility of facing high medical and long-term care
expenses in the future and that they are engaging in precautionary saving in response to
these worries. The second explanation, which of course is not mutually exclusive with the
first, is that the retired elderly are continuing to accumulate wealth or are decumulating
their wealth (dissaving) more slowly than expected because they are saving in order to
leave bequests and other intergenerational transfers to their children.


In this paper, we analyze the wealth accumulation and saving behavior of the retired
elderly in Italy using micro data from the 2000-02 and 2012-14 waves of the "Survey of
Italian Households' Income and Wealth (hereafter SHIW)," a panel survey of households
conducted every two years by the Bank of Italy. We are particularly interested in shedding
light on whether or not the "Wealth Decumulation Puzzle" applies in the case of Italy, and
if so, whether it is due to the presence of bequest motives and/or to the presence of
precautionary saving.


This paper makes a number of original contributions to the existing literature. First, it is
one of the first papers to examine whether the "Wealth Decumulation Puzzle" (the
tendency of the retired elderly to decumulate their wealth more slowly than expected)
applies in the case of Italy. Second, it is one of the first papers to shed light on the relative
importance of bequest motives and precautionary saving as determinants of the wealth
accumulation and saving behavior of the retired elderly in Italy. Third, it makes direct use

                                               1
of data on saving motives. Fourth, it is careful to construct a measure of the change in
wealth that includes only out-of-pocket saving and excludes capital gains and losses on
real estate and other components of wealth. Fifth, it takes account of the endogeneity of
bequest intentions and the intended bequest to wealth ratio by instrumenting for these
variables. Fifth, it analyzes data before as well after the Global Financial Crisis to see
whether the behavior of households changed after the Global Financial Crisis.


This paper is closely related to several strands in the literature. Most obviously, it is
related to the many studies that have been conducted in the United States and other
countries that attempt to shed light on the relative importance of bequest motives and
precautionary saving as explanations for the failure of the retired elderly to decumulate
their wealth as quickly as expected. For examples, studies for the U.S. include Bernheim
(1987), Hurd (1987), Weil (1994), Poterba, et al. (2011), Palumbo (1999), Dynan, et al.
(2002), French, et al. (2006), De Nardi, et al. (2010), and Ameriks, et al. (forthcoming),
studies for Europe include Borsch-Supan (1992), Alessie, et al. (1995, 1999), and
Dobrescu (2015), and studies for Japan include Horioka, et al. (1996), Horioka (2010),
Usuki, et al., (2016), Horioka and Niimi (2017), Murata (2018), and Niimi and Horioka
(2019) (see Hurd, 1990, De Nardi, et al. (2016), and Niimi and Horioka, 2019, for more
comprehensive literature surveys). Virtually all of these studies find that both bequest
motives and precautionary saving are important as explanations for the failure of the
retired elderly to decumulate their wealth as quickly as expected.


Looking in particular at previous studies for Italy, Jappelli and Pagano (1997) find that
Italian households of all ages save positive amounts even though their saving rates have
declined over time for almost all age groups. Similarly, Brugiavini and Padula (2001) find
that elderly households in Italy save positive amounts even after controlling for
measurement error and cohort effects. Miniaci and Weber (2003) find that Italian
households fail to decumulate their financial assets after retirement and that, although
their housing wealth appears to decline after the age of 60, this is due largely to cohort
effects. Finally, Jappelli and Modigliani (2003) do a detailed analysis of the age-saving
profiles and age-wealth profiles of Italian households and find that discretionary wealth
(exclusive of pension wealth) declines in old age, at least after the age of 65, but that
discretionary saving remains positive throughout the life cycle (at least until age 80) if it
is calculated as disposable income minus consumption. These findings, taken as a whole,
strongly suggest that the "Wealth Decumulation Puzzle" applies in the case of Italy, as it
does in most other countries (see Jappelli, et al. (2014) for a more general survey of

                                             2
household saving behavior in Italy).


As for why the "Wealth Decumulation Puzzle" is observed in the case of Italy, Miniaci
and Weber (2003) conclude that bequest and gift motives play an important role, and the
findings of Guiso and Jappelli (2002), Jappelli and Pistaferri (2005), and Cannari and
D'Alessio's (2008) that bequests and other intergenerational transfers are substantial in
the case of Italy provide further corroboration for this view.


Turning to evidence on whether or not precautionary saving could be why the Wealth
Decumulation Puzzle applies in the case of Italy, Jappelli, Pistaferri, and Padula (2008)
find that precautionary saving is not very significant in the case of working-age
households in Italy, but this does not necessarily preclude the possibility that longevity
risk and the possibility of facing high medical and long-term care expenses in the future
motivates elderly households in Italy to engage in substantial precautionary saving.
Moreover, Guiso, Jappelli, and Padula's (2009) finding that Italians facing more pension
wealth risk have a greater demand for targeted retirement saving and insurance suggests
that Italians are risk-averse, that they are concerned about their living expenses after
retirement, and that they are engaging in precautionary saving for this purpose.


Thus, although there seems to be a consensus that the Wealth Decumulation Puzzles
applies in the case of Italy, there does not seem to be a consensus about whether bequest
motives or precautionary saving is the more important explanation


Another strand of literature to which this paper is related is the literature that attempts to
assess the relative importance of various saving motives (see, for example, Horioka and
Watanabe, 1997, Alessie, et al., 1999, Horioka, et al., 2000, and Schunk, 2009). Horioka
and Watanabe (1997) and Horioka, et al. (2000) find that retirement and precautionary
motives are of predominant importance in both Japan and the United States, while Alessie,
et al. (1999) find that precautionary and bequest motives are both important in the
Netherlands, and Schunk (2009) finds that the precautionary, retirement, housing, and
bequest motives (in roughly that order) are the most important motives for saving in
Germany. These findings provide further corroboration that both bequest motives and
precautionary saving are important as explanations of the Wealth Decumulation Puzzle.


A final strand of literature to which this paper is related is the literature on bequest motives
(see, for example, Hurd, 1989, Laitner and Ohlsson, 2001, Horioka, et al, 2002,

                                               3
Nishiyama, 2002, Brown, 2006, Altonji and Villanueva, 2007, Kopczuk and Lupton, 2007,
Horioka, 2014, and Lockwood, 2018; for comprehensive literature surveys, see Arrondel
and Masson, 2006, and Laferrere and Wolff, 2006). This literature analyzes the various
motives for which people leave bequests and what impact bequest motives have on
people's saving and other behavior.


The analysis in this paper is meaningful not only because it sheds light on the wealth
accumulation and saving behavior of the retired elderly (who hold a substantial share of
household wealth) and on the applicability of the life-cycle model but also because it has
important policy implications. For example, whether and the extent to which the retired
elderly decumulate their wealth (dissave) will determine what impact the aging of the
population will have on future trends in the aggregate household saving rate, and knowing
more about the determinants of the wealth accumulation and saving behavior of the retired
elderly will inform us about what policies would be most effective in stimulating the
consumption and raising the living standards of the retired elderly.


It is especially interesting to look at the case of Italy because household saving rates have
traditionally been very high in Italy, because the share of the elderly in the total population
in Italy is the highest in the EU, because the fertility rate is very low in Italy, and because
it would be interesting to shed light on the impact of Italy's unique cultural and
institutional setting (relative strong family ties, relatively underdeveloped financial
system, high government debt to GDP ratio, well-developed public pension system,
absence of a public long-term care insurance system, etc.) on the wealth accumulation
and saving behavior of the retired elderly in Italy.


To summarize our main findings, we find that, on average, the retired elderly in Italy are
decumulating their wealth (dissaving) but that their wealth decumulation rates are much
slower than expected. Moreover, we also find that more than 40 percent of the retired
elderly in Italy are continuing to accumulate wealth and that more than 80 percent are
doing positive amounts of saving. Thus, the Wealth Decumulation Puzzle (the tendency
of the retired elderly to decumulate their wealth more slowly than expected) appears to
apply in the case of Italy, as it does in most other countries, before as well as after the
Global Financial Crisis. Moreover, our regression analysis of the determinants of the
wealth accumulation and saving behavior of the retired elderly in Italy suggests that
respondents with bequest motives and those saving for precautionary purposes show
higher wealth accumulation rates and higher amounts of saving than other respondents,

                                              4
which suggests that the lower than expected wealth decumulation rates and dissaving of
the retired elderly in Italy is due largely to intergenerational transfers (bequests and inter
vivos transfers) and saving for precautionary purposes, especially the former.


The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we discuss theoretical
considerations; in section 3, we explain the estimation model we use for our regression
analysis of the determinants of the wealth accumulation and saving behavior of the retired
elderly in Italy; in section 4, we explain the data source and sample selection criteria we
use for our analysis; in section 5, we present and discuss some descriptive statistics; in
section 6, we present and discuss our estimation results; and section 7 is a concluding
section that summarizes our findings and explores the policy implications of our findings.



2. Theoretical Considerations


In this section, we briefly discuss theoretical considerations. According to the simple life
cycle model, households work and save in preparation for their life after retirement when
young and retire and finance their living expenses by decumulating their previously
accumulated wealth when old (Modigliani and Brumberg, 1954). Moreover, in the
absence of bequest motives and precautionary saving arising from longevity risk and
future medical and long-term care expenses, retired households should decumulate their
wealth so as to precisely exhaust their wealth at the time of death. If the wealth
decumulation rate of retired households is slower than predicted by the simple life cycle
model, it is presumably due to bequest motives and/or to precautionary saving arising
from longevity risk or future medical and long-term care expenses.


The purpose of this paper is to determine whether the retired elderly in Italy decumulate
their wealth (dissave) after they retire as predicted by the simple life cycle model and
whether or not their wealth accumulation and saving behavior is influenced by the
presence of bequest motives and precautionary saving.



3. The Estimation Model


In this section, we explain the estimation model we use for our regression analyses of the
determinants of the wealth accumulation and saving behavior of the retired elderly in Italy

                                              5
based on data for the 2000-02 and 2012-14 waves of the Survey of Households' Income
and Wealth.


3.1. The Estimation Model for the Regressions based on Data from the 2000-02
Waves


Dependent variables
We use two dependent variables in our analysis based on data from the 2000-02 waves of
SHIW.
(1) The wealth accumulation (decumulation) rate between 2000-02, calculated as the
    natural logarithm of the ratio of wealth (net worth) in 2002 to wealth (net worth) in
    2000 in 2000 prices (following Spicer, et al., 2016). We use a comprehensive measure
    of wealth that is calculated as the sum of financial and real assets minus liabilities.
(2) The amount of saving in 2002, calculated as the residual between disposable income
    and consumption expenditure in 2002. Consumption expenditure is a comprehensive
    measure of expenditures on both nondurable and durable goods but excludes
    maintenance payments and other financial contributions to non-cohabiting relatives
    and friends, extraordinary maintenance payments and rent on one's dwelling, and
    mortgage payments. Expenditures on nondurable goods include expenditures on food
    products purchased in shops and supermarkets, meals eaten regularly outside the
    home, and nonfood items, while expenditures on durable goods include expenditures
    on precious objects, means of transport, furniture, furnishings, household appliances,
    and sundry articles.


Note that these two measures of wealth accumulation or saving are calculated in totally
different and independent ways. The first of them is calculated from the net change in
wealth between the 2000 and 2002 waves, while the second of them is calculated using
only data from the 2002 wave by subtracting consumption expenditure from household
disposable income in that year. Since it is possible to compute wealth accumulation or
saving in these two very different ways, we decided to do so as a robustness check.


Turning to the explanatory variables, the ones of most interest to us are the ones relating
to bequest motives and precautionary saving:


Bequest-related variables
(1) A dummy variable that takes a value of one if the respondent intends to leave a bequest

                                            6
    to his or her children or grandchildren and zero otherwise
(2) The ratio of the amount of the intended bequest that the respondent intends to leave
    to his or her children or grandchildren to household wealth (net worth)


We would expect both bequest intentions and the ratio of the amount of the intended
bequest to wealth (hereafter referred to as the intended bequest to wealth ratio) to have a
positive impact on the wealth accumulation rate because households that intend to leave
a bequest (or that intend to leave a larger bequest) to their children would be expected to
moderate their rate of wealth decumulation so that they have enough wealth left over to
leave as a bequest. Thus, if bequest intentions and/or the intended bequest to wealth ratio
are found to have a positive and significant impact on households' wealth accumulation
rate, we will be able to conclude that bequest motives are one factor moderating the
wealth decumulation and dissaving of the retired elderly in Italy. Needless to say, we do
not include the two bequest-related variables simultaneously because of the high
correlation between them.


Precautionary saving-related variable
A dummy variable that takes a value of one if the respondent holds at least one insurance
product (life insurance, private health insurance, or insurance-based saving) and zero
otherwise


If this variable is regarded as a proxy for respondents' degree of risk aversion, we would
expect respondents holding at least one insurance product to be more risk-averse, to
engage in more precautionary saving, and therefore to decumulate their wealth more
slowly. Thus, if ownership of insurance products is found to have a positive and
significant impact on households' wealth accumulation rate, as expected, we will be able
to conclude that precautionary saving is one explanation of the slower than expected
wealth decumulation rates of the retired elderly in Italy.


Control variables
Learning from Alessie, et al. (1995, 1999), we include a large number of control variables
including those relating to the respondent's age, age squared, gender, marital status, and
educational attainment and the household's wealth (net worth), housing type, the number
of non-cohabiting children, and city size (whether or not the respondent lives in a city
with a population of 500,000 or more). The reference category for marital status is
widowed, that for educational attainment is no schooling, and that for housing type is

                                            7
occupied in usufruct (temporary right to occupy) or occupied free of charge. We also
include regional dummies for Northern Italy (Piemonte, Valle d'Aosta, Lombardia,
Liguria, Trentino Alto Adige, Veneto, Friuli Venezia Giulia, and Emilia Romagna) and
Central Italy (Toscana, Marche, Umbria, and Lazio), with the reference category being
Southern Italy and Islands (Abruzzo, Molise, Campania, Puglia, Calabria, Basilicata,
Sicilia, and Sardegna). We will not discuss these control variables in detail due to space
limitations.


Note finally that there is the possibility of endogeneity, omitted variables, or reverse
causality between wealth accumulation rates and bequest intentions. For example, it could
be that there is an omitted variable (e.g., greater retirement needs) that is leading to higher
wealth accumulation rates as well as to weaker bequest intentions and lower intended
bequest to wealth ratios, thereby causing a downward bias in the coefficient of the
bequest-related variables. We therefore also try estimating our regression equation using
two-stage least squares (TSLS) in addition to estimating it using ordinary least squares
(OLS). We use the receipt of bequests and inter vivos transfers and the expectation of
receiving bequests and inter vivos transfers as instruments for both bequest intentions and
the intended bequest to wealth ratio (which are never included together as explanatory
variables, as discussed earlier) because they are not necessarily correlated with wealth
accumulation rates but are likely to be correlated with bequests intentions (for example,
Niimi and Horioka, 2018, find that those who receive bequests and inter vivos transfers
are significantly more likely to leave bequests than those who did not receive bequests
and inter vivos transfers in both Japan and the United States, as do Cannari and D'Alessio,
2008, in the case of Italy). The usual tests confirm that these instruments are not weak
and that they are not correlated with the residuals.


3.2. The Estimation Model for the Regressions based on Data from the 2012-14
Waves


Dependent variables
We use the same two dependent variables that we use in our analysis of data from the
2000-02 waves for our analysis of data from the 2012-14 waves.


Bequest-related variables
We had no choice but to use different bequest-related variables from those used in our
analysis based on data from the 2000-02 waves because information on bequest intentions

                                              8
and the intended value of bequests is not available in the 2012 and 2014 waves.
Information is available on whether or not respondents have received bequests and inter
vivos transfers in the past, and since Niimi and Horioka (2018) found that those who
receive bequests are significantly more likely to leave bequests themselves than those
who did not receive bequests, as did Cannari and D'Alessio (2008) in the case of Italy,
we used the following variable as a proxy for bequest intentions:
(1) A dummy variable that takes a value of one if the respondent has received a bequest
    or inter vivos transfer in the past and zero otherwise


Moreover, since information is collected on respondents' saving motives in the 2014 wave
(respondents are asked to select their three most important motives for saving from among
ten choices), we include the following variables as proxies for bequest intentions in our
saving regressions:
(2) A dummy variable that takes a value of one if the respondent is saving to give inter
    vivos transfers to children and grandchildren (i.e., to pay for their education and
    economic support) and zero otherwise
(3) A dummy variable that takes a value of one if the respondent is saving in order to
    leave bequests to children and grandchildren and zero otherwise


If these bequest-related variables are found to have a positive and significant impact on
the wealth accumulation rates and saving amounts of the retired elderly in Italy, this can
be construed as corroborative evidence that bequest motives are one factor moderating
the wealth decumulation and dissaving of the retired elderly in Italy.


Precautionary saving-related variables
We were able to include three variables relating to precautionary saving because of the
availability of data on saving motives:
(1) The same dummy variable for ownership of insurance products that we use in the case
    of our analysis based on data from the 2000-02 wave
(2) A dummy variable that takes a value of one if the respondent is saving for old age and
    zero otherwise
(3) A dummy variable that takes a value of one if the respondent is saving for unexpected
    contingencies and zero otherwise


If insurance ownership and/or saving for old age and for unexpected contingencies are
found to have a positive and significant impact on the wealth accumulation and saving

                                            9
behavior of the retired elderly in Italy, as expected, we will be able to conclude that saving
for precautionary saving is one explanation for the less prevalent than expected wealth
decumulation and saving of the retired elderly in Italy.


Unfortunately, however, the variables relating to saving motives could be included only
in the regressions for the amount of saving because information on these variables was
collected only in the 2014 wave.


Control variables
We include the same control variables that we include in the case of our analysis based
on data from the 2000-02 wave.


4. Data Source and Sample Selection


In this section, we explain the data source and sample selection criteria we use for our
analysis. The data set we use is the "Survey of Italian Households' Income and Wealth
(hereafter SHIW)," which has been conducted by the Bank of Italy since 1965 (and as a
panel survey since 1989). This data set is ideally suited for the topic of this paper because
it includes detailed data on the flow of saving, the stock of wealth (net worth), bequest
intentions, the value of the intended bequest, saving motives, preference parameters such
as those relating to time preference and risk aversion, demographic and economic
characteristics, etc.


Each wave of the Survey, which has been conducted as a panel every two years since
1989, collects information on about 8000 households randomly chosen from population
registers (attrition hovers around 20% per wave). The Survey is very rich and collects
information on virtually every aspect of households' lives, including social and
demographic characteristics (such as age, gender, educational attainment, type of job,
number of income earners, dynamics of the household in terms of members entering and
leaving, information about parents and spouse's parents, etc.), consumption (including
detailed breakdown by type), income, gross and net wealth, and categories thereof.

Importantly, some waves of the SHIW include special sections devoted to particular
aspects of households' lives, and we were drawn to the 2002 and 2014 waves of the survey
because the 2002 wave included a special section on intergenerational transfers, with
information on bequests and inter vivos transfers received, bequest intentions, and the

                                             10
amount of intended bequests, and because the 2012 wave asked about bequests and inter
vivos transfers received as well as about saving motives.1

Since data from two consecutive waves are needed to calculate the wealth accumulation
rate, we used the 2000-02 and 2012-14 waves to calculate the wealth accumulation rate,
but we used the values of the explanatory variables in the earlier of the two waves (2000
and 2012, respectively) in order to mitigate potential endogeneity issues. The only
exception to this rule was that we had to use the 2002 and 2014 values of the bequest-
related variables because these variables were not available in 2000 or 2012. However,
we do not believe that this will seriously bias our results because these variables pertain
to intentions and preferences and are therefore presumably relatively stable over time.

By contrast, since the amount of saving could be calculated from just one wave of data,
the saving regressions were estimated using cross-sections of the 2002 and 2014 waves
to benefit from a much larger number of observations, and thus the control variables refer
to the same year. However, since the control variables are mostly sociodemographic and
geographic variables that are relatively stable over the short time span used for our
analysis, we do not believe that our procedure will introduce any serious biases in our
results.

We confine our sample to only single-person or couple households in which both the
husband and wife are 60 or older and retired to avoid the problem of having to allocate
saving, wealth, etc., to cohabiting household members. We also confine our sample to
households with at least one non-cohabiting child since we are interested in looking at the
impact of bequest intentions on wealth accumulation behavior and since respondents with
no living children are unlikely to have a bequest motive. We also drop observations for
which all of the necessary information is not available as well as observations whose
wealth accumulation rate is less than -200% or more than 300% in order to purge the
sample of outliers.

These conditions, in particular the condition that no household member works, greatly
reduced the size of the sample and left us with only 302 observations in the 2000-02
waves and 1041 observations in the 2012-14 waves for our analysis of the wealth

                                            11
accumulation rate and with 790 or 664 observations for the 2002 wave (depending on
which variables are included) and 2328 observations for the 2014 wave for our analysis
of the amount of saving. We should note, however, that sample weights provided by the
Bank of Italy were always used for both the descriptive statistics and the regressions to
ensure that our sample remained representative of the universe of households fulfilling
the aforementioned criteria.

Special care has been taken to construct a measure of the change in wealth that includes
only out-of-pocket saving and excludes capital gains and losses on real estate, equities,
and bonds. Real estate, which constitutes the bulk of wealth (net worth), is evaluated at
constant prices to avoid the risk of including positive (or negative) changes in wealth that
are due solely to housing price inflation or deflation. To obtain the value of real estate at
constant prices, real estate in 2002 and 2014 was valued at 2000 and 2012 prices
whenever possible (i.e., whenever the same property was owned in both periods) and
deflated by a real estate deflator otherwise.2 In fact, the former method was applied to 75
percent of households in the 2000-2002 panel and to about 80 percent of households in
the larger 2012-2014 panel. For these households, therefore, changes in net worth are due
entirely to changes in holdings of financial assets and liabilities. Equities and (in the case
of the analysis based on data from the 2012-14 waves) bonds were also evaluated at
constant prices for the same reason.3 All other components of wealth (net worth) in 2002
were deflated using the consumer price index.



5. Descriptive Statistics


In this section, we present and discuss some descriptive statistics. Table 1 shows
descriptive statistics (medians, means, standard deviations, and minimum and maximum
values) for all dependent and explanatory variables used in our regression analysis. In
what follows, we will refer primarily to medians rather than to means because medians
are less influenced by extreme values than are means.


As this table shows, the median wealth decumulation rate was 2.3 percent in 2000-02 and
0.6 percent in 2012-14, which corresponds to an annual wealth decumulation rate of 1.2
and 0.3 percent, respectively. Thus, the retired elderly in Italy were decumulating their
wealth (dissaving) before as well as after the Global Financial Crisis of 2007-08, as


                                             12
predicted by the simple life cycle model, but their wealth decumulation rates are far too
slow if one takes account of the fact that life expectancy at age 60 in Italy was 25 years
in 2015.4 Moreover, the wealth decumulation rate of the retired elderly in Italy was even
lower in 2012-14 than it was in 2000-02, possibly because the increased uncertainty
caused by the Global Financial Crisis caused the retired elderly in Italy to moderate their
speed of wealth decumulation and dissaving even more than they had been doing
previously.


Moreover, the proportion of the retired elderly with a positive wealth accumulation rate
was a full 42.4 percent in 2000-02 and a full 44.1 percent in 2012-14, and the proportion
of the retired elderly engaging in a positive amount of saving was a full 84.4 percent in
2002 and a full 89.5 percent in 2014.5


All of the foregoing evidence strongly suggests that the Wealth Decumulation Puzzle
applies in the case of Italy, especially after the Global Financial Crisis. This is consistent
with the findings of the studies for Italy that we surveyed earlier and with the findings for
most other countries also.


Table 1 also shows that the roughly half (50.7 percent) of the retired elderly in Italy intend
to leave bequests to their children and that intended bequests are a full 56.5 percent of
household wealth. Both of these figures suggest that bequest motives are quite strong in
Italy.


Table 2 shows the proportion of households saving for each of four saving motives, and
as can be seen from this table, 15.7 percent of respondents are saving for inter vivos
transfers and 71.4 percent are saving for bequests, which suggests that saving for bequests
and other intergenerational transfers is important. At the same time, 54.8 percent of
respondents are saving for unforeseen contingencies and 32.9 percent are saving for old
age, which suggests that saving for precautionary purposes is also important.


Table 3 shows the median wealth accumulation rate in 2000-02 and 2012-14 broken down
by the age and marital status of the household head, and as can be seen from this table,
the wealth accumulation rate is negative in all age groups and all marital statuses in both
time periods (except for one exception in 2012-14), which is consistent with the simple
life cycle model. However, the wealth decumulation rate is slower than expected (except
in the 81 or older age group in 2000-02), which suggests that the Wealth Decumulation

                                             13
Puzzle is observed in virtually all age groups and all marital statuses. Moreover, the
wealth decumulation rate is lower in 2012-14 than in 2000-02 in all cases except one,
which further corroborates our earlier finding that the Global Financial Crisis caused the
retired elderly in Italy to moderate their speed of wealth decumulation even more than
they had been doing previously. Finally, Table 2 shows that the wealth decumulation rate
is highest in the 81 or older age group in both time periods, which is as one would expect
given that medical and long-term care expenses tend to increase with age.


We then tried calculating median wealth accumulation rates by various attributes such as
bequest intentions, the intended bequest to wealth ratio, and insurance ownership.


First, we calculated the median wealth accumulation rate for respondents with and
without bequest intentions and found that it is 6.4 percent for those with bequest intentions
and -22.1 percent for those without such intentions, a gap of a full 28.5 percentage points.


Next, we calculated the median wealth accumulation rate by quintile of the intended
bequest to wealth ratio and found that the median wealth accumulation rate increases with
the intended bequest to wealth ratio, as expected, from -21.7 percent in the lowest quintile
to 24.5 percent in the highest quintile, a gap of a full 46.4 percentage points.


Finally, we calculated the median wealth accumulation rate for respondents who own an
insurance product and those who do not, and found that it is 1.5 percent for those who
own an insurance product and -2.6 percent for those who do not, a gap of 4.1 percentage
points. This suggests that saving for precautionary purposes may be somewhat important
in the case of the retired elderly in Italy.


Thus, our descriptive statistics suggest that both bequest motives and precautionary
saving are important in the case of Italy and that both appear to have a substantial impact
on the wealth accumulation and saving behavior of the retired elderly in Italy, especially
the former, but we need to do a regression analysis to determine whether these results
hold even after controlling for other variables.



6. Estimation Results


6.1. Estimation Results based on Data from the 2000-02 Waves

                                             14
In this section, we present the estimation results of our regression analysis of the
determinants of the wealth accumulation and saving behavior of the retired elderly in Italy
based on data from the 2000-02 waves. The results for the wealth accumulation rate are
show in Tables 4 and 5 (the ordinary least squares (OLS) results in Table 4 and the two-
stage least squares (TSLS) results in Table 5), whereas the results for the amount of saving
are shown in Table 6.


Looking first at the impact of bequest intentions and the intended bequest to wealth ratio,
Tables 4 and 5 show that both bequest intentions and the intended bequest to wealth ratio
have a positive and statistically significant impact on the wealth accumulation rate in the
OLS estimates as well as in the TSLS estimates, as expected. In fact, the coefficients of
both bequest intentions and the intended bequest to wealth ratio are larger and more
significant in the TSLS estimates, suggesting that the impact of bequests on wealth
accumulation rates is robust and even stronger after controlling for endogeneity, omitted
variable bias, and reverse causality. Indeed, the direction of the OLS bias suggests that an
omitted variable (e.g., greater retirement needs) is leading to higher wealth accumulation
rates as well as to weaker bequest intentions and lower intended bequest to wealth ratios,
which in turn is leading to a downward bias in the coefficients of the bequest-related
variables in the OLS regressions.


As for how the impact of bequest intentions on the wealth accumulation rate of the retired
elderly in Italy compares to that for other countries, the OLS coefficient for Italy is lower
than the OLS coefficient for Japan in a very similar study (Niimi and Horioka, 2019), but
the TSLS coefficient for Italy is higher. 6 This suggests that the impact of bequest
intentions is roughly comparable in the two other countries, which is reassuring because
the two countries are similar in many ways (e.g., close family ties, aged populations,
traditionally high saving rates, etc.).


We then tried replacing the bequest intentions variable with interactive terms between
bequest intentions and age group dummies to see whether or not the impact of bequest
intentions on the wealth accumulation rate varies by age. The results are shown in the last
column of Table 4, and as can be seen from this column, the impact of bequest intentions
varies greatly by age, with its impact being the largest and most statistically significant in
the 60-64 age group, smaller but still statistically significant in the 65-69 age group, and
not statistically significant in the 70-74 and 75 or older age groups. Our finding that the

                                             15
impact of bequest intentions on the wealth accumulation rate declines sharply with age is
new but not surprising because, as people age, their medical and long-term care expenses
tend to increase, making it increasingly difficult to moderate wealth decumulation even
if they have a bequest motive.


Looking next at the impact of bequests on the amount of saving, Table 6 shows that
bequest intentions have a positive and statistically significant impact on the amount of
saving but that the intended bequest to wealth ratio does not have a statistically significant
impact thereon. Thus, almost all of our results suggest that bequest motives are one
explanation for the lower than expected wealth decumulation rates and dissaving of the
retired elderly in Italy.


Turning next to the impact of insurance ownership, it does not have a statistically
significant impact on the wealth accumulation rate in either the OLS or TSLS estimates,
perhaps because we have not adequately controlled for the endogeneity of insurance
ownership. However, insurance ownership has a positive and statistically significant
impact on the amount of saving, as expected. This constitutes weak evidence that saving
for precautionary purposes is one explanation for why the retired elderly in Italy dissave
less than expected.


Turning finally to the impact of the control variables, and looking first at their impact on
the wealth accumulation rate, separated or divorced respondents seem to have
significantly lower wealth accumulation rates, homeowner households seem to have
significantly higher wealth accumulation rates, and wealth seems to have a negative and
statistically significant impact on the wealth accumulation rate. As for the impact of the
control variables on the amount of saving, married and more highly educated respondents
and respondents living in the North seem to have significantly higher amounts of saving.


6.2. Estimation Results Based on Data from the 2012-14 Waves


In this section, we present the estimation results of our regression analysis of the
determinants of the wealth accumulation rate and saving behavior of the retired elderly in
Italy based on data from the 2012-14 waves. The results for the wealth accumulation rate
are show in the first column of Table 7 whereas the results for saving are shown in the
second column of the same table.



                                             16
Looking first at bequest-related variables, bequest receipts (which are included as a proxy
for bequest intentions) are found to have a positive and statistically significant impact on
the wealth accumulation rate. Bequest receipts are found not to have a statistically
significant impact on the amount of saving, but dummy variables for saving for inter vivos
transfers and saving for bequests (which are included to capture the impact of bequest
motives) are both found to have a positive and statistically significant impact on the
amount of saving. These results provide further corroboration that the lower than expected
wealth accumulation and dissaving of the retired elderly in Italy are due largely to bequest
motives.


Turning next to the impact of precautionary saving-related variables and looking first at
the impact of insurance ownership, it is found not to have a statistically significant impact
on the wealth accumulation rate but is found to have a positive and statistically significant
impact on saving, as in the case of the results based on the 2000-02 waves. These results
provide further (weak) corroboration that saving for precautionary purposes is one
explanation why the retired elderly in Italy dissave less than expected.


Looking next at the impact of saving for old age and saving for unexpected contingencies,
both motives for saving have a positive and statistically significant impact on the amount
of saving of the retired elderly in Italy, which provides stronger corroboration that saving
for precautionary purposes may be an important explanation for why the retired elderly
in Italy dissave less than expected.


Turning finally to the impact of the control variables and looking first at their impact on
the wealth accumulation rate, male respondents seem to have a significantly higher wealth
accumulation rates and wealth seems to have a negative and statistically significant
impact on the wealth accumulation rate. As for the impact of the control variables on the
amount of saving, married respondents and respondents living in the North seem to have
significantly higher amounts of saving while primary school graduates and renter
households seem to have significantly lower amounts of saving.


6.3. Summary of Estimation Results


To summarize the findings of our analysis of the wealth accumulation and saving behavior
of the retired elderly in Italy, our estimation results for the two waves are broadly
consistent with one another and suggest that bequest motives and (to a lesser extent)

                                             17
saving for precautionary purposes are both important as explanations of the lower than
expected wealth decumulation rates and dissaving of the retired elderly in Italy.



7. Conclusion


In this paper, we analyzed the wealth accumulation and saving behavior of the retired
elderly in Italy using micro data from the "Survey of Italian Households' Income and
Wealth," a panel survey of households conducted every two years by the Bank of Italy.
We were particularly interested in shedding light on whether or not the "Wealth
Decumulation Puzzle" (the tendency of the retired elderly to decumulate their wealth
more slowly than expected) applies in the case of Italy, and if so, why.


To summarize our main findings, we found that, on average, the retired elderly in Italy
are decumulating their wealth (dissaving) but that their wealth decumulation rates are
much slower than expected. Moreover, we also found that more than 40 percent of the
retired elderly in Italy are continuing to accumulate wealth and that more than 80 percent
are doing positive amounts of saving. Thus, the Wealth Decumulation Puzzle (the
tendency of the retired elderly to decumulate their wealth more slowly than expected)
appears to apply in the case of Italy, as it does in most other countries, before as well as
after the Global Financial Crisis. Moreover, our regression analysis of the determinants
of the wealth accumulation and saving behavior of the retired elderly in Italy suggested
that respondents with bequest motives and those saving for precautionary purposes show
higher wealth accumulation rates and higher amounts of saving than other respondents,
which implies that the lower than expected wealth decumulation rates and dissaving of
the retired elderly in Italy is due largely to intergenerational transfers (bequests and inter
vivos transfers) and saving for precautionary purposes, especially the former.


Turning next to directions for further research, the most important direction for further
research is to estimate a full structural model. Another direction for further research is to
do similar analyses for other countries and to assess whether institutional, legal, and
cultural factors influence the wealth accumulation and saving behavior of the retired
elderly. A comparison between Italy and Japan suggests that the wealth accumulation and
saving behavior of the retired elderly in the two countries is broadly consistent but that
the impact of bequest motives is relatively more important in Italy whereas the impact of
saving for precautionary saving is relatively more important in Japan (see Niimi and

                                             18
Horioka, 2019).


We turn finally to the implications of our findings. First, our findings show that the wealth
accumulation and saving behavior of the retired elderly in Italy is consistent with the life
cycle model once we take account of bequest motives and saving for precautionary
purposes. Second, our finding that the retired elderly in Italy are decumulating their
wealth (dissaving) relatively slowly implies that Italy's household saving rate will not
decline precipitously as her population ages (see Weil, 1994). Third, our finding that the
retired elderly in Italy are decumulating their wealth so slowly due largely to bequest
motives and saving for precautionary purposes implies that we can stimulate their
consumption by (1) raising inheritance taxes, thereby weakening their incentive to leave
bequests, and/or (2) by expanding social safety nets, thereby alleviating their need to save
for precautionary purposes.



                                   Acknowledgements


We are grateful to Ali Akkemik, Marianna Brunetti, Elena Capatina, Javier Gardeazabal,
Thesia Garner, Shoshana Grossbard, Tatsuo Hatta, Takashi Kurihara, Anne Laferrere, Ran
Sun Lyng, Eric D. Ramstetter, Paolo M. Silva, Timothy Smeeding, Xiaonan Sun, Tien
Manh Vu, Midori Wakabayashi, Junmin Wan, Takashi Yamashita, other participants of
the Osaka University Conference on Household Economics, the Staff Seminar of the
Asian Growth Research Institute, the Annual Meeting of the Society of Economics of the
Household (SEHO), the Econometric Society Australasian Meeting (ESAM), the General
Conference of the International Association for Research in Income and Wealth (IARIW),
and the International Workshop on the Socio-economics of Ageing (IWSEA), three
anonymous referees, and especially Yoko Niimi for their valuable comments. This work
was supported by JSPS (Japan Society for the Promotion of Science) KAKENHI Grant
Numbers 15H01950 and 18H00870, a project grant from the Asian Growth Research
Institute, a grant from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, and Science and
Technology (MEXT) Joint Usage/Research Center at the Institute of Social and Economic
Research, Osaka University, and grant number RP116154D0309987 from Sapienza,
University of Rome.




                                             19
                                        References
Alessie, R., Lusardi, A., and Kapteyn, A. (1995). "Saving and Wealth Holdings of the

       Elderly." Ricerche Economiche, 49(3), 293-314.

Alessie, R., Lusardi, A., and Kapteyn, A. (1999). "Saving after Retirement: Evidence

       from Three Different Surveys." Labour Economics, 6(2), 277-310.

Altonji, J. G., and Villanueva, E. (2007). "The Marginal Propensity to Spend on Adult

       Children." BE Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, 7(1), 1-52.

Ameriks, J., Briggs, J. S., Caplin, A., Shapiro, M. D., and Tonetti, C. (forthcoming).

       "Long-term Care Utility and Late in Life Saving." Journal of Political Economy,

       forthcoming.

Arrondel, L., and Masson, A. (2006). "Altruism, Exchange or Indirect Reciprocity: What

       Do the Data on Family Transfers Show?" In Handbook of the Economics of Giving,

       Altruism and Reciprocity (vol. 2, 971-1053). Edited by Kolm, S. C., and Mercier,

       J. Y. Amsterdam: Elsevier B.V.

Bernheim, B. D. (1987). "Dissaving after Retirement: Testing the Pure Life Cycle

       Hypothesis." In Issues in Pension Economics (237-274). Edited by Bodie, Z.,

       Shoven, J. B., and Wise, D. A. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Börsch-Supan, A. (1992). "Saving and Consumption Patterns of the Elderly: The German

       Case." Journal of Population Economics, 5(4), 289-303.

Brown, M. (2006). "Informal Care and the Division of End-of-Life Transfers." Journal

       of Human Resources, 41(1), 191-219.

Brugiavini, A. and Padula, M. (2001). "Too Much for Retirement: Saving in Italy."

       Research in Economics, 55(1), 39-60.

Cannari, L., and D'Alessio, G. (2008). "Intergenerational Transfers in Italy." In



                                           20
       Household Wealth in Italy (255-286). Edited by Banco d'Italia. Rome, Italy:

       Banca d'Italia.

De Nardi, M., French, E., and Jones, J. B. (2010). "Why Do the Elderly Save? The Role

       of Medical Expenses." Journal of Political Economy, 118(1), 39-75.

De Nardi, M., French, E., and Jones, J. B. (2016). "Savings After Retirement: A Survey."

       Annual Review of Economics, 8(1), 177-204.

Dobrescu, L. I. (2015). "To Love or to Pay: Savings and Health Care in Older Age."

       Journal of Human Resources, 50(1), 254-299.

Dynan, K. E., Skinner, J., and Zeldes, S. P. (2002). "The Importance of Bequests and Life-

       cycle Saving in Capital Accumulation: A New Answer." American Economic

       Review: Papers & Proceedings, 92(2), 274-278.

French, E., De Nardi, M., Jones, J. B., Baker, O., and Doctor, P. (2006). "Right Before

       the End: Asset Decumulation at the End of Life." Economic Perspectives, 30(3),

       2-13.

Guiso, L. and Jappelli, T. (2002). "Private Transfers, Borrowing Constraints and the

       Timing of Homeownership." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 34(2), 315-

       339.

Guiso, L., Jappelli, T., and Padula, M. (2009). "Pension Risk, Retirement Saving and

       Insurance." CSEF Working Papers 223, Centre for Studies in Economics and

       Finance, University of Naples, Italy.

Horioka, C. Y. (2010). "The Dis(saving) Behavior of the Aged in Japan." Japan and the

       World Economy, 22(3), 151-158.

Horioka, C. Y. (2014), "Are Americans and Indians More Altruistic than the Japanese and

       Chinese? Evidence from a New International Survey of Bequest Plans," Review


                                           21
       of Economics of the Household, 12(3), 411-437.

Horioka, C. Y., Fujisaki, H., Watanabe, W., and Kouno, T. (2000). "Are Americans More

       Altruistic than the Japanese? A U.S.-Japan Comparison of Saving and Bequest

       Motives." International Economic Journal, 14(1), 1-31.

Horioka, C. Y., Kasuga, N., Yamazaki, K., and Wanatabe, W. (1996). "Do the Aged

       Dissave in Japan? Evidence from Micro Data." Journal of the Japanese and

       International Economies, 10(3), 295-311.

Horioka, C. Y. and Niimi, Y. (2017). "Nihon no Koureisha Setai no Chochiku Koudou ni

       kansuru Jisshobunseki (An Empirical Analysis of the Saving Behavior of Elderly

       Households in Japan)." Keizai Bunseki (Economic Analysis) (Economic and

       Social Research Institute, Cabinet Office, Government of Japan, ed.), 196, 29-47

       (in Japanese).

Horioka, C. Y. and Watanabe, W. (1997). "Why Do People Save? A Micro-Analysis of

       Motives for Household Saving in Japan. Economic Journal, 107(442), 537-552.

Horioka, C. Y., Yamashita, K., Nishikawa, M., and Iwamoto, S. (2002). "Nihonjin no Isan

       Douki no Juuyoudo, Seishitsu, Eikyou ni tsuite (On the Importance, Nature, and

       Impact of the Bequest Motives of the Japanese)." Yuusei Kenkyuusho Geppou,

       163, 4-31 (in Japanese).

Hurd, M. D. (1987). "Savings of the Elderly and Desired Bequests." American Economic

       Review, 77(3), 298-312.

Hurd, M. D. (1989). "Mortality Risk and Bequests." Econometrica, 57(4), 779-813.

Hurd, M. D. (1990). "Research on the Elderly: Economic Status, Retirement, and

       Consumption and Saving." Journal of Economic Literature, 28(2), 565-637.

Jappelli, T., Marino, I., and Padula, M. (2014). "Households' Saving and Debt in Italy."


                                          22
       Politica Economica, (2-3), 175-202.

Jappelli, T., and Modigliani, F. (2003). "The Age-Saving Profile and Life-Cycle

       Hypothesis." CSEF Working Paper No. 9, Centre for Studies in Economics and

       Finance, Department of Economics, University of Naples, Naples, Italy.

Jappelli, T. and Pagano, M. (1997). "The Determinants of Saving: Lessons from Italy."

       Working Paper R-313, Inter-American Development Bank, Washington, D.C.,

       USA.

Jappelli, T., and Pistaferri, L. (2005). "The Dynamics of Household Wealth Accumulation

       in Italy." Fiscal Studies, 21(2), 269-295.

Jappelli, T., Pistaferri, L., and Padula, M. (2008). "A Direct Test of the Buffer-Stock

       Model of Saving." Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(6), 1186-

       1210.

Kopczuk, W., and Lupton, J. P. (2007). "To Leave or Not to Leave: The Distribution of

       Bequest Motives." Review of Economic Studies, 74(1), 207-235.

Laferrere, A., and Wolff, F.-C. (2006). "Microeconomic Models of Family Transfers." In

       Handbook of the Economics of Giving, Altruism and Reciprocity (vol. 2, 889-969).

       Edited by Kolm, S. C., and Ythier, J. M. Amsterdam: Elsevier B.V.

Laitner, J., and Ohlsson, H. (2001). "Bequest Motives: A Comparison of Sweden and the

       United States." Journal of Public Economics, 79(1), 205-236.

Lockwood, L. M. (2018). "Incidental Bequests and the Choice to Self-insure Late-Life

       Risks." American Economic Review, 108(9), 2513-2550.

Miniaci, R., and Weber, G. (2003). "The Wealth Accumulation of Italian Households:

       Evidence from Shaw." Giornale degli Economisti, 62(1), 57-91.

Mirer, T. W. (1979). "The Wealth-Age Relation among the Aged." American Economic


                                            23
       Review, 69(3), 435-43.

Modigliani, F. and Brumberg, R. (1954), "Utility Analysis and the Consumption

       Function: An Interpretation of Cross-section Data." In Post-Keynesian Economics.

       Edited by Kurihara, K. K. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.

Murata, K. (2018). "Dissaving by the Elderly in Japan: Empirical Evidence from Survey

       Data." ESRI Discussion Paper Series No. 346, Economic and Social Research

       Institute, Cabinet Office, Tokyo, Japan.

Niimi, Y., and Horioka, C. Y. (2018). "The Impact of Intergenerational Transfers on

       Wealth Inequality in Japan and the United States." World Economy, 41(8), 2042-

       2066.

Niimi, Y., and Horioka, C. Y. (2019). "The Wealth Decumulation Behavior of the Retired

       Elderly in Japan: The Relative Importance of Precautionary Saving and Bequest

       Motives." Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 51, 52-63.

Nishiyama, S. (2002). "Bequests, Inter Vivos Transfers, and Wealth Distribution." Review

       of Economic Dynamics, 5(4), 892-931.

Palumbo, M. G. (1999), "Uncertain Medical Expenses and Precautionary Saving Near

       the End of the Life Cycle." Review of Economic Studies, 66(2), 395-421.

Poterba, J. (1994). International Comparison of Personal Saving. Chicago, Illinois, USA:

       University of Chicago Press.

Poterba, J., Venti, S., and Wise, D. (2011), "Family Status Transitions, Latent Health, and

       the Post-Retirement Evolution of Assets." In Explorations in the Economics of

       Aging. Edited by D. Wise. Chicago, Illinois, USA: University of Chicago Press.

Schunk, D. (2009). "What Determines the Saving Behavior of German Households? An

       Examination of Saving Motives and Saving Decisions." Journal of Economics


                                            24
       and Statistics (Jahrbuecher fuer Nationalokonomie und Statistik), 229(4), 467-

       491.

Spicer, A., Stavrunova, O., and Thorp, T. (2016). "How Portfolios Evolve after

       Retirement: Evidence from Australia." Economic Record, 92(297), 241-267.

Usuki, M., Kitamura, T., and Nakajima, K. (2016). "Intai Zengo no Chukounen Kakei no

       Chochikudoukou (The Saving Behavior of Middle-aged and Elderly Households

       Before and After Retirement)." Mimeo, Nagoya City University, Nagoya, Japan

       (in Japanese).

Weil, D. N. (1994). "The Saving of the Elderly in Micro and Macro Data." Quarterly

       Journal of Economics, 109(1), 55-81.




                                         25
              Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for All Variables, 2000-02 Waves
                                                                            Std.
                       Variable                        Obs. Median Mean dev.      Min     Max
Bequest intentions                                      302 1.000 0.507 0.038 0.000 1.000
Value of intended bequest (10,000 euros)                302 0.000 8.291 1.015 0.000 118.687
Intended bequest to wealth ratio                        302 0.000 0.565 0.055 0.000 5.344
Insurance                                               302 0.000 0.089 0.285 0.000 1.000
Bequests receipts                                       302 0.000 0.145 0.025 0.000 1.000
Bequest expectations                                    302 0.000 0.029 0.010 0.000 1.000
Household head's age                                    302 73.000 73.536 0.611 61.000 99.000
Household head's age^2/100                              302 53.290 54.628 0.923 37.210 98.010
Male                                                    302 1.000 0.551 0.038 0.000 1.000
Married                                                 302 1.000 0.540 0.038 0.000 1.000
Single                                                  302 0.000 0.005 0.003 0.000 1.000
Separated/divorced                                      302 0.000 0.042 0.017 0.000 1.000
Number of non-cohabiting children                       302 2.000 2.267 1.197 1.000 8.000
No schooling                                            302 0.000 0.157 0.033 0.000 1.000
Elementary school                                       302 1.000 0.606 0.038 0.000 1.000
Middle school                                           302 0.000 0.116 0.022 0.000 1.000
Vocational secondary school                             302 0.000 0.020 0.009 0.000 1.000
High school                                             302 0.000 0.071 0.018 0.000 1.000
Post-secondary                                          302 0.000 0.031 0.010 0.000 1.000
Homeowner                                               302 1.000 0.747 0.035 0.000 1.000
Renter                                                  302 0.000 0.124 0.025 0.000 1.000
Redemption (renting with option to buy)                 302 0.000 0.004 0.004 0.000 1.000
Major city                                              302 0.000 0.086 0.024 0.000 1.000
North                                                   302 0.000 0.436 0.497 0.000 1.000
Center                                                  302 0.000 0.161 0.369 0.000 1.000
Net worth in 2000 (10,000 euros)                        302 8.883 13.328 1.111 -0.258 173.530
Wealth accumulation rate, 2000-02 (percent)             302 -2.341 -7.515 3.875 -100.000 270.188
Saving in 2002 at 2000's prices (10,000 euros)          302 0.196 0.383 0.047 -1.332 3.673
Source: Bank of Italy, Survey of Italian Households' Income and Wealth




                                             26
                  Table 2: Descriptive Statistics for All Variables, 2012-14 Waves
                                                                               Std.
                       Variable                       Obs. Median Mean         dev.   Min      Max
Bequests received                                      1041 0.000        0.189 0.015   0.000    1.000
Insurance                                              1041 0.000        0.063 0.009   0.000    1.000
Saving for education/economic support (inter vivos
transfers) to children and grandchildren                1041 0.000       0.157 0.015   0.000     1.000
Saving for bequests to children and grandchildren      1041 1.000        0.714 0.018   0.000     1.000
Saving for unforeseen contingencies                    1041 1.000        0.548 0.020   0.000     1.000
Saving for old age needs                               1041 0.000        0.329 0.019   0.000     1.000
Household head's age                                   1041 76.000 75.605 0.311 60.000         101.000
Household head's age^2/100                             1041 57.760 57.786 0.477 36.000         102.010
Male                                                   1041 0.000        0.460 0.020   0.000     1.000
Married                                                1041 1.000        0.513 0.020   0.000     1.000
Single                                                 1041 0.000        0.001 0.001   0.000     1.000
Separated/divorced                                     1041 0.000        0.056 0.009   0.000     1.000
Number of non-cohabiting children                      1041 2.000        2.161 0.042   1.000     7.000
No schooling                                           1041 0.000        0.112 0.014   0.000     1.000
Elementary school                                      1041 0.000        0.422 0.020   0.000     1.000
Middle school                                          1041 0.000        0.216 0.016   0.000     1.000
Vocational secondary school                            1041 0.000        0.058 0.009   0.000     1.000
High school                                            1041 0.000        0.128 0.012   0.000     1.000
Post-secondary                                         1041 0.000        0.063 0.010   0.000     1.000
Homeowner                                              1041 1.000        0.773 0.017   0.000     1.000
Renter                                                 1041 0.000        0.111 0.013   0.000     1.000
Redemption (renting with option to buy)                1041 0.000        0.002 0.001   0.000     1.000
Residing in a major city                               1041 0.000        0.086 0.013   0.000     1.000
geographical area, North                               1041 0.000        0.422 0.019   0.000     1.000
geographical area, Center                              1041 0.000        0.186 0.016   0.000     1.000
Net worth in 2012 (10,000 euros)                       1041 16.550 25.133 1.396       -1.413   569.695
Net worth in 2014 (10,000 euros)                       1041 16.932 24.150 1.274       -0.067   573.454
Wealth accumulation rate, 2012-14                      1041 -0.568       2.014 2.544 164.871   291.546
Amount of saving in 2014 (10,000 euros)                1041 0.350        0.526 0.028  -3.541     5.973
Source: Bank of Italy, Survey of Italian Households' Income and Wealth
                                               3




                                                   27
        Table 3: Median Wealth Accumulation Rates by Age and Marital Status
                    2000-02                             2012-14
                                     Median wealth                       Median wealth
                    No. of obs.                         No. of obs.
                                    accumulation rate                   accumulation rate
Age group
60-70                         113               -2.34             333                -0.23
71-80                         133               -1.38             430                -0.56
81 or older                    56               -6.43             278                -1.76
Marital status
Single                           3               -1.38           2                    0.63
Married                       175                -1.96         578                   -0.97
Separate/divorced               10               -0.11          56                   -1.11
Widowed                       114                -2.67         405                   -1.22
Full sample                   302                -2.34       1041                    -0.57
Source: Bank of Italy, Survey of Households' Income and Wealth




                                           28
                       Table 4: The Determinants of the Wealth Accumulation Rate, 2000-02 Waves
                                           (Ordinary Least Squares Estimates)

                        Wealth accumulation rate, 2000-   Wealth accumulation rate, 2000-   Wealth accumulation rate, 2000-
                                2002 (percent)                     02 (percent)                      02 (percent)
 Bequest intentions                              13.951
                                              (6.288)**
 Bequest intentions                                                                                                 59.635
 (>=60, <65)                                                                                                   (14.892)***
 Bequest intentions                                                                                                 18.588
 (>=65, <70)                                                                                                     (10.269)*
 Bequest intentions                                                                                                  8.760
 (>=70, <75)                                                                                                      (11.654)
 Bequest intentions                                                                                                 -8.839
 (>=75)                                                                                                            (9.637)
 Intended bequest                                                                 16.323
 to wealth ratio                                                             (4.555)***
 Insurance                                        7.728                            8.930                             10.210
                                               (12.055)                         (11.684)                           (12.424)
 Household head's                                 9.047                            8.492                             19.277
 age                                            (5.595)                          (5.638)                           (20.754)
 Household head's                                -6.457                           -6.069                            -12.644
 age^2/100                                     (3.748)*                          (3.783)                           (14.556)
 Male                                            -4.490                           -5.677                            -12.933
                                                (7.438)                          (7.546)                             (7.866)
 Married                                        -10.010                           -9.378                              -0.300
                                                (8.813)                          (8.590)                           (10.204)
 Single                                          10.389                           11.485                               7.187
                                               (26.744)                         (23.729)                           (22.979)
 Separated/divorced                             -40.910                          -40.258                            -36.796
                                            (18.373)**                       (18.190)**                         (17.812)**
 Number of non-                                   0.693                            1.533                               0.900
 cohabiting children                            (2.701)                          (2.815)                             (2.622)
 Elementary school                               -7.043                           -6.821                            -28.687
                                               (11.730)                         (11.742)                         (16.906)*
 Middle school                                   32.101                           31.816                             16.682
                                            (14.676)**                       (14.972)**                            (19.121)
 Vocational                                      11.510                            5.615                            -32.284
 secondary school                              (18.028)                         (17.051)                           (28.411)
 High school                                     16.571                            8.211                              -7.112
                                               (18.724)                         (18.636)                           (27.032)
 Post-secondary                                  -1.485                            0.338                            -20.133
                                               (14.739)                         (14.247)                           (22.883)
 Homeowner                                       49.184                           46.027                             24.814
                                           (13.724)***                      (13.465)***                            (21.238)
 Renter                                           7.105                            6.541                            -24.580
                                               (19.515)                         (19.360)                           (24.476)
 Redemption (renting                             32.740                           33.297                             24.479
 with option to buy)                         (17.589)*                        (17.212)*                            (23.335)
 Major city                                      -1.297                            0.529                              -3.069
                                               (16.321)                         (16.402)                           (16.077)
 North                                            5.704                            8.224                             11.772
                                                (7.570)                          (7.370)                             (7.273)
 Center                                          19.581                           18.799                             11.058
                                             (9.534)**                        (9.433)**                              (7.554)
 Households' wealth                              -0.515                           -0.426                              -0.449
 in 2000 (in 10,000                         (0.152)***                       (0.134)***                         (0.168)***
 euros)
 Constant                                      -357.047                        -340.657                           -730.965
                                             (205.275)*                       (206.463)                          (737.572)
 R2                                               0.30                             0.33                              0.31
 N                                              302                              302                               246

Notes: * p <0.1; ** p <0.05; *** p <0.01




                                                           29
  Table 5: The Determinants of the Wealth Accumulation Rate, 2000-02

                      (Two-stage Least Squares Estimates)

                         Wealth accumulation rate,     Wealth accumulation
                            2000-2002 (percent)          rate, 2000-2002
                                                            (percent)

Bequest intentions                           54.726
                                        (27.756)**
Intended bequest to                                                     34.210
wealth ratio                                                      (15.023)**
Insurance                                     8.280                     10.453
                                            (12.776)                (12.022)
Household head's                              8.710                      7.757
age                                          (5.970)                    (5.717)
Household head's                              -6.287                     -5.580
age^2/100                                    (4.033)                    (3.835)
Male                                          -5.164                     -7.230
                                             (8.616)                    (8.384)
Married                                     -15.618                     -10.787
                                            (9.304)*                    (8.747)
Single                                      -11.033                      4.655
                                            (31.011)                (21.763)
Separated/divorced                          -33.046                     -36.595
                                           (18.515)*              (17.726)**
Elementary school                           -11.929                      -8.410
                                            (12.804)                (12.131)
Middle school                                36.610                     33.194
                                        (16.611)**                (15.587)**
Vocational                                    3.199                      -3.961
secondary school                            (18.196)                (18.184)
High school                                   5.766                      -5.000


                                      30
                                                 (21.131)     (23.155)
 Post-secondary                                  -13.664        -2.229
                                                 (19.876)     (14.836)
 Number of non-                                    2.079        2.973
 cohabiting children                              (3.348)      (3.370)
 Homeowner                                        31.142       35.803
                                                (18.186)*   (14.795)**
 Renter                                            9.254        6.729
                                                 (18.621)     (18.563)
 Redemption                                        -2.685      20.627
 (renting with option                            (28.530)     (18.978)
 to   buy)
 North                                             -0.006       8.845
                                                  (8.947)      (7.564)
 Central                                          13.141       15.526
                                                 (11.560)     (10.064)
 Major city                                        -2.330       2.142
                                                 (15.324)     (15.792)
 Wealth in 2000 (in                                -0.496       -0.322
 10,000 euros)                              (0.163)***        (0.171)*
 Constant                                       -341.742     -316.961
                                                (217.271)    (209.944)
 R2                                                  0.20         0.28
 N                                                 302            302

Notes: * p <0.1; ** p <0.05; *** p <0.01




                                           31
          Table 6: The Determinants of the Amount of Saving, 2000-02 Waves
                         (Ordinary Least Squares Estimates)
                         Amount of saving in 2002 at      Amount of saving in 2002 at
                         2000 prices (in 10,000 euros)    2000 prices (in 10,000 euros)
Bequest intentions                             0.067
                                               (0.034)*
Intended bequest to                                                            -0.005
wealth ratio                                                                   (0.021)
Insurance                                       0.135                           0.175
                                                (0.092)                       (0.099)*
Household head's age                            0.015                          0.005
                                                (0.026)                        (0.027)
Household head's                               -0.010                            0.003
age^2/100                                      (0.017)                          (0.017)
Male                                             0.033                           -0.005
                                               (0.036)                          (0.039)
Married                                          0.090                            0.127
                                            (0.040)**                       (0.044)***
Single                                           0.092                            0.084
                                               (0.153)                          (0.137)
Separated/divorced                              -0.119                           -0.109
                                            (0.052)**                           (0.068)
Number of non-                                   0.001                            0.001
cohabiting children                            (0.011)                          (0.012)
Elementary school                                0.019                           -0.007
                                               (0.030)                          (0.031)
Middle school                                    0.110                            0.111
                                            (0.047)**                        (0.052)**
Vocational secondary                             0.103                            0.153
school                                         (0.118)                          (0.114)
High school                                      0.155                            0.127
                                            (0.071)**                          (0.076)*
Post-secondary                                   0.529                            0.522
                                           (0.127)***                       (0.138)***
Homeowner                                        0.047                            0.074
                                               (0.039)                         (0.042)*
Renter                                          -0.118                           -0.149
                                           (0.044)***                       (0.047)***
Redemption (renting                             -0.122                           -0.111
with intention to buy)                         (0.099)                          (0.104)




                                          32
 Major city                                    0.029         0.009
                                             (0.041)       (0.046)
 North                                         0.130         0.158
                                         (0.032)***    (0.035)***
 Center                                       -0.009        -0.013
                                             (0.034)       (0.034)
 Households' wealth                           -0.000        -0.000
 in 2002 at 2000                             (0.002)       (0.002)
 prices (in 10,000
 euros)
 Constant                                     -0.489       -0.088
                                             (1.019)      (1.049)
 R2                                             0.23         0.26
 N                                               790          664
Notes: * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01




                                        33
    Table 7: The Determinants of the Wealth Accumulation Rate and Saving, 2012-14
                         (Ordinary Least Squares Estimates)

                                Wealth          Saving in 2014 at     Saving in 2014 at
                           accumulation rate,    2012 prices (in       2012 prices (in
                          2012-2014 (percent)    10,000 euros)         10,000 euros)
Bequest receipts                       12.131                -0.025               -0.038
                                     (7.097)*               (0.060)              (0.061)
Insurance                              -9.146                 0.380                0.390
                                      (5.683)            (0.161)**            (0.161)**
Saving for inter vivos                                        0.134                0.151
transfers                                               (0.050)***           (0.051)***
Saving for bequests                                           0.104                0.134
                                                        (0.039)***           (0.042)***
Saving for unforeseen                                                              0.122
contingencies                                                                (0.047)***
Saving for old age                                                                 0.035
                                                                                 (0.039)
Household head's age                   -5.605                 0.031                0.032
                                      (5.432)               (0.033)              (0.033)
Household head's                        3.229                -0.020               -0.020
age^2/100                             (3.565)               (0.021)              (0.021)
Male                                    9.862                 0.082                0.086
                                     (5.947)*               (0.052)              (0.052)
Married                                -4.339                 0.203                0.194
                                      (5.455)           (0.054)***           (0.055)***
Single                                 -3.495                -0.017               -0.034
                                      (9.319)               (0.139)              (0.137)
Separated/divorced                     -3.309                 0.046                0.048
                                     (14.003)               (0.168)              (0.168)
Elementary school                      10.483                -0.082               -0.090
                                     (13.506)            (0.037)**            (0.037)**
Middle school                           0.937                -0.002               -0.011
                                     (15.638)               (0.082)              (0.082)
Vocational secondary                    0.845                -0.073               -0.076
school                               (15.708)               (0.101)              (0.101)
High school                             9.963                 0.100                0.088
                                     (15.751)               (0.143)              (0.143)
Post-secondary                         21.577                 0.442                0.439
                                     (15.908)               (0.288)              (0.285)
Number of non-                          1.941                -0.017               -0.019
cohabiting children                   (2.477)               (0.011)             (0.011)*
Homeowner                              20.268                 0.017                0.025
                                     (13.627)               (0.102)              (0.102)
Renter                                 13.401                -0.274               -0.260




                                         34
                                           (18.513)   (0.060)***    (0.060)***
Redemption (renting                          79.826         0.028         0.026
with option to buy)                        (59.651)       (0.131)       (0.120)
North                                         0.650         0.195         0.197
                                            (6.312)   (0.049)***    (0.049)***
Central                                      -3.937         0.114         0.098
                                            (6.073)      (0.063)*       (0.062)
Major city                                    0.892        -0.057        -0.059
                                            (6.728)       (0.089)       (0.088)
Households' wealth in                        -0.258
2012 (in 10,000 euros)                  (0.090)***
Households' wealth in                                      0.007         0.007
2014 at 2012s prices (in                                 (0.005)       (0.005)
10,000 euros)
Constant                                   213.369        -1.340        -1.560
                                         (203.819)       (1.325)       (1.326)
R2                                            0.05          0.27          0.27
N                                            1,041         2,328         2,328
Notes: * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01




                                              35
                                               Endnotes

1     More      details   about     this   Survey    can    be   found    at   the     following    url:
https://www.bancaditalia.it/statistiche/tematiche/indagini-famiglie-imprese/bilanci-
famiglie/distribuzione-microdati/index.html


2
    The Real Property Price Index of the European Central Bank was used, and data on this index
were                                                                                               taken
from http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/quickview.do?SERIES_KEY=129.RPP.A.IT.N.TD.00.2.00


3   The FTSE MIB, the primary benchmark index for Italian equity markets, and FTSE MTS, an
index for Italian government bonds with a maturity of one to three years, were used, and data on
these        indices      were     taken      from https://www.borsaitaliana.it/borsa/indici/indici-in-
continua/dettaglio.html?indexCode=FTSEMIB&lang=it                 and      https://it.investing.com/ind
ices/ftse-mts-italy-government-1-3y-chart, respectively.


4     This      figure     is     from     Global   Age     Watch     Index    2015,     taken     from
https://www.helpage.org/global-agewatch/population-ageing-data/life-expectancy-at-60/

5
    As for what sets positive savers apart from others, we compared the income and consumption
of positive savers and others and found that positive savers had both higher income and lower
consumption in both 2002 and 2014, but less so in 2014, when consumption levels were
comparable and income drove the result. These findings suggest that dissavers dissave partly
because they have lower incomes and partly because they have higher consumption and that it is
relatively affluent households that are saving, which is not surprising.

6
    Niimi and Horioka (2019) distinguish between those intending to leave bequests for altruistic
reasons and those intending to leave bequests for strategic reasons, but the above conclusions are
unchanged regardless of which type of bequest one refers to.




                                                    36
