                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           DO PEOPLE HAVE A BIAS FOR LOW-DEDUCTIBLE INSURANCE?

                                      Howard Kunreuther
                                         Mark Pauly

                                      Working Paper 26994
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26994


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2020




Our thanks to Spencer DeRoos for his assistance in helping us analyze the data and to Carol
Heller for helpful suggestions on an earlier draft of the paper. Support for this research comes
from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and the Wharton Risk Management and Decision Processes
Center. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Howard Kunreuther and Mark Pauly. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Do People Have a Bias for Low-Deductible Insurance?
Howard Kunreuther and Mark Pauly
NBER Working Paper No. 26994
April 2020
JEL No. C90,C91,D03,D12,D3,D81,G22,I11,I18

                                         ABSTRACT

Do consumers show a strong bias toward low deductible insurance plans, as many field studies
imply? This paper reports on a controlled experiment intended to see whether subjects have a
predisposition toward such plans and whether that preference is consistent when their default plan
and premiums are changed. Subjects were presented with a scenario where they had to make a
decision on whether to purchase a plan with a low deductible (LD) or high deductible (HD) when
faced with an illness having a specified probability and cost. Participants had to choose between
these plans in two rounds with the identical risk of an illness and specified premiums. If their
default option was an LD plan in Round 1, then it was an HD plan in Round 2. The experiment
did not show a strong bias toward low deductible health plans. Only slightly more than half of the
respondents chose an LD plan even when it was optimal for them to do so. When faced with a
default option that was switched in Round 2, 58% of the respondents chose the same plan as they
did in Round 1, implying that some but not all subjects resisted the default option in their
decision process. Subject choices were correlated with their responses to questions about risk
aversion and a desire for peace of mind.


Howard Kunreuther
Wharton Risk Management
 and Decision Processes Center
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3819 Chestnut Street, Suite 330
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6366
and NBER
kunreuth@wharton.upenn.edu

Mark Pauly
Health Care Management Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
208 Colonial Penn Center
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218
and NBER
pauly@wharton.upenn.edu

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26994
1. Introduction
Recent debates about health insurance reform have been concerned with whether consumers
should be required to have coverage providing them full protection without deductibles, or
whether they should be permitted to make their own decisions on the type of insurance they
would like to purchase (Stein, 2017). A key question is what choices some or all of them would
make on their own. Indeed, a perennial topic in the economics of risk and insurance is whether,
in practice, insurance buyers have a bias for low deductible coverage when they should have
chosen a policy with a higher deductible if they were maximizing their expected utility. If there
is a bias toward low deductible plans, it would mean that there would be little resistance to
mandating this provision in a health insurance reform bill.
This paper describes the results of an experiment that examines the influence of default options
with respect to the choice between a high deductible (HD) health insurance plan and a low
deductible (LD) health insurance plan and to understand what factors may lead individuals to
opt-out of the prescribed default. Our interest is in answering two questions posed in the
literature:
       (1) Do insurance buyers display a bias toward low deductible plans?
       (2) Do default options have the same effect on plan choice when it is less or more
       advantageous for an individual to choose the option that is not a default?
Over fifty years ago, Pashigian et al. (1966) showed that risk averse individuals should prefer a
high rather than a low deductible based on the relative costs of the two policies. More recently, a
number of empirical studies have indicated that individuals are more likely to favor products
with low rather than high deductibles even when the administrative loading costs associated with
the low deductible ought to have discouraged this preference.
In a study of 8,000 individuals with private health insurance, van de Ven and van Praag (1981)
determined that about 60% wanted full coverage, that is, a policy with no deductible. In a study
of deductible choices by 50,000 homeowners using a data set provided by an insurance company,
Sydnor (2010) found that 83% chose a deductible lower than the maximum one available, even
though the increased premium for the additional coverage would be hard to justify by comparing
the expected benefits with the extra cost. Data from one million flood insurance policies in force
in Florida revealed that almost 80% chose the lowest deductible ($500) when there were five
higher deductible options ranging from $1000 to $5,000 (Michel-Kerjan and Kousky, 2010). In
a study of 23,894 employees in a large U.S. firm, the majority chose health insurance plans with
a low deductible when they would have been better off financially if they had chosen a plan with
the same coverage except for a higher deductible, because the high deductible premium was less
than the maximum additional deductible. By making this change, the average employee could
have saved $373 per year, which is equivalent to 2% of mean annual income and 42% of the
average employee-paid premium (Bhargava, Loewenstein and Sydnor, 2017).
In behavioral economics, choice architecture recommends changing the framing of decisions,
such as using default options, to promote socially and individually beneficial decisions (Johnson
and Goldstein, 2003; Cohen et al., 2015; Ungemach et al., 2017). Field and controlled


                                                1
experiments reveal that consumers are generally more likely to stick with the default option
rather than going to the trouble of opting out in favor of some other alternative. To date, this
framing technique has normally been applied to situations where the outcome is either known
with certainty, or when the chosen option (such as a recommended 401(k) plan), has a higher
expected return than the other options and is the best choice for all or almost all employees in
firms (Madrian and Shea, 2001; Thaler and Benartzi, 2004).
A few studies have examined the use of defaults in the context of insurance decisions in
situations where the best choice under full information is not necessarily the same for all
individuals. Johnson et al. (1993) examined changes in legislation in two states that introduced
an automobile policy with either a full right to sue or a limited right to sue at a lower premium.
In New Jersey, the policy was the limited right to sue; 80% of the drivers maintained this feature
rather than opting out of the default by choosing the full right to sue. In Pennsylvania, the policy
was the full right to sue; 75% of the drivers in this state retained this option. Whether choices on
average led to better outcomes with the New Jersey default compared to the Pennsylvania default
is unknown. Krieger and Felder (2013) showed that default assignment to a health insurance
policy where the individual pays no medical treatment costs led to more frequent choice of that
option compared to a setting in which subjects had to choose a plan.
Do those who favor low deductibles behave as if they maximized their expected utility? One
influence on consumers buying a more expensive policy with the low deductible is that these
individuals overestimate their loss probability. They would then perceive the premium with a
low deductible to be attractive because they believe they are likely to have more claims than the
average person. Individuals with budget constraints may prefer paying a small additional
premium to avoid cash flow difficulties if they suffer a loss (Bhargava, Loewenstein and Sydnor,
2017) or they may anticipate other uninsured losses that are correlated with their medical
expenses, such as payment to caregivers (Doherty and Schlesinger, 1983). The incremental
premium associated with a low deductible is usually above the actuarially fair level to cover
administrative costs and profits (Phelps and Parente, 2017), but it can fall below that level when
health insurance premiums for employment based insurance are excluded from worker income
subject to income and payroll taxes.
This paper describes the results of an experiment designed to minimize the role of the above
factors so we can explore the following questions which, to our knowledge, have not been
addressed in previous research:
       (1) Do individuals choose the same insurance plan when the default option is altered but
           the likelihood of an illness and cost of insurance are kept the same for HD and LD
           insurance plans?
       (2) Do subjects utilize different strategies when making choices between these two
           insurance plans (i.e., always choosing the LD plan, always choosing the HD plan;
           always choosing the default option or never choosing the default option)?
In our study, a sample of consumers are told that they face the same probability and losses from
an illness and insurance premiums, and must choose between an HD and LD health insurance



                                                 2
plan. This setting is highly relevant, as some legislators favor high deductible plans while others
feel these policies are a form of underinsurance (Stein, 2017).
We explore potential influences that defaults have on respondents' choice of plans and the
strength of their feelings about their deductible. We are particularly interested in the roles that
regret, risk aversion and peace of mind play in decisions on whether to stick with the default
option (either HD or LD) or switch to the other deductible plan. Behavioral factors such as
regret, which are normally not considered as part of standard expected utility models, have been
highlighted as a rationale for purchasing insurance (Bell, 1982; Loomes and Sugden, 1982;
Krantz and Kunreuther, 2007).
In our experiment, 811 subjects were randomly assigned to scenarios in which the low or high
deductible option was the default. When the low deductible (LD) plan was the default option,
many of the subjects chose the high deductible (HD) rather than the low deductible (LD) plan
even though they would have benefitted from a favorable (i.e., subsidized) incremental premium
to maintain LD coverage. When HD was the default and/or the incremental premium was
unfavorable (i.e., a loading cost), most chose the HD plan. We find no evidence for an
appreciable bias toward LD plans in a controlled experiment with well-specified probabilities
and losses. Changes in the LD and HD premiums also have a modest impact on plan choice,
default options held constant. These findings imply that there is no single archetype of an
insurance buyer: some consistently prefer LD plans, but many others choose HD plans even
when an LD plan was the optimal choice if one was risk averse and maximized expected utility.
Others are inconsistent in their choices, though in different ways.
2. Nature of the Experiment
We used Qualtrics to undertake a web-based experiment consisting of two rounds. In Round 1,
each participant was assigned to a health insurance plan with either an HD or LD and was given
the option to switch to the other deductible plan. Participants were given the specified premiums
for each plan, a probability of contracting an illness and the cost to treat the illness. In Round 2,
participants were assigned to the other health insurance policy (LD or HD) and told that the
specified premiums for each plan and the probability of an illness and cost to treat it were
identical to those in Round 1. We could thus determine whether the deductible plan selected in
Round 1 had an impact on the choice of the deductible plan in Round 2, by seeing how
frequently the choices matched. More specifically, we were interested in how many individuals
chose the plan with the same deductible in Rounds 1 and 2--in which case they would be
considered consistent in their behavior--or whether they differed between the two rounds.
We used a fictitious currency (talers) where 1,000 talers=$1 and constructed a scenario where
individuals with an annual income of 100,000 talers were enrolled in a health insurance plan for
the coming year that covered all expenses above a specified deductible for a specified premium.
To incentivize individuals to take the experiment seriously, each participant was given a number
between 100 and 199 with the knowledge that 1 out of every 100 of them would be selected to
play the experiment for real money if the last two digits of their number matched the winning
number (between 00-99) of the Florida Pick 2 on a specific date. Participants were told that a
random device determined whether the participant playing for real money had contracted an


                                                  3
illness. Potential earnings for this individual could range from $40-$50 depending on the
participant's deductible choice, the premium, and whether or not they had suffered an illness.
Participants were told that they had a 20% chance of contracting a certain illness next year that
would cost them 20,000 talers to treat. The options were a low deductible (LD) plan with a
deductible of 500 talers or a high deductible (HD) plan with a deductible of 2500 talers. One
subject group was given a favorable incremental premium to switch from the HD to LD plan so
that it was always economically attractive to choose the LD if a person were risk neutral or risk
averse. Another group was given an unfavorable incremental premium with a loading cost of
20% so that the extra cost of choosing an LD over an HD plan was greater than the expected
benefits. This group should choose an HD plan if they maximized their expected utility unless
they were extremely risk averse.
Our experiment was designed to pose minimal challenges for individuals with respect to their
understanding of insurance by posing only one risk (an illness) with the probability of its
occurrence and the cost to treated it stated explicitly to all participants so as to avoid the
challenges employees faced with in the field experiment undertaken by Bhargava, Loewenstein,
and Sydnor (2017). Participants were told that the annual likelihood of contracting the illness
was 20% (.20) and that they had an opportunity to change their deductible with either a decrease
in premium if they switched from an LD to HD plan or an increase in their premium if they
switched from an HD to an LD plan. The actuarially fair incremental premium for LD is
0.2(2000), or 400 talers. Table 1 shows the premium-coverage combinations faced by different
participants.
                                              Table 1
       FAVORABLE AND UNFAVORABLE PREMIUMS FOR LOW AND HIGH
                         DEDUCTIBLE PLANS
                                          Favorable Premium             Unfavorable Premium
      High Deductible (HD)                        30                             30
      Low Deductible (LD)                        350                            530


To determine the role that risk perception played in the HD or LD decision, we asked each
person to characterize themselves as a person who is not willing or willing to take risks on a
scale ranging from 1 (not at all willing to take risks) to 10 (very willing to take risks) and how
much they value peace of mind. We also asked questions about attitudes, feelings toward
insurance markets, and life experiences. The survey concluded with a set of standard socio-
economic questions such as age, gender, education and income.




                                                  4
3. Experimental Findings: Low Deductible Bias
RESULT 1: When the low deductible (LD) plan was the default option, only 55% of the
participants chose it in Round 1, even when the insurance premium was favorable. Any
individual who was risk neutral or risk averse should have opted for the LD plan if they were
expected utility maximizers or undertook an expected benefit-cost comparison between the two
plans. Many subjects opted out of the default options and chose the HD plan.
Nature of the Finding: To determine whether individuals preferred a low deductible (LD) plan
in Round 1, we first examined participant behavior when the LD insurance premium was
favorable: the difference between the extra cost for choosing an LD rather than an HD plan was
less than the increase in expected claims if one suffered a loss, as shown in Table 2. More
specifically, as shown in Table 1, if a person chose an LD rather than an HD plan, they would
pay 320 talers more (350 - 30); however, they would receive an extra 2000 talers (2500 - 500) if
they suffered an illness implied that their extra expected return would be 400 [.20 (2000)].


                                    Table 2
                    EVIDENCE ON LOW-DEDUCTIBLE (LD) CHOICE
                        (% CHOOSING LD PLAN IN ROUND 1)

 Row #    Default           Premium             % choosing LD Plan       Number choosing
                                                                        LD Plan/Total Sample
   1        LD              Favorable                     55                  101/184
   2        LD             Unfavorable                    50                  106/213
   3        HD              Favorable                     41                   77/188
   4        HD             Unfavorable                    40                   91/229


RESULT 2: Default options had a greater impact on choice of plan than did premium
differentials.
Nature of the Finding: Table 2 indicates that changing the default option from LD to HD while
holding premiums the same increases the proportion choosing HD by 14% for favorable
premiums (row 1 and row 3) and by 10% for unfavorable premiums (row 2 and row 4).
Increasing the incremental premium to an unfavorable level produced a slight increase in the
proportion choosing HD: 5% when LD was the default option (row 1 and row 2) and only 1%
when HD was the default option (row 3 and row 4). These data suggest that in Round 1 of the
experiment, there was limited interest in low deductible plans when LD was the default , with
only a little more than half choosing them when the premiums were favorable. When the choice
environment was made less supportive of the LD choice by having HD as the default, the
proportion choosing LD was approximately 40% as shown in Table 2. Hence, our controlled
experiments produced results very different from previous empirical studies that individuals
preferred low deductibles, and sometimes in ways that did not conform to maximizing their
expected utility.


                                                5
4. Experimental Findings: Choice Consistency
We next looked at whether each participant would consistently select the same health plan when
the default was changed from one round to the next with the specific premiums and likelihood
and loss from contracting an illness held constant between the two rounds.
RESULT 3: A majority (58%) of respondents chose the same deductible plan when given a
different default option, but a sizeable minority was not consistent in their choices. Of the latter
group, 23% of the respondents always chose the default, and 19% never chose the default.
Nature of the Finding: Table 3A shows that between 60% and 70% of individuals chose the LD
insurance plan with either a favorable or unfavorable premium when the default option was
switched from Round 1 to Round 2. The highest percentage of individuals who were consistent
in their LD choice were those who were given LD as the default option in Round 1 and HD as
the default option in Round 2 with a favorable premium. A somewhat smaller proportion of
individuals were always consistent in choosing an HD with the percentage ranging from 46% to
59%. The lowest percentage (46%) were those given LD as the default option in Round 1 with a
favorable premium; the highest percentage (59%) were given HD as the default option in Round
1 with an unfavorable premium. This result is not surprising if one believes that the initial
choice of plan is influenced by the default option and the premium. A person should be most
likely to choose an HD plan if it is the default in Round 1 with an unfavorable premium. The
overall number of respondents who were choice consistent across all scenarios is 474 out of the
total sample of 811, meaning that 58% were choice consistent.


                              Table 3A
                  EVIDENCE ON CHOICE CONSISTENCY
    % OF ROUND 1 SAMPLE CHOOSING SAME HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN IN
                          ROUNDS 1 AND 2

   Row #      Round 1       Round 2         Premium         Round 1     Round 2       % of Sample
              Default       Default                         Choice      Choice         Repeating
                                                                                       Round 1
                                                                                        Choice.
    1           LD            HD         Favorable            LD           LD              62
    2           LD            HD        Unfavorable           LD           LD              60
    3           LD            HD         Favorable            HD           HD              46
    4           LD            HD        Unfavorable           HD           HD              54
    5          HD             LD         Favorable            LD           LD              70
    6          HD             LD        Unfavorable           LD           LD              60
    7          HD             LD         Favorable            HD           HD              56
    8          HD             LD        Unfavorable           HD           HD              59
 Note: Consistent choices for LD, rows 1-2 and 5-6
       Consistent choices for HD, rows 3-4 and 7-8

Table 3B provides additional evidence on the role the default option played in influencing
people's insurance purchase decisions. A sizeable fraction of respondents chose the default

                                                  6
option in Rounds 1 and 2. Slightly less than 40% of the individuals who chose the LD plan in
Round 1 when LD was the default chose the HD plan in Round 2 when HD was the default (the
first two rows of Table 3B). This implies that only about 60% of these individuals preferred LD
whether or not it was the default, as shown in Table 3A (rows 1-2 and 9-10). When HD was the
default in Round 1 and respondents chose it, either 59% or 49% choose the LD default in Round
2 depending on whether the premium was favorable or unfavorable (rows 3-4 of Table 3B).
Smaller but still substantial fractions of respondents never chose the default in either round (rows
5-8 of Table 3B).

In summary, the total number of respondents who were choice inconsistent was 340, or 41.8% of
all respondents. Of these respondents, 187 (55%) always chose the default; the other 153
respondents (45%) never chose the default. Out of the total sample, 23% always chose the
default, and 19% never chose the default.

                                             Table 3B
                EVIDENCE ON CHOICE INCONSISTENCY:
  % OF SUBJECTS ALWAYS CHOOSING OR NEVER CHOOSING THE DEFAULT


                                ALWAYS CHOOSE DEFAULT
   Row #      Round 1       Round 2  Premium    Round 1 Round 2                     % of Round 1
              Default       Default             Choice  Choice                        Choices
      1         LD            HD     Favorable    LD      LD                             38
      2         LD            HD    Unfavorable   LD      HD                             40
      3         HD            LD     Favorable    HD      LD                             59
      4         HD            LD    Unfavorable   HD      LD                             49

                                 NEVER CHOOSE DEFAULT
   Row #      Round 1       Round 2   Premium    Round 1               Round 2      % of Round 1
              Default       Default              Choice                Choice         Choices
      5         LD            HD      Favorable    HD                    LD              32
      6         LD            HD     Unfavorable   HD                    LD              31
      7         HD            LD      Favorable    LD                    HD              28
      8         HD            LD     Unfavorable   LD                    HD              32




                                                 7
5. Experimental Findings: Correlates of Choice
We now explore whether participants who chose LD in each scenario differed in their survey
responses from those who chose HD by undertaking logit regressions.
RESULT 4: Respondents who chose an LD insurance plan were more risk averse and valued
peace of mind more highly than those selecting an HD insurance plan.
Nature of the Finding:
The only two variables that were statistically significant in predicting a preference for an LD
were risk aversion and desire for peace of mind. This held whether the premium is favorable or
unfavorable and whether or not the low deductible was the default. Regret did not play a
significant role in the decisions on what to select for any of the four conditions to which the
participants were assigned. The full regression results are shown in the Appendix. Table 4A
shows the odds ratios and significance levels of these two variables in Round 1. In settings with
favorable premiums, these individuals were more risk averse (than those choosing HD) when LD
was the default (row 1) but had a higher value of peace of mind when HD was the default (row
3). When the premium was unfavorable and LD was the default, those who chose it in Round 1
were both more risk averse and attached a higher value to peace of mind, but neither influence
was significant when HD was the default (row 4).
Table 4B reveals differences across respondents with respect to risk aversion and peace of mind
when choices were made for Rounds 1 and 2. Those individuals who chose LD in both Rounds
1 and 2 when the premium was favorable were more risk averse than individuals who chose HD
in both these rounds. This finding is not surprising if those who chose HD in both rounds were
risk takers. Respondents who chose HD in Rounds 1 and 2 when the premium was unfavorable
had less concern with peace of mind than those who chose the LD in both Rounds 1 and 2
perhaps because the latter group was concerned with peace of mind. The only other group that
had a statistically significant variable were individuals who rebelled against the default option by
being inconsistent with their choices between the two rounds.
None of the socio-economic variables from the survey (i.e., age, gender, education, income)
impacted respondents' choice or whether they had experienced a past illness and made a claim
on their health insurance policy. Several individuals who had prior illness or were young or
male chose an LD plan, but these variables were not statistically significant across the entire
sample.




                                                 8
                                           Table 4
     BINARY LOGIT ANALYSIS OF CORRELATES OF PLAN CHOICE, GIVEN
                             PREMIUM,
             ROUND 1 DEFAULT, AND PARTICIPANT CHOICES
                  LOG ODDS AND SIGNIFICANCE LEVELS (p-Values)
                                 Panel A: Round 1 Choices
 Row #      Round 1          Premium             Round 1        Risk          Peace
             Default                             Choice       Aversion       of Mind
     1         LD            Favorable             HD          1.664*          0.891
     2         LD           Unfavorable            HD         1.823**        0.394**
     3         HD            Favorable             LD           0.796         3.738*
     4         HD           Unfavorable            LD           0.245          0.953
* .10 < p-value <.05      ** .01< p-value <.05
                Panel B: Round 2 Choices, Conditioned on Round 1 Choice
 Row #    Premium      Round     Round      Round Round          Round      Risk        Peace
                          1        1           2       2           2       Aversion       of
                       Default   Choice    Subjects Default      Choice                 Mind
    1         Fav       LD        LD         101     HD           LD         2.18*       2.22
    2         Fav       LD        HD          83     HD           LD         0.743      0.896
    3        Unfav      HD        HD         107     LD           HD          1.02      6.63*
    4        Unfav      HD        LD         106     LD           HD         0.766      0.261
    5        Unfav      LD        LD         106     HD           LD         0.563      1.007
    6        Unfav      LD        HD         107     HD           LD         0.963      1.728
    7         Fav       HD        HD         111     LD           HD         1.216      1.684
    8         Fav       HD        LD          77     LD           HD        4.024*      0.929
* .10 < p-value <.05
6. Discussion
There are several key takeaways from this experiment that challenge the empirical findings from
previous studies on the preference for low deductible and the role of defaults when making
insurance purchasing decisions:
    1. Individuals do not consistently choose low deductibles even when they are presented
       with favorable premiums that would make it optimal for them to do so if they are
       maximizing their expected utility and are risk neutral or risk averse. Only 55% chose
       LD plans with a favorable premium when LD was the default option.
    2. Default options have some impact on the choice of insurance plans. In Round 1, making
       an LD or HD health insurance plan the default option increased the percentage choosing
       that plan by 10-15%. Switching the default option in Round 2 also leads an even larger
       minority of subjects to choose the new default, rather than remaining with their initial
       choice. A large number of respondents opt out of the default option even when it is cost-



                                               9
       effective for them not to do so, such as staying with the LD default option when
       premiums are favorable.
    3. Increasing the LD premium so it was unfavorable to the purchase of a low deductible
       health insurance has only a small impact on the choice of plans. When the premium was
       changed from a favorable premium to one with a 20% loading factor, there was only a
       small increase in the proportion who purchased an HD plan when it was more desirable
       to have this coverage.
    4. About 60% of respondents were consistent in their choice of LD or HD insurance plans
       when defaults were subsequently changed.
With respect to an analysis of the consistency of choice with maximizing expected utility, we
found that some respondents who chose LD in Round 1 when it was the default option switched
away from that choice when they were presented with HD as the default option in Round 2.
Given that loss probabilities and premium differences did not change, these respondents were not
expected utility maximizers. The 45% who chose an HD plan when the premiums were
favorable and LD was the default option were either risk loving or they were not maximizing
expected utility. These results mirror our earlier experimental findings on insurance choice for
hurricane losses, which revealed that subjects vary in their adherence to the standard economic
choice model of maximizing expected utility theory--some do, but many do not (Kunreuther and
Pauly, 2018).
To analyze the factors influencing the decision on which health insurance deductible plan to
purchase, we undertook logit regressions. We found that the more risk averse respondents
purchased an LD plan when the premium was favorable, and that those having a greater concern
with peace of mind did so when the premium was unfavorable. This provides some internal
validity for the choices observed in the study; those who chose LD were more likely to have
characteristics consistent with that choice. It also showed, however, that in a head-to-head
comparison, risk aversion that motivates the EU maximization model was sometimes less
predictive of choice than the emotion of peace of mind.
7. Conclusion and Future Research
Risk neutral or risk averse individuals who chose an HD plan when premiums are favorable do
not conform to expected utility maximization. We do find many subjects who are consistent with
this behavior, but we cannot determine whether their decision process in making their choice was
guided by maximizing their expected utility. A strategy of providing individuals with a health
insurance plan with a high deductible as the default may lead some individuals to stay with this
insurance policy when they may have chosen an LD plan if they were not given a default.
Consumers who consider the benefits and costs of different health insurance plans may decide to
choose an LD plan over an HD plan even if the loading costs are high should they perceive that
they are at a higher risk than the average person suffering an illness and/or they cannot afford a
large uninsured loss. We designed our experiment so that these factors could not be the basis for
a person's choice of insurance plans. The probabilities, costs of illness and insurance premiums
were stated explicitly and were identical for all respondents in each of the specific conditions in



                                                10
the experimental design. Yet many of the individuals chose an LD plan even when the
premiums were unfavorably priced, as they are in current health insurance plans.
Future research is thus needed to determine how to present information to individuals to make
the costs and benefits of different health insurance plans more transparent to consumers. For
example, explaining to individuals that there can be significant savings over time by taking a
high deductible and that the purpose of insurance is to protect those at risk against large losses
might prove to be a rationale for people to favor an HD plan. Another point in favor of an HD
plan is that one can avoid the time and effort of filing an insurance claim for a relatively small
payment that would be covered by an LD plan. In fact, empirical research has shown that
individuals who have a low deductible often do not make a claim on their homeowners policy
partly for that reason, so they would have been far better off with a higher deductible (Braun et
al., 2006). On the other hand, warning people that they might avoid cost-effective medical care if
they chose a HD plan might motivate them to prefer the more costly LD plan.
The results from this experiment are consistent with the hypothesis that, although framing
through default options, and, to a lesser extent, premium differentials can affect individuals'
choice of cost sharing in health insurance, a majority still make consistent choices, and many of
these respondents chose HD rather than LD in Rounds 1 and 2 when LD was the default option.
For this reason, efforts to reform health insurance by mandating LD on all policies will conflict
with what a sizeable fraction of people appear to prefer.
The research presented here should thus be viewed as another step in highlighting the importance
of understanding individuals' decision processes associated with the purchase of insurance. For
example, if some consumers tend to view insurance as an investment rather than a form of
protection, they may want to have a low deductible so they feel they can get something back
from having paid premiums to their insurers (Kunreuther, Pauly and McMorrow, 2013). A
major challenge for future research is to convince individuals that the "best return on an
insurance policy is no return at all" and that they should celebrate having no claims and having
saved money by having a high deductible rather than focusing on getting as large a claim as
possible by taking a low deductible.




                                                11
                                        REFERENCES
Bell, D. (1982). Regret in Decision Making Under Uncertainty. Operations Research 30: 961­
981.
Bhargava, S., Loewenstein, G., and Sydnor, J. (2017). Choose to Lose: Health Plan Choices from
a Menu with Dominated Option. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(3), August, pp. 1319-
1372.
Braun, M., Fader, P. S., Bradlow, E. T., and Kunreuther, H. (2006). Modeling the
`Pseudodeductible' in insurance claims decisions. Management Science. 52: 1258-72.
Cohen, J. F., Richardson, S. A., Cluggish, S. A., Parker, E., Catalano, P. J., and Rimm, E. B.
(2015). Effects of choice architecture and chef-enhanced meals on the selection and consumption
of healthier school foods: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA Pediatrics, 169(5): 431-437.
Doherty N., and Schlesinger, H. (1983). The Optimal deductible for an Insurance Policy When
Initial Wealth Is Random. Journal of Business, 56: 555-565.
Johnson, E.J., and Goldstein, D.G. (2003). Do Defaults Save Lives? Science, 302: 1338-1339.
Johnson, E. J., Hershey, J., Meszaros, J., and Kunreuther, H. (1993). Framing, probability
distortions, and insurance decisions. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 7(1): 35-51.
Krantz, D. H., and Kunreuther, H. (2007). Goals and plans in decision making. Judgment and
Decision Making, 2(3): 137.
Krieger, M., and Felder, S. (2013). Can decision biases improve insurance outcomes? An
experiment on status quo bias in health insurance choice. International Journal of Environmental
Research and Public Health, 10(6): 2560-2577.
Kunreuther, H., and Pauly, M. V. (2018). Dynamic insurance decision-making for rare events:
The role of emotions. The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance-Issues and Practice, 43(2):
335-355.
Kunreuther, H., Pauly, M. V., and McMorrow, S. (2013). Insurance and Behavioral Economics:
Improving Decisions in the Most Misunderstood Industry. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Loomes, G., and Sugden, R. (1982). Regret theory: An alternative theory of rational choice under
uncertainty. The Economic Journal, 92(368): 805-824.
Madrian, B. C., and Shea, D. F. (2001). The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation
and Savings Behavior. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 16: 1149-1187.
Michel-Kerjan, E., and Kousky, C. (2010). Come Rain or Shine: Evidence on Flood Insurance
Purchases in Florida. Journal of Risk and Insurance, 77: 369-397.




                                               12
Pashigian, B. P. Schkade, L. L., and Menefee, G. H. (1966). The Selection of an Optimal
Deductible for a Given Insurance Policy. The Journal of Business, 39(1), Part 1 (January), pp.
35-44.
Phelps, C. and Parente, S (2017). The Economics of U.S. Health Care Policy. New York:
Routledge.
Stein, J. (2017). Bernie Sanders explains why he thinks everything short of Medicare-for-all is
failure. Vox. https://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2017/9/13/16297228/bernie-sanders-
medicare-single-payer. September 13.
Sydnor, J. (2010). (Over)insuring Modest Risks. American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics.2(4) (October), pp. 177-199.
Thaler, R. H., and Benartzi, S. (2004). "Save more tomorrowTM: Using behavioral economics to
increase employee saving." Journal of Political Economy 112(S1): S164-S187.
Ungemach, C., Camilleri, A.R., Johnson, E.J., Larrick, R.P., and Weber, E.U. (2017). Translated
attributes as choice architecture: Aligning objectives and choices through decision signposts.
Management Science, 64(5): 2445-2459.
van de Ven, W.P.M.M., and van Praag, B.M.S. (1981). The demand for deductibles in private
health insurance: A probit model with sample selection. Journal of Econometrics. 17(1981): 229-
252.




                                               13
