                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 AGEING-DRIVEN MIGRATION AND REDISTRIBUTION:
                          COMPARING POLICY REGIMES

                                         Assaf Razin
                                  Alexander Horst Schwemmer

                                       Working Paper 26998
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26998


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Assaf Razin and Alexander Horst Schwemmer. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Ageing-Driven Migration and Redistribution: Comparing Policy Regimes
Assaf Razin and Alexander Horst Schwemmer
NBER Working Paper No. 26998
April 2020
JEL No. F2,F22,H3,H4,J11

                                         ABSTRACT

Life cycle and insurance-type considerations dominate redistribution policy. Wage and fiscal
prospects of ageing dominate migration policy. The paper compares distinct policy regimes,
directed at migration and redistribution issues. Migration quotas, provision of social benefits,
labor income taxation, and capital income taxation, are all endogenously determined in a policy-
optimizing framework. The analysis makes a three-way comparison: free-migration regime vs.
restricted-migration regime, welfare-state regime vs. no-migration-quota, no-redistribution
regime, and low-income-majority regime vs. high-income-majority regime.


Assaf Razin
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978
ISRAEL
and Cornell University and CEPR
and also NBER
razin@tauex.tau.ac.il

Alexander Horst Schwemmer
Department of Economics
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität
Geschwister-Scholl-Platz
Munich, 80539
Germany
alexander.schwemmer@outlook.com
          Abstract


Life cycle and insurance-type considerations dominate redistribution policy. Wage and fiscal prospects of

ageing dominate migration policy. The paper compares distinct policy regimes, directed at migration and

redistribution issues. Migration quotas, provision of social benefits, labor income taxation, and capital

income taxation, are all endogenously determined in a policy-optimizing framework. The analysis makes a

three-way comparison: free-migration regime vs. restricted-migration regime, welfare-state regime vs. no-

migration-quota, no-redistribution regime, and low-income-majority regime vs. high-income-majority

regime.




            I.       Introduction

           The developed world in the last few decades has experience an unprecedented

demographic change. In virtually all OECD countries, people are getting older ­ a lot older. The

reasons are dramatic baby bust, following the equally dramatic baby boom, and the remarkable

increase in life expectancy. Fiscal prospects depend on two factors, in order to mitigate adverse

macroeconomic impact of ageing. The first is the potential for capital deepening. The second is

increased immigration.
                    The potential for a big surge in cross-border labor mobility is beyond that has ever been before. 1

First, gaps between what the same worker can make in one country versus another are higher than they have

ever been in history. That is, gaps are much higher than the wage differentials that drove the "mass

migration" at the nineteenth century and early 20th century. Second, ageing trends in the migration-

destination countries decrease the supply of young workers in them. Third, the globalization of finance,

information, and trade, lessen costs of international labor mobility.         However, the main hurdle to labor

mobility are restriction on immigration by the host countries. The potential for massive migration could only

come about if administrative migration barriers were to be lifted. That is, as with the "mass migration" in the

nineteenth century migration becomes free. 2


        One reason for migration restrictions emerges from the negative effect of immigration on native-born

        employment and wages. 3 Another reason for the rise of policy-based restrictions on cross-border

        migration is the advent of a more generous welfare state. 4 Milton Friedman famously quipped: "free


              1
                  See Prichett (2006) insightful essay.

        2
            Between 1850 and 1915, during the Age of Mass Migration, the US attracted close to 30
        million European immigrants, and the foreign-born share of the US population peaked at 14%
        (Abramitzky and Boustan (2017)).
    3
        See the findings in Borjas (2003) and Dustmann et al. (2017) among others, it is in contrast with results

    in Card (2001, 2005), Foged and Peri (2016), and Ottaviano and Peri (2012), who document that

    immigrants have a negligible, or even positive, impact on native-born earnings.

        4
            During the Age of Mass Migration, more than 30 million people moved from Europe to the US
        (Abramitzky and Boustan (2017)), and the share of immigrants in the US population was even
        higher than it is today. During the 1910s and the 1920s the US pattern of voters radically
        changed (e.g., women received voting rights) and a welfare state institutions started to emerge.
immigration and a welfare state are incompatible". 5 However, as population ageing progresses, and the

share of native born which depend on the provision of social benefits rises, the welfare state benefits

from unrestricted migration. It needs more immigrants for the sustainability of the social insurance

system. 6

Commodity prices vary across countries due to several reasons: different tax rates, market

segmentation, different standards, transportation costs, etc. However, the forces of free trade tend to

narrow these differences. These forces are enhanced by multi-lateral trade agreements reached under

the auspices of the World Trade Organization (WTO); by regional trade agreements, such as the North

America Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA); or by other bilateral trade agreements, such as the one

between Switzerland and the European Union (the EU), and the one between Norway and the EU. In

contrast, wages of individuals with similar labor- market traits differ considerably across countries,

especially between advanced and developing countries. Such high differences cannot persist under free

migration;. They exist mostly because sovereign states restrict migration. Among such states, there is no



Anti-immigration sentiments were widespread, and the introduction of immigration restrictions
is advocated on both economic and cultural grounds.


5
    Israel provides a counter example. The constitutional Law of Return imposes no immigration
barriers two the Jewish diaspora (see Razin (2018)). Israel, which has a modern welfare-state
system, not only enables free immigration but also grants Jewish immigrants immediate
citizenship, regardless of origin or skill. The EU is another modern counter example to his
observation. Every EU country is obligated to enable free entrance to any individual originated
in other EU country, while each country retains its own welfare-state system.


6
    See Zaicheva and Zimmermann (2016) for a recent literature survey of population ageing and
international migration.
     WTO-like organization such as the WTO which can coordinate sustainable reductions in the

     administrative barriers to migration.

     Restrictions on the international mobility of labor are arguably the single largest policy distortion that

     besets the international economy. A variety of studies suggests that even a small reduction in barriers to

     migration will result in large welfare benefits to the global economy. Unlike international trade in goods,

     or

     international financial flows, migration can change the decision -making policy in the an economy. This is

     because population composition in terms of income, age, etc., can alter the power balance between the

     native-born and the newcomers in a way that changes the political-economic policy of the state.

     Nevertheless, despite the potential gains from easing restrictions on international labor mobility,

     countries do not pursue the liberalization of migration flows unilaterally, or through negotiations, in a

     way that international trade negotiations do.2 Why is this? Because politicians face a backlash against

     immigration. Among several key explanations for this, is the fiscal burden imposed by immigration on

     the native-born.




   Lindbeck (1985) observes that during the first part of the 20th century, life cycle and insurance-type

considerations seem to have dominated redistribution policy. By contrast, during the decades following

WWII, `fragmented horizontal redistributions' between various minority groups have probably been

the most important mechanisms. The self-interest of different groups of the electorate seems to have

provided the most powerful motive behind redistribution in favor of the poor.


A representative welfare state, with its relatively abundant supply of capital, and high productivity (implying

relatively high wages for all skill levels) is able to attract both unskilled-poor and skilled-rich migrants.

However, its relative generosity attract relatively more unskilled-poor migrants. They expect to gain more
from the benefits of the welfare state than what they pay in taxes. A note-worthy trend in migration policy

in the OECD countries is the move toward restricting migration, by placing more emphasis on skills. 7 That is,

immigrants with high skills and education are preferred over immigrants with low skills and education. Skill-

selection immigration policy has been instituted in Australia, New Zealand and Canada. The US also adopted

such rules in 1990, as have a growing number of EU countries, including France, Ireland and the UK 8. Major

immigrant-receiving countries increasingly are examining how to select immigrants across a range of skill

levels, retain those with the greatest potential to succeed, engage employers constructively in the immigration

process.


Welfare-state voters are motivated in their voting preferences not only on how migration affects their wage

income. That is, since the welfare state redistributes income from the rich to the poor, unskilled migrants,

over lifetime, are net beneficiaries of the welfare state. In contrast, skilled (rich) migrants are in general net

contributors. Consequently, a under free migration, the migrant skill composition is tilted towards the

unskilled; whereas under controlled migration regime, the skill composition is skewed towards the skilled.




     7
         This trend is documented in Kapur and McHalet (2005),

     8
         A point-based system is a method to rank applications for residence and work permits. It has
     been adopted by Australia, Canada, and New Zealand and, in Europe, by Switzerland. In such a
     system, each application is allocated a score based on explicit criteria which typically reward
     educational attainment, experience, and language abilities. "Bonus points" can also be given for
     employment in occupations and regions where there is a shortage of workers. Recently, the UK
     proposed a new system, billed as a "points-based system", which treats migrants equally, regardless of
     where they come from. After Brexit, Europeans will no longer benefit from freedom of movement.
     Policy preferred occupations are "shortage occupation list" (SOL), central to the government's planned
     new immigration rules. Most immigrants will need to speak English and have a job offer with a
     prospective salary of more than £25,600 ($33,245).
However, voters are driven also by how migration bears on the social insurance system, when they retire,

become unemployed, etc. Migration effects on the social insurance system are common to voter

preferences, regardless of skills. From the public-finance point of view, native-born voters opt for high- skilled

migrants to come on shore; whereas, for the unskilled to stay away, to mitigate the fiscal burden on them.

Therefore, notwithstanding the common interests in social insurance, the different income effects of

migration on voters, every welfare state unavoidably adopts migration regulations and restrictions 9.


   The purpose of this paper is compare different social insurance and migration policy regimes by

using a stylized international-macroeconomic framework. Key policy variables are the provision of

social benefits, determined jointly with skill-based migration policy. tax policies, capital mobility, good

mobility, and policy, are all endogenously being determined in a general-equilibrium setup. Features

analyzed are self-interest income group, ageing, and globalization. To this end, we develop a model

in which (life-cycle) social insurance and skill-based migration policies, are driven by the ageing of

the population. Our analysis involves a three-way comparison: free-migration regime contrasted with

a controlled-migration regime, welfare-state regime contrasted with free-market regime, and skilled-

rich controlled regime vs. unskilled-poor controlled regime.


   The paper is organized as follows. Section II briefs on relevant literature. Section III describes the

main blocks of the model. Section IV presents model predictions, based on simulation results, and

Section V concludes.


                II.      Literature

          Gary Freeman (1986) observes, "The logic of the welfare state implies the existence of

  boundaries that distinguish those who are members of the community from those who are not.



     9
         See Razin et al. (2011).
Migration continuously intrude on, and challenge, the endogenous nature of the welfare state." At

the same time redistribution policies by the welfare state, through inherent political-economic

forces set strict limits to the free mobility of people. All industrial countries, which are the major

host countries for migration, uphold extensive welfare state systems. They provide some

combination of income support and direct provision of goods (e.g., housing, health care, education).


As for migration, the standard theory concludes that the major cause is wage-level differences

among countries. Labor migration would stop if wage differences vanish. 10 However, the

generosity of the welfare state should also be included as a trigger. When it comes to the

interaction of migration policy and the welfare-state-generosity policy, one argument often

heard in public debate is the view that immigrants are drawn towards a more generous

welfare systems of the receiving countries. This is the basis for welfare-state-as-magnet hypothesis.

However a fundamental question that remains unanswered is how migration policy is

determined in the first place. Is it originates from the source country preferences of would be

migrants; is it restricted by policy maker preferences in the destination country; or whether

migration is determined by both forces. The former driving force, that migration is determined

at the source, and workers entering the "open doors to heaven" has been the tradition in the

labor economics literature (Borjas (1999)). In reality, who is allowed into a country, depends

on active immigration policy of receiving countries; not the source countries. Receiving countries




   10
        This theory suggests that the labor migration moves from capital-poor/labor force-rich countries
   to capital-rich/labor force-poor countries, while by contrast capital moves in the opposite direction,
   expecting a higher return on investment made in capital-poor countries.
more often than not enact quotas, point systems, and the like, in order to select those

immigrants whom they deem most desirable (see Razin et al (2002). 11 Models in which

redistribution policy is determined by the majority rule predicts that the median voter serves as a

major check on inequality via redistributive policies. 12


High and lasting restrictions on immigration stand in marked contrast to accelerating liberalization

of the goods markets, starting soon after World War II through the GATT, and liberalization of

capital markets starting after the breakdown of the Bretton woods system in 1973. At present,

markets for goods and services as well as capital are global, whereas labor markets are still national,

without much policy to liberalize immigration; see Freeman (2006). Economic historian Khoudour-

Castéras (2008) studies migration from the 19th century Europe. He finds that the social insurance

legislation, adopted by Bismarck in the 1880s, reduced the incentives of risk averse Germans to

emigrate. He estimates that in the absence of social insurance, German emigration rate from 1886 to

1913 would have been more than doubled their actual level. Southwick (1981) shows with US data

that high welfare-state benefit gap, between the origin and destination regions in the US, increases

the share the welfare-state benefit recipients among the migrants. Gramlich and Laren (1984)


     11
          Facchini, Razin, and Willman (2004) extend their analysis to investigate the role of lobbying
     in shaping migration policy.

12
     Traditional theory of the determinants of the size of the government in a direct democracy highlights the
relationship between the scope of redistribution, i.e. the extent of the welfare state, and pre-tax income
inequality. Two interpretations explain this dependence: Lovell (1975) emphasize the size of the
government as a provider of public goods, while others such as in the traditional median voter models of
redistribution in Roberts (1997), Meltzer, and Richard (1981). They emphasize the role of extensions of the
voting franchise and the pre- tax inequality on redistribution of income.
analyze a sample from the 1980 US Census data and find that the high-benefit regions will have

more welfare-recipient migrants than the low-benefit regions. Using the same data, Blank (1988)

employs a multinomial logit model to show that welfare benefits have a significant positive effect

over the location choice of female-headed households. Meyer (2003) employs a conditional logit

model, as well as a comparison-group method, to analyze the 1980 and 1990 US Census data and

finds significant welfare-induced migration, particularly for high school dropouts. Borjas (1999),

who uses the same data set, finds that low-skilled migrants are much more heavily clustered in

high-benefit states, in comparison to other migrants or natives. Gelbach (2004) finds strong

evidence of welfare migration in 1980, but less in 1990. Levine and Zimmerman (1999) estimate a

probit model using a data set for the period 1979­1992 and find, on the contrary, that welfare

benefits have little effect on the probability of female-headed households (the recipients of the

benefits) to relocate. Dustmann and Frattini (2014) bring evidence of no welfare migration.


Razin and Wahba (2014) decompose bi-lateral migration sample into three groups as follows.

Group A (EUR to EUR) contains only the source-host pairs of countries, which allow free mobility

of labor between them, according to the Schengen agreement. Razin and Wahba (2014) find that a

more generous welfare state tilts the skill composition downward under free migration and upward

under policy- controlled migration. Regardless whether migration is free or controlled a higher Gini

generates greater income distribution and consequently more skill-biased immigration In Razin,

Sadka and Swagel (2002) the dependency effect of unskilled migrants on the welfare-state policy

depends on two contrasting driving forces. On the one hand, the effect is negative because a rise in

the dependency ratio increases the fiscal burden on the median voter. On the other hand, the

dependency-ratio effect on policy is positive to the extent that the median voter preference shifts

towards the group of voters who are net beneficiary of the welfare state. In the present context of
two skill levels, the effects of a rise in the dependency ratio on the welfare-state generosity policy

is negative if the high skill are in the majority, and positive if the low skill are in the majority13.

Notwithstanding the great insights arising from the above-mentioned literature, complex interactions

among the driving forces are to be further explained in only a general equilibrium framework. The

paper addresses the general-equilibrium interactions in a majority-voting analytical framework.


   III. Minimalist Model


   We develop a two-period political-economy model, capturing skill based immigration policy

   jointly and welfare-state redistribution policy, that are determined through majority voting 14. The




   13 Interest-group arguments in political science date back more than a century. From the pioneering

   works of Arthur F. Bentley (1908), V.O. Key, Jr. (1942) to David B. Truman (1951). Group models of

   politics search for propositions about how and when individuals coordinate their activities and engage in

   collective behavior (Olson 1971). Work in this vein commonly attempts to link policy demands to

   concrete (or expected) gains and losses of identifiable sub-groups of the electorate, and to the bargains

   and concessions, they produce in pluralistic political systems. Interest-group approaches have focused

   on a broad array of groups positioned for or against immigration (Freeman 1995; Gimpel and Edwards

   1999; Haus 1995; Joppke 1998; Watts 2001).

   14
        The model draws on Razin et al (2019). The framework consists of two skill levels in a Heckscher-Ohlin setting
   where factors of production are perfectly mobile across sectors. Using public opinion polls conducted in the United
   States, Steve and Slaughter (2001) and O'Rourke (2003), find support for hypotheses derived from the Heckscher-
   Ohlin trade model. Specifically, they find that there is a robust skills cleavage over immigration policy,   with
   highly skilled workers being less likely to support restricting immigration policies and low-
   skilled counterparts more likely to do so; and these effects of immigration on workers at different
   skill levels are consistent with the model. Their findings suggest `the potential for immigration
government provides a uniform social benefit. Capital income tax is proportional whereas the

average rate of the labor income tax progresses from low-skilled wage to high-skilled wage.




III.1 Income groups


In order to consider redistribution issues, which are at the heart of the welfare state, we assume

that there minimally are two types of individuals -- low skilled-poor (indexed) and high skilled

­rich (indexed ). The workers have two types of skills--low (l) and high (h). There are three

types of factors of production--capital (K) high-skilled labor ( ), and low-skilled labor ( ). 15


Each high-skill individual is endowed with  units of good x, and  units of good y, respectively,

in the first period; a low-skill individual is endowed with only  < 1 units of a skilled individual's

wealth endowment.          Thus, a skilled-rich individual enjoys both higher initial endowment

("wealth"), and higher labor market skill than the unskilled-poor individual.


Ageing leads to increasing dependency ratio ­ the ratio of retirees to workers- is the main driving

force in our analysis.




politics to be connected to the mainstream redistributive politics over which political parties
often contest elections.
15 When confining consideration to factor rewards, under the standard complementarity--
substitution specification of production functions, low skill labor, and capital, benefit from high
skill immigration, whereas high skill labor loses. However, such narrow benefit-lose calculation
abstracts from the general-equilibrium effect factor allocation across sectors, international capital
flows and from the fiscal aspects associated with the welfare state.
To capture the essence of ageing, we assume an idiosyncratic shock in the second period so that,

with certain likelihood the individual retires from work.


The overall size of the initial native-born population is normalized to one, where a proportion  of

the population is of high skill and a proportion 1 -  is of low skill. We denote by  the number

of high-skill migrants and by  the number of low-skill migrants. We denote the number of high-

skill immigrants,   , and low-skill immigrants,   .


III.2 Dependents


The welfare state provides universal social benefits, paid by tax on labor income and tax on capital

income. There are two periods. We assume that everyone works in the first period. As for the second

period, with a probability , an individual is out of work, earning no wage income. The individual draws

on the earned income which is saved from the first period. We label this individual as dependent,

because relative to others in the same skill group, the individual spending draws more the welfare-state

social transfers. To capture dependency on the social insurance through retirement, unemployment,

disability, etc., we assume that there is an individual idiosyncratic shock. The probability of non-work

realization is also the share of dependents in the population. Because migrants typically come in young

and productive, the non-working shock does not apply to them.


III.3 Immigration


Immigrants, who bring with them no capital, consume only in the second period, and their utility

function is given by:


 = (2 ) (2 )1- +  
Consumption functions are:




 (1)     2        = (1 -  )( ),


 and


 (1)     2         = (1 - )(1 -  )( /p )




 (1)      2        = (1 - )(1 -  )( ),


 and


 (1)         2         = (1 - )(1 -  ) (1 -  )( /p )


 Where  and  denote wage proportional wage tax rates on high-skill and low-skill, respectively.

                                     
 The exogenously given pair        ,       of utility levels attained by S-individuals and L-individuals,

 respectively, in foreign residence. The number of high skilled immigrants depends positively on the foreign-
                                   
 domestic utility differential,  -  ; and number of low skilled immigrants depends positively on the
                                          
 foreign-domestic utility differential  -  .
 Under the free migration regime, the number of migrants are determined as follows.


                                      ) 
             (2)              =  ( -                       with  > 0, 0 <  < 1.

                               ) 
                       =  ( -                        with  > 0, 0 <  < 1.


           For consistency, under a controlled-migration regime,  and  are policy

                   controlled variables. The migration quotas must be chosen so that


                                                      -                              -
                                                                   
               (3)                 -  <                   , and  -  <                    .
                                                                                  




III.4 Production and investment


To enable us to consider trade in goods we assume that there minimally are two tradable goods (x

and y). In the absence of uncertainty and differentiated products, each sector will either export or

import its standard product, but not both at the same time. World prices of x and y are exogenously

given for our small open economy with good x serving as a numeraire, whose price is normalized

to one, and the world price of y is denoted by p*. There is an impediment to trade in goods.

Specifically, goods can be exported, but again only at some border related friction cost (e.g.,

country specific standards, regulations, etc.). For concreteness of the notation, we consider y as an
export good. A similar and straightforward notation applies when x is the export good. 16 We denote

this cost per unit of price by  , so that the domestic price of the export good y is



                                                        
                                               =      1 +  
                                                              .
 (4)




A representative firm produces well  according to a constant-returns-to scale technology:


                                                       1--
      (5)       =    ,  ,   =                                     ,    = , ,


Where, g is the input of physical capital, and  is high-skill labor, and  is low-skill labor,

used in the respective production process.  > 0 Is a total factor productivity coefficient, and

 ,  , and 1 -  -  are, respectively, the capital, high-skill labor, and low-skill labor shares

in the sector producing.


Capital is employed together with labor in the first period with output generated in the second

period. We assume that labor is paid in the second period, at the end of the production process.


Capital ( ) is a composite good, produced in the first period is of a variable mix of  and  ,

according to:


(6)           =    1- , where 0 <  <1.




16
     By the Lerner Symmetry proposition, any wedge between the domestic and the world prices applied to

importable goods, is equivalent to a wedge between world and domestic prices applied to exportable goods.
To find the cost minimizing mix of x and y, of which a unit of capital (K) is composed of, one, has

to solve the following problem:


                                               min( + 1  )
                                               (,)



                                               Subject to:


                                                 1-  1 ,


Where  is the domestic price of  in period  = 1,2.


Solving this problem yields also the unit price  of capital as


                  1-
(7)      = 1           ,


             1-            
where  = (    
               )   + (1-)1- .




Demands for labor and capital are given, respectively, by the marginal productivity conditions in

both sectors. Note that because labor and capital move freely between the two sectors, then the

factors of production earn the same remuneration across sectors, that is:




                                             1- - 
                                     = (  )        ,


                                                             1- - 
 (8a)                                = 2    
                                              -- 
 (8b)                           = (1 -  -  )  


                                                              - - 
                                = 1 -  -    




                                                       -1 1- - 
 (9)                             (1 + ) =   
                                                                     ,


                                                                 -1 1- - 
 (10)                                  (1 + ) =       2                        ,




                                                                              
Where  is the capital- labor ratio in sector , that is  =            ;  =          ;  is high-skill
                                                                              


wage rate, paid in the second period (after the completion of the production process); and  is

low-skill wage rate, paid in the second period after the completion of the production process. Note

that for simplicity we assume that capital fully depreciates at the end of the production process.




III.5 Saving behavior


We denote by 1 the consumption of good g = x , y by an individual of type i = u,s in period t =

1,2. All native-born individuals have identical preferences, given by



 (11)                      =    (1  11- ) (2  21- )1- +   ,
Where, 0 < a < 1, 0 < b < 1, d > 0,  > 0, and  is a uniform social benefit (provided in an equal

amount to all individuals), assumed (for simplicity) to be provided in the second period only. This

social benefit captures the various ingredients that a welfare state provides, such as health services,

education, in-kind transfers, etc. Note that the social benefit is not a perfect substitute to private

consumption 17.


The consumption basket remains the same across period 1 and 2. Therefore, we can aggregate

consumption goods into a consumption composite:

    1-
 =   , t = 1, 2

                            1-
The composite price is  =   


With,

            1
 =               ,   , t = 1,2.
          (1-)1-




    17
          In our model, the redistribution made by the welfare state is in the form of an in-kind
    benefit. There are other aspects of the social insurance system that we abstract from. For
    example, in Europe the welfare system is more in the tradition of Beveridge (based on
    universal at benefits). In some non-European countries, the system is mainly Bismarkian
    (based on benefits related to past contributions). Since social contributions are related to
    individual incomes, the more Beveridgean welfare systems have a higher implicit income
    redistribution. See Cremer and Goulão (2014).
The (two-state) idiosyncratic shock , which occurs in the second period, is indexed  , where,  =  ,

if the individual works, or  = , if the individual retires from work; with the probability of the non-

working state, , and the probability of the working state, 1 - .


The Individual household I seeks to maximize the expected utility


(12)          = 1 +  [2 (  )],


Subject to


1 + 1 =  +   , and



                      [ 1 + (1 -  )] + ( 1 -  ) = 2 2 , if  = 


                                 [ 1 + (1 -  )] = 2 2 , if  =  ,




Where, the proportional tax on labor income is  , and the capital income of residents and

foreigners (from domestic sources only) is taxed at a flat rate  ;  represents period- 

consumption spending,  denotes period-1 domestic saving of individual I, and  denotes the

expectation operator for the distribution function of the non-working shock  ; ; I = S, L..




III.6 Capital Flows
Recall that the welfare-state fiscal prospects depend on two factors, in order to mitigate adverse

macroeconomic impact of ageing. The first is the potential for capital deepening. The second is

increased immigration. Domestic capital deepening depends in and out capital flows.


As usual, capital flows are driven by net-of-tax rates of return. Capital does flow internationally,

but at some cost  > 0 per unit. The net return on investing into domestic capital is 1 + (1 -  )

for investors, where r is the domestic interest rate. A domestic individual who invests abroad can
                        )                                             
thus gain only 1 + (1 -   -  , where   is the world interest rate and  is the tax rate,

levied abroad under a source-based taxation. In a small, open economy context, the two
                      
(exogenous) variables  and   play an equivalent role, where the only relevant variable is   =

(1 - ) 
       , which is the net of tax international interest rate. We assume that the cost of capital

flows applies symmetrically to foreign investors, i.e. their return on investment in the domestic

country is given by 1 + (1 -  ) -  , where investing abroad yields a return   .


The small open economy exports capital in case:


   (13)        (1 -  ) =   -  .


This means that    (1 -  ) -  <   , and therefore foreigners do not invest in the domestic

economy.


Similarly, the small open economy imports capital in case:


   (13b)   (1 -  ) -  =   .
This means that (1 -  ) >   -  , and therefore the residents of the small open economy do

not wish to invest abroad.




III.7   Current Account


First-period current account surplus is given by:



          (14)               (1 -  )( + 1  ) + ()(  + 1  ) - (1 - )1 +

         1 1 ) + () 1 + 1 1  +  ( +  ) = [ (1 -  ) + ( ) ] -

                                          ( +  ).
Note that when the country exports capital (that is, (1 - ) + () >  ( +  )), then

it incurrs the cost of  on its capital exports. Conversely, when foreigners invest in the domestic

economy (that is, (1 - ) + () <  ( +  )), then the country pays foreiners only

1 + (1 -  ) , because they are taxed on their income originating in the domestic economy;

foreigners bears the friction cost  in this case.


Second period resource constraint is given by:


  (15)            (1 - )2 + 2 2  + ()2 + 2 2  +  (2                            + 2)

                   +  ((2           + 2)         +  + (1 +  +  +  ) 

                   =  ( ,  ) + 2   ,   + [ (1 - ) + ( ) -  ( +  )] 



                               1+  -                 (1-) +(- )  ( +  )
(16)                 =                                                             .
                               1 + 1-                (1-) +(- )  ( +  )




III.8    Policy Instruments


Finally, consider the government, which is active in a balanced-budget way only in the second

period. Its budget constraint is:



           (17)

          (1 +  +  +  ) =  ( ((1 - ) +  ) +   ( +  ) +

            ( +  ) .
Note that the government taxes capital income of both domestic residents and foreigners which

originates in the domestic economy,  ( +  ). This means that when saving of domestic

residents exceeds domestic investment,  ( +  ), with the excess invested abroad, then this

excess is not taxed at home. Conversely, when savings of domestic residents fall short of domestic

investment,  ( +  ), with the shortage financed by foreigners, then this shortage is taxed by

the domestic government.


The available policy instruments are the number of high-skilled migrants,  , the number of low

-skilled migrants, ,  , the labor income tax rates,  and  (proportional wage tax rates on

high-skill and low-skill, respectively) , the capital income tax rate,  , and the scale of the social

benefit, . Labor income tax is progressive (measured by the difference in the average rate

differential  -  > 0 ), whereas capital income tax (  ) is proportional.


Note also that the government taxes capital income of both domestic residents and foreigners

which originates in the domestic economy,  ( +  ). This means that when saving of

domestic residents exceeds domestic investment,  ( +  ), with the excess invested abroad,

then this excess is not taxed at home. Conversely, when savings of domestic residents fall short of

domestic investment,  ( +  ), with the shortage financed by foreigners, then this shortage

is taxed by the domestic government.


We abstract from a tax on the initial endowments because these are in fixed supply at the beginning

of the first period, and a tax on them is not distortive; it will tend to be extremely high. Furthermore,

when the low-skill form the majority, they will tax them at a rate of 100%. For a similar reason,
we abstract also from a tax on consumption (VAT) because it is equivalent to a tax on wages

(which are taxed directly in our model), and a tax on the initial endowments (see, for instance,

Frenkel, Razin and Sadka (1991)).




       IV.       Model's Predictions




       To capture the effect of ageing (that is, a rising share of dependents with the -parameter)

       on social insurance, the composition of taxes, and the skill gap of immigration, resort to

       numerical simulation.


       IV.1 Majority Determined Policy

       In the following Figures we compare the high skilled regime policies with the low-skilled

       regime policies, through varying the retirement-likelihood parameter, .


             Figure 1: Capital income tax: high skilled majority vs. low-skilled majority
Note: For -parameter values falling short of 0.2 the economy imports capital. For -parameter

values exceeding 0.35 the economy exports capital. For -parameter values in between 0.2 and

0.35 the economy is in financial autarky. For the model's parameter values, see Appendix.


Figure 1 demonstrates that,


   1. The capital tax rate set by the high-skilled majority is higher than the rate set by the low-

       skilled majority if the country is capital exporter. The capital tax rate is set equal to zero

       set by the high-skilled majority if the country is capital exporter.


   2. Increasing the -parameter lowers the capital tax rate set by the high-skilled majority if

       the country is capital exporter. Increasing the -parameter lowers the rate of tax on capital

       by the low-skilled majority, regardless of whether the country exports or imports capital.
           Figure 2: low-wage tax rate: high skilled majority vs. low-skilled majority




7




Note: For -parameter values falling short of 0.2 the economy imports capital. For -parameter

values exceeding 0.35 the economy exports capital. For -parameter values in between 0.2 and

0.35 the economy is in financial autarky. For the model's parameter values, see Appendix.




Figure 2 demonstrates that,


       1. The low-wage tax rate set by the high-skilled majority is higher than the rate set by the

           low-skilled majority.
       2. Increasing the -parameter raises the low-wage tax rate by both the high-skilled and

           low-skilled regimes.




           Figure 3: High-wage tax rate: high skilled majority vs. low-skilled majority




Note: For -parameter values falling short of 0.2 the economy imports capital. For -parameter

values exceeding 0.35 the economy exports capital. For -parameter values in between 0.2 and

0.35 the economy is in financial autarky. For the model's parameter values, see Appendix.
Figures 3 demonstrate that,




   1. The high-wage tax rate set by the high-skilled majority is lower than the rate set

       by the low-skilled majority.


   2. Increasing the -parameter raises the high-wage tax rate by the high-skilled but

       lowers the rate set by low-skilled regime.




   Figure 4: Provision of social benefits: high-skilled majority and low-skilled

   majority


   3. The high-wage tax rate set by the high-skilled majority is lower than the rate set

       by the low-skilled majority.


   4. Increasing the -parameter raises the high-wage tax rate by the high-skilled but

       lowers the rate set by low-skilled regime.
Note: For -parameter values falling short of 0.2 the economy imports capital. For -parameter

values exceeding 0.35 the economy exports capital. For -parameter values in between 0.2 and

0.35 the economy is in financial autarky. For the model's parameter values, see Appendix.




Figure 4 shows that,


1. The high-skilled regime provides greater social benefits than the low-skilled regime (except

   for very low values of the -parameter where the provision is similar).


2. Increasing the -parameter raises social-benefit provision in the high-skilled regime but

   lowers the provision in the low-skilled regime.
           Figure 5: low-skilled-migration quota: high-skilled majority and low-skilled

           majority




Note: For -parameter values falling short of 0.2 the economy imports capital. For -parameter

values exceeding 0.35 the economy exports capital. For -parameter values in between 0.2 and

0.35 the economy is in financial autarky. For the model's parameter values, see Appendix.




Figure 2 shows that,
1. The high-skilled regime sets positive (and high) the migration quota to low-skilled

   migrants, whereas the low-skilled regime sets the quota equal to zero.


2. Increasing the -parameter does not change the low-skilled migration quota if the high-

   skilled form the majority if the country is capital importer or exporter. Increasing the -

   parameter raises the low-skilled migration quota, when the high-skilled form the majority,

   if economy is in financial autarky.




       Figure 6: high-skilled-migration quota: high skilled majority and low-skilled

       majority
Note: For -parameter values falling short of 0.2 the economy imports capital. For -parameter

values exceeding 0.35 the economy exports capital. For -parameter values in between 0.2 and

0.35 the economy is in financial autarky. For the model's parameter values, see Appendix.




Figures 6 shows that,


    1. The quota for high-skilled migration set by the high-skilled regime is zero and the quota

        set by the low-skilled regime is positive if the country imports capital; If the country

        exports capital, the quota set by the high-skilled regime exceeds the quota set by the low-

        skilled regime.


    2. Increasing the -parameter lowers the high-skilled migration quota set by low-skilled

        regime; increasing the -parameter lowers the high-skilled migration quota set by the

        high-skilled regime once the country becomes capital exporter.




              IV.2 Free migration vs. Restricted Migration

       In the following Figures we compare the free-migration regime with the restricted-

       migration regime, through varying the retirement-likelihood parameter, .




Figure 7: provision of social benefit: Free Migration vs. Restricted migration
             (High skilled form the Majority)




Note: For -parameter values falling short of 0.2 the economy imports capital. For -parameter

values exceeding 0.35 the economy exports capital. For -parameter values in between 0.2 and

0.35 the economy is in financial autarky. For the model's parameter values, see Appendix.




Figure 7 shows that,


   1. The provision of the social benefit exceeds the provision under restricted migration.


   2. Under free migration, increasing the -parameter raises the provision of the social benefit

       under both free- and restricted-migration.


       Figure 7: provision of social benefit: Free Migration vs. Restricted migration
                     (Low skilled form the Majority)




Note: For -parameter values falling short of 0.2 the economy imports capital. For -parameter

values exceeding 0.35 the economy exports capital. For -parameter values in between 0.2 and

0.35 the economy is in financial autarky. For the model's parameter values, see Appendix.




       1. The provision of the social benefit, under free migration, exceeds the provision under

           restricted migration.


       2. Increasing the -parameter raises the provision of the social benefit under both free-

           and restricted-migration as long as the economy imports capital.
       Figure 8: Share of high-skilled immigration in total immigration Free Migration vs.

       Restricted migration


       (High skilled form the majority, Low skilled form the Majority)




Note: For -parameter values falling short of 0.2 the economy imports capital. For -parameter

values exceeding 0.35 the economy exports capital. For -parameter values in between 0.2 and

0.35 the economy is in financial autarky. For the model's parameter values, see Appendix.
Figures 8 shows that,


    1. If the low skilled form the majority which control the welfare-state policy, free-migration

        share of high- skilled falls short of the migration-restricting regime.


        When the high skilled form the majority which control the welfare-state policy, free-

        migration share of high- skilled exceeds (falls short) of the migration- restricting regime

        for capital-import (export)country .




Summary conclusion

The paper compares policy regimes, dealing with migration and redistribution Migration quotas

of low skilled and high skilled, provision of social benefits, labor income taxation, capital income

taxation, - are all endogenously determined in a general-equilibrium optimizing framework. Main

driving force is ageing of the population. The analysis involves three-way comparisons: free-

migration regime differentiated from restricted-migration regime, welfare-state regime
distinguished from free-market regime, and low-income-majority regime assessed against high-

income-majority regime.


Main patterns, distilled from the analysis, are as follows.


Welfare-state generosity and migration


 The provision of social benefits by the welfare state decline when the country switches from free-

to restricted-migration. In a capital exporting country, which have high demand for high-skill

labor, the share of high skilled immigrants in total number of immigrants rises when the country

switches from free- to restricted-migration. Social provisions rise with ageing if the high skilled

form the majority, and fall if the low skilled form the majority.


The share hare of skilled migration in total migration rises with ageing across if the high skilled

form the majority. The share is set equal to one if the low skilled form the majority. Migration of

low skilled rises with ageing if the high skilled form the majority. Migration is wholly prevented

if the low skilled form the majority. Migration of high skilled rises with ageing across if the high

skilled form the majority and declines if the low skilled form the majority.


Taxation shifts from capital to labor

First, Capital income tax rate declines with ageing across all policy regimes. Second, the tax rate

on low wage rises with ageing across all policy regimes. The tax rate on high wage rises with

ageing across all policy regimes 18.




18
  Except if the low skilled form the majority where the rate is high for all demographics, which does not show
upward trend with ageing)
Appendix: Simulation model and Parameter values
To simplify the model in the text, the simulation model has a layered production structure with three
inputs, two intermediary goods and one final good in each period. This is without much loss of
generality, but simplifies the analysis. The final good in each period serves this purpose.

The final good is produced by a Cobb-Douglas production function. Individuals start with an endowment
 of the final good, I = 1, 2. The capital good is produced one-to one from the final good, thus reducing
the need to track another production function that is not at the core of the analysis.

Preferences are specified as

                                                               ¯
                                            1-
                                             , - 1    ()1- - 1
                                   (, , ) =        + 
                                            1 -        1 - 

Provision of social benefit  is:

                                                  
                                          =           .
                                              (  +  )


 is total government spending on public goods, and   0 measures to what extent there are
congestion externalities in its provision. In particular, for  = 0, the public good would be a pure
public good, and for = 1, only per-person spending on it would be relevant. By setting the value  
(0,1), we allow for some returns to scale in public goods provision.

 Parameter                         Value                            Description

                                   1.0                              Elasticity of intertemporal
                                                                    substitution

                                   1.3                              CES parameter public goods

                                   0.5                              Weight public good

                                   0.5987369392383787               Discount factor
¯   0.05                Subsistence level of public

                        goods

    1.0                 Depreciation rate

    0.0                 Skilled agents' unskilled
                        endowment


    0.2                 Foreign capital tax rate

    0.9                 Congestion in public goods
                        use

    1.0                 Labor endowment unskilled

    1.0                 Labor endowment skilled

,   1.0                 Labor endowment unskilled
                        migrants

,   1.0                 Labor endowment skilled
                        migrants


    1.5                 Relative price of goods on the
                        world market

    1.0                 Price level abroad

    1.0                 MFP final goods abroad


    0.5                 World market share of x

    3.321942375150668   Interest rate abroad

    0.0                 Default risk dependents

    0.0                 Cost of curbing unskilled
                        migration

    0.0                 Cost of curbing skilled
                        migration
                         0.0                    Cost of sorting migrants

                         0.01                   Trade wedge

                         0.01                   Capital wedge

                         -0.30000000000000004   Exponent on public good

                         -1.6666666666666665    Modified weight




Parameters relating to domestic agents
Parameter        Unskilled            Skilled           Description

                 0.5                  0.5               Initial population

                 0.1                  1.0               Elasticity of
                                                        immigration

                 0.05                 0.05              Probability of retiring

       ¯         -10.0                -9.0              Reference utility if
      _^ 
                                                        migrating abroad

                 0.5                  0.5               Elasticity of
                                                        emigration

                 0.3                  0.3               Scaling factor
                                                        emigration




Parameters relating to potential immigrants
Parameter        Unskilled            Skilled           Description

                 1.0                  1.0               Scaling factor
                                                        immigration
                           0.5                       0.5                      Elasticity of
                                                                              immigration

           
                           -2.255                    -2.145                   Reference utility of
                                                                              immigrants




Parameters relating to production structure
                  Factor shares                                      Other parameters

       =          Unskilled         Skilled labour   Capital         MFP ( )           Demand
                  labor                                                                share ( )

                  0.3               0.4              0.3             9.0               0.5

                  0.33              0.33             0.34            9.0               0.5




Other parameters
Note: Aan additional layer of production is inserted: Unskilled labor is transformed into unskilled labor
services at a rate of 1:1, whereas skilled labor is transformed into skilled labor services at a rate 1:1.5.
This ensures that the skilled wage is higher than the unskilled wage. In effect, this is similar to changing
 to 1.5, but reporting   as the effective wage.




References
Abramizky, Ran, and Leah Boustan (2017) "Immigration in American Economic History," Journal of
Economic Literature, 55 (2017) 1311­45.


Bentley, A. 1908. The Process of Government, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Blank, R. M. (1988). The effect of welfare and wage levels on the location decisions of female-headed
households. Journal of Urban Economics, 24, 186.
Boeri, Tito, (2008), "brain gain: a European approach," Cesifo Forum 3, 30-34.

Boeri, Tito, (2010), "Immigration to the land ofredistribution,"Economica, 77, 651-687.

Boeri, Tito, Gordon H. Hanson, and Barry McCormick (eds) (2002), Immigration Policy and the Welfare

System, A Report for the Fondazione Rodolfo Debenedetti, Oxford University Press.




Borjas, George J. (1999), "The Economic Analysis of Immigration," in Orly Ashenfelter and

David Card (eds.),    Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3, Chapter 28, Elsevier.

Borjas, G. J. (1999). Heaven's door: immigration policy and the American economy. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

Borjas, G J (2003), "The Labor Demand Curve is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the Impact

of Immigration on the Labor Market," The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4): 1335-1374.

Brochmann, Grete, Anniken Hegelund, Karin Borevi, Heidi Vad Johnsson, and Klaus Petersen,

(2012), Immigration Policy and the Scandinavian Welfare State 1945-2010, Palgrave

MacMillan.

Card, D (2001), "Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of

Higher Immigration," Journal of Labor Economics 19(1): 22-64.



Card, D (2005), "Is the New Immigration Really So Bad?", The Economic Journal 115(507).



Cremer Helmuth and Catarina Goulão (2014), " Migration and Social Insurance," Louvain

Economic Review Volume 80, Issue 1 , pp. 5-29.
Disney, Richard (2007) " Population ageing and the size of the welfare state: Is there a puzzle to

explain?,"    European Journal of Political Economy, Volume 23, Issue 2, June 2007, Pages 576-

577.

Dustmann, Christian , and Tomasso Frattini, (2014), "The Fiscal Effects of Immigration to the

UK," Economic Journal, 124(580).

Dustmann, C, U Schonberg, and J Stuhler (2017), "Labor Supply Shocks, Native Wages, and the

Adjustment of Local Employment," The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(1): 435-483.




Facchini, Giovanni, Assaf Razin, and Gerald Willman, (2004), "Welfare Leakage and

Immigration Policy," CESifo Economic Studies, Vol. 50, 4/2004.

Foged, M, and G Peri (2016), "Immigrants' Effect on Native Workers: New Analysis on

Longitudinal Data," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8(2): 1-34.



Freeman, Gary P., (1986), "Migration and the Political Economy of the Welfare State," Annals of the

American Academy of Science       AAPS 485, May.



Freeman, G. 1995. `Modes of immigration politics in liberal democratic states'. International Migration
Review, 29(4): 881­902.

Freeman, Richard B., "People Flows in Globalization," Journal of Economic Perspectives, June 2006, 20
(2), 145­170.




Frenkel, Jacob, Assaf Razin, and Efraim Sadka (1990), "Basic Concepts of International Taxation",
NBER Working Paper No. 3540.
Gimpel, J. and Edwards, J. 1999. The Congressional Politics of Immigration Reform, Boston: Allyn &
Bacon.
Goldin, Claudia (1994), " The Political Economy of Immigration Restriction in the United States, 1890
to 1921," in Claudia Goldin and Gary D. Libecap (editors) The Regulated Economy: A Historical
Approach to Political Economy, NBER and University of Chicago Press.




 Haus, L. 1995. `Openings in the wall: transnational migrants, labor unions, and US immigration policy'.
International Organization, 49(2): 285­313.
Joppke, C. 1999. Immigration and the Nation-State: The United States, Germany, and Great Britain,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.



Kapur, Davesh, and John McHale. 2005. Give Us Your Best and Brightest. Washington: Center for Global
Development.

Key, V. 1942. Politics, Parties and Pressure Groups, New York: Thomas Y. Crowell.


Khoudour-Castéras, D. (2008). "Welfare state and labor mobility: the impact of Bismarck's social
legislation on German emigration before World War I," The Journal of Economic History, 68(1), 211­
243.
Levine, P. B., and Zimmerman, D. J. (1999). An empirical analysis of the welfare magnet debate using
the NLSY. Journal of Population Economics, 12(3), 391.

Lindbeck, Assar (1985), "Redistribution policy and the expansion of the public sector," Journal of

                Public Economics, Volume 28, Issue 3, December 1985, Pages 309-328.


Lovell, M. C. (1975). The collective allocation of commodities in a democratic society. Public Choice 24,
71­92.
Meltzer, ; Allan and Scott F. Richard, "A Rational Theory of the Size of Government," Journal of
Political Economy 89 (1981): 914­27.


Meyer, J.-B. (2003). "Diasporas: concepts et pratiques.,"In R. Barre, V. Hernandez, J.-B. Meyer, & D.
Vinck (Eds.), Scientific Diasporas. Expertise collégiale, IRD Editions.


Oates, Wallace (1972), Fiscal Federalism, Harcourt Brace and Jovanovitch, New York.

Pritchett,Lant (2006).,"Let Their People Come: Breaking the Gridlock on International Labor Mobility,"
Center for Global Development: Brookings Institution Press, 2006.


Ottaviano, G I, and G Peri (2012), "Rethinking the Effect of Immigration on Wages," Journal of the

European Economic Association 10(1): 152-197.


Razin, Assaf (2018), " Israel Immigration Story: Winners and Losers," Israel Economic Review Vol. 15, No. 1
(2018), 1-33.


Razin, Assaf, Efraim Sadka and Phillips Swagel (2002a), "The Aging Population and the Size of the
Welfare State," Journal of Political Econ omy, 110, pp. 900-918.


Razin, A., E. Sadka, and P. Swagel (2002b). Tax burden and migration: A political economy theory and
evidence. Journal of Public Economics 85, 167­190.
Razin, Assaf and Jackline Wahba, (2015), "Welfare Magnet Hypothesis, Fiscal Burden, and Immigration
Skill Selectivity," Scandinavian Journal of Economics, Volume117, Issue 2, April 2015, Pages 369-402.
Razin, Assaf, Efraim Sadka, and Alexander Schwemmer, (2019) "Welfare State vs. Market Forces in a
Globalization Era" , CEPR D DP13937.


Razin, Assaf and Efraim Sadka (1991), "International Tax Competition and Coordination", Economic
Letters.
Razin, Assaf, Efraim Sadka, and Ben Suwankiri, (2011), Migration and the Welfare State: Political-
Economy Policy Formation, MIT Press.
Roberts, Kevis, (1977) "Voting over Income Tax Schedules," Journal of Public Economics 8 (1977):
329­40.


Scheve, K. and Slaughter, M. 2001. `Labor market competition and individual preferences over
immigration policy'. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 83(1): 133­45.


Truman, D. 1951. The Governmental Process, New York: Knopf.
Watts, J. 2001. Immigration Policy and the Challenge of Globalization: Unions and Employers in
Unlikely Alliance, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Zaiceva, Anzelika, and Klaus F. Zimmermann, (2016), "Migration and the Demographic Shift,"
In John Piggott, Alan Woodland (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Population Aging, Volume 1,
Chapter 3, Pages 119-169.
Gramlich, E. M., and Laren, D. S. (1984). Migration and income redistribution responsibilities. The
Journal of Human Resources, 19(4), 489.

Khoudour-Castéras, D. (2008). Welfare state and labor mobility: the impact of Bismarcks social
legislation on German emigration before World War I. The Journal of Economic History, 68(1), 211­243.

Levine, P. B., and Zimmerman, D. J. (1999). An empirical analysis of the welfare magnet debate using the
NLSY. Journal of Population Economics, 12(3), 391.

Meyer, J.-B. (2003). Diasporas: concepts et pratiques. In R. Barre, V. Hernandez, J.-B. Meyer, & D. Vinck
(Eds.), Diasporas scientifiques/Scientific Diasporas. Expertise collégiale. Expertise collégiale, IRD Editions.

Southwick, L. Jr. (1981). Public welfare programs and recipient migration. Growth and Change, 12(4), 22.
