                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                STICKY CAPITAL CONTROLS

                                      Miguel Acosta-Henao
                                         Laura Alfaro
                                       Andrés Fernández

                                       Working Paper 26997
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26997


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




We benefited from conversations with Javier Bianchi, Emine Boz, Scott Davis, Christian Daude,
Marc Giannoni, José De Gregorio, Nicolas Magud, Karel Mertens, Juan Montecinos, Andrew
Powell, Sangeeta Pratap, Damiano Sandri, Jesse Schreger, and Eric Young. We are thankful for
the comments and suggestions received at workshops held at the International Monetary Fund,
Federal Reserve Board, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Central Bank of Chile, University of
Chile, and RIDGE Workshop-International Macro. Javier Caicedo, Daniel Guzman, Sarah Jeong,
Daniel Ramos, and Johana Torres provided excellent research assistance. Any errors are our own.
The information and opinions presented are entirely those of the author(s), and no endorsement
by the Central Bank of Chile or its board of directors is expressed or implied. Emails: Miguel
Acosta (macosta@gradcenter.cuny.edu), Laura Alfaro (lalfaro@hbs.edu), and Andrés Fernández
(afernandezm@bcentral.cl). The information and opinions presented are entirely those of the
author(s), and no endorsement by the Central Bank of Chile, its board of directors, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research is expressed or implied.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Miguel Acosta-Henao, Laura Alfaro, and Andrés Fernández. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Sticky Capital Controls
Miguel Acosta-Henao, Laura Alfaro, and Andrés Fernández
NBER Working Paper No. 26997
April 2020
JEL No. E44,F38,F41,G01

                                          ABSTRACT

There is much ongoing debate on the merits of capital controls as effective policy instruments.
The differing perspectives are due in part to a lack of empirical studies that look at the intensive
margin of controls, which in turn has prevented a quantitative assessment of optimal capital
control models against the data. We contribute to this debate by addressing both positive and
normative features of capital controls. On the positive side, we build a new dataset using textual
analysis, from which we document a set of stylized facts of capital controls along their intensive
and extensive margins for 21 emerging markets. We document that capital controls are
"sticky"; that is, changes to capital controls do not occur frequently, and when they do, they
remain in place for a long time. Overall, they have not been used systematically across
countries or time, and there has been considerable heterogeneity across countries in terms of
the intensity with which they have been used. On the normative side, we extend a model of
capital controls relying on pecuniary externalities augmented by including an (S; s) cost of
implementing such policies. We illustrate how this friction goes a long way toward bringing
the model closer to the data. When the extended model is calibrated for each of the countries
in the new dataset, we find that the size of these costs is large, thus substantially reducing the
welfare-enhancing effects of capital controls compared with the frictionless Ramsey benchmark.
We conclude with a discussion of the structural interpretations of such costs, which calls for a
richer set of policy constraints when considering the use of capital controls in models of
pecuniary externalities.

Miguel Acosta-Henao                              Andrés Fernández
The Graduate Center                              Research Department
City University of New York                      Central Bank of Chile
365 Fifth Avenue                                 Agustinas 1180
New York, NY 10016                               Santiago
macosta@gradcenter.cuny.edu                      Chile
                                                 afernandezm@bcentral.cl
Laura Alfaro
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 263
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
lalfaro@hbs.edu

A technical appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26997
1       Introduction
        Following the Global Financial Crisis of 2007­2008, a body of research has taken a closer
look at the use of unconventional policy tools--namely, macroprudential instruments--aimed
at curbing potential imbalances that can trigger financial crises and sudden stops in cross-
border capital flows. Capital controls (or capital flow management policies) are arguably
among the instruments that have drawn the most attention.2 The case for capital controls
rests primarily on the volatility of foreign capital inflows. As macroprudential measures,
they are designed to mitigate systemic crises.3 Recent normative analysis of these policies
has argued that their cyclical use can have nontrivial welfare implications by reducing the
probability of financial crises. However, much debate remains on both the positive and
normative aspects of capital controls.
        On the positive side, an element that has prevented shedding new light on the use of
these policy instruments is a lack of cross-country measures of the intensive margin of capital
controls (i.e., rates) over time. Although there has been important progress in documenting
the extensive margin of capital controls (i.e., whether controls are in place or not), no analysis
has yet documented the behavior of the intensive margin of this policy instrument, its cyclical
properties across countries, and its interaction with other instruments in the macroprudential
toolbox. Related to this shortcoming is a disconnect between the normative implications of
models of optimal capital controls and the data. The normative prescriptions of most of these
models rely heavily on the use of controls along the intensive margin. The optimal policy
tends to involve not just the imposition of controls in certain states of nature (extensive
margin) but, more importantly, an active cyclical use of them (intensive margin); hence the
lack of data on the intensive margin has made it difficult to bring models of optimal capital
controls closer to the data.
        Our work makes several contributions to this debate that relate to the aforementioned
    2
      Another set of instruments that has received considerable interest is that aimed at curbing imbalances in
domestic financial systems: LTV ratios, dynamic provisions, countercyclical buffers, etc. (see Jim´   enez et al.
2017; Galati and Moessner 2018; and Lubis et al. (2019), among others). While our work mostly focuses on
capital controls, we complement the relationships between capital controls and these other instruments as
discussed in Section 2.
    3
      In addition, controls can have a protectionist or mercantilist motive related to affecting the value of the
currency (Magud et al. 2018, Alfaro et al. 2017).



                                                       1
shortcomings. First, using textual analysis of official regulations from multilateral and na-
tional sources, we build a novel quarterly dataset on de jure capital controls along their ex-
tensive and, importantly, intensive margins. To our knowledge, this is the first cross-country
panel dataset on the extensive and intensive margins of capital controls. The dataset covers
a panel of 21 well-established emerging market economies (EMEs) for the period 1995­2014.4
       We focus on two types of quantitative capital controls: unremunerated reserve require-
ment (URRs) rates applicable to cross-border flows, and tax rates applicable to cross-border
inflows and outflows. When distinguishing the extensive from the intensive margins, we
differentiate controls of a quantitative nature (as the two that we focus on) from those of a
qualitative nature (e.g., authorizations and other kinds of regulations that do not directly
target market prices or volumes). We label the latter type of measures as non-price-based
capital controls. We further complement the dataset with information on other macropru-
dential instruments from earlier work by Cerutti et al. (2017), as well as that in Federico
et al. (2014), which we also extend.
       We uncover six stylized facts from the new dataset that taken together point to a
large degree of "stickiness" of capital controls. First, the intensive margin of both controls
(taxes and URRs) has not been systematically used either across countries or time. Second,
when they have been used, controls display considerable heterogeneity across countries in
terms of the intensity with which they have been used. Third, changes to capital controls
do not occur frequently, and when they do occur, they remain in place for a long time (i.e.,
longer than a typical business cycle). As a result, these instruments display very high serial
autocorrelation. Fourth, the cyclicality of capital controls differs sharply across instruments,
with URRs having been used countercyclically during episodes of large economic booms, and
taxes on both inflows and outflows having been used in the contractionary phase of the GDP
cycle. Fifth, analysis of the joint dynamics of capital controls and other macroprudential
policies reveals little evidence of complementarity. If anything, they appear to have been
substitutes. Sixth, while extensive measures of capital controls capture more non-price-based
policy measures, they also display a considerable degree of persistence.
   4
      During our period of analysis, most developed nations limited their use of capital controls (see Fern´
                                                                                                           andez
et al. 2016).



                                                       2
        We then turn to a normative analysis. Our starting point--which we label our base-
line model--is a small open economy with collateral constrains of the kind introduced by
Mendoza (2002). Subsequent works have documented extensively how such types of bor-
rowing constraints give rise to pecuniary externalities that in turn are widely viewed as a
benchmark theory for rationalizing the use of capital controls in an dynamic stochastic envi-
ronment, implemented as taxes on cross-border flows (see Mendoza and Smith 2006, Uribe
2006, Lorenzoni 2008, Bianchi 2011, Farhi and Werning 2014, Benigno et al. 2011, Korinek
2018, Bianchi and Mendoza 2018, Schmitt-Groh´
                                            e and Uribe 2017, and Schmitt-Groh´
                                                                              e and
Uribe 2020, among others).5
        The baseline model allows us to build an unregulated economy with no taxes and where
agents do not internalize such externalities, as well as the optimal capital control derived
from the Ramsey planner, who can internalize the pecuniary externality. We argue that
such optimal policy is not designed to account for the stickiness documented in the data but
rather suggests a highly active and cyclical use of these instruments. We then extend this
setup to improve the baseline model along this dimension.
        Of course, there are many reasons why positive and normative implications may differ.6
Our exercise attempts to understand if additional considerations or frictions might be incor-
porated into the benchmark model, albeit in reduced form, to better account for the stylized
facts that we uncover. In particular, we consider the stickiness of controls documented in
the empirical part of our work. We naturally turn to (S, s) costs, which have served as a
quintessential device for economists seeking to generate inaction regions in models where
consumers and firms make decisions, and which have successfully generated stickiness in
variables ranging from prices to investment (Caplin and Leahy, 2010). Our work extends
this concept to a policy variable, namely capital controls.
        We modify the baseline model by introducing a fixed cost (of policymaking) in the
tradition of (S, s) models, whereby policymakers equate their policy instrument to its optimal
value only when the benefit of doing so surpasses its (S, s) cost. Otherwise the (policy) cost
    5
      The setup of pecuniary externalities can also be used to rationalize the use of domestic macroprudential
tools. We do not consider this case. In addition to pecuniary externalities, the use of capital controls can also
be justified in the presence of aggregate demand externalities and terms of trade manipulation (see Rebucci
and Ma 2019 for a literature review).
    6
      In the last section of the paper, we discuss possible explanations.


                                                       3
is large enough to deter policymakers from adjusting the policy instrument, staying in an
inaction region, and inducing stickiness.7
       Our analysis of this extended model begins with a simple illustration of the quantitative
effects of varying levels of (S, s) costs on the equilibrium dynamics in an economy calibrated
as in the aforementioned literature, hence taking no stance on the size of such costs. We doc-
ument that (S, s) costs allow us to bring the model closer to the data along four dimensions
that characterize the stickiness in capital controls. First, the extended model has the ability
to reduce the share of time during which the tax is active, with higher (S, s) costs further
reducing this share--unlike in the baseline case, where controls are counterfactually always
active. Second, the presence of (S, s) costs is shown to reduce the frequency of changes in
capital controls with values that are more aligned to those observed in the data. Third,
(S, s) costs also generate episodes when capital controls are used in a highly non-linear way,
where taxes remain inactive for a long time, then jump to high levels with a considerable
persistence. Hence, such costs can generate the high serial autocorrelation of capital controls
documented in the data, the fourth dimension that characterizes stickiness in these policy
instruments.
       Our work then considers a formal calibration of the (S, s) costs for each of the 21
EMEs in the dataset. The calibration strategy that we follow is country-specific in the
two endowment processes for tradable and non-tradable incomes that constitute the driving
forces of the model, the parameters that govern the strength of the collateral constraint,
and, importantly, the (S, s) cost that generates the stickiness in capital controls. For the
two endowments processes, we build empirical counterparts that we use to parameterize the
two driving forces in the model. For the latter two parameters, we select values such that
the distance between model and data is minimized along two key moments: the frequency
of adjustment in the intensive margin of capital controls--taken from the new dataset--and
the frequency of occurrence of financial crises in each of these countries (taken from Reinhart
2010).
       The average value for (S, s) costs calibrated is large and allows the extended model to
   7
     While the use of (S, s) costs is intuitive, we do consider other types of (convex and concave) costs. In
the Appendix, we document how, when compared with (S, s) costs, such alternative cost specifications do
not help the baseline model in a meaningful way to better replicate the data.


                                                     4
account for the low frequency of changes in capital controls in the data. In the data, controls
are changed 1.4 times for every 20 years; the extended model matches that quite closely by
generating, on average, 1.6 changes for every 20 years simulated. In contrast, the calibrated
baseline model with no (S, s) costs predicts, on average, 13.8 changes in capital controls for
every 20 years. Importantly, other non-targeted moments are also much more in line with
the data, such as the share of time that controls are predicted to be active; the value of the
tax used; the non-mean reversion observed in episodes when controls have been used; and
their serial autocorrelation.
     Calibrated (S, s) costs are also large when we assess their impact on welfare. Using the
Ramsey planner who implements controls at no cost as benchmark, imposing capital controls
bring about welfare gains for agents in the unregulated economy. However, such gains for
agents in a model with (S, s) costs are about 4/5 of those in the unregulated economy. This
implies that the magnitude of (S, s) costs calibrated is large enough to eliminate most--
though not all--of the welfare gains obtained after imposing controls.
     There are several reasons why models of optimal capital controls may be at odds with
the data, and the reduced form specification with which we try to capture several of these
reasons through an (S, s) cost is, at best, a crude approximation for them. We view the
enhanced performance of the modified model as a call for including a richer set of policy
constraints when considering the optimal use of capital controls in the presence of pecuniary
externalities. In the last section of the paper, we discuss some of these potential policy
constraints based on previous studies. We discuss at least three alternative deeper causes for
the (S, s) costs. First, such costs may be capturing a more complex cost-benefit analysis made
by policymakers, incorporating negative effects and/or unintended consequences of capital
controls not picked up by standard models. A second explanation may more generally relate
to political economy considerations driving policymaking, which can also link to credibility
and signaling issues related to the use of these tools that end up shaping policy choices over
these instruments in a highly nonlinear form. Third, model robustness and (perceptions of)
lack of ineffectiveness of capital controls may also play a role in policymakers' cautious use
of these instruments, unless extreme conditions warrant their use.
     This paper relates to several strands of the literature. On the empirical front, seminal


                                              5
empirical works that have measured capital controls and their use include Quinn (1997),
Chinn and Ito (2006), Schindler (2009), Pasricha (2012), Klein (2012), Aizenman and Pas-
richa (2013), Ahmed and Zlate (2014), Eichengreen and Rose (2014), Fern´
                                                                       andez et al.
(2015a), Fern´
             andez et al. (2016), Jahan and Wang (2017), and Pasricha et al. (2018), among
others. Klein (2012) casts doubts the use of episodic controls on capital inflows and con-
cludes that, with a few exceptions, there is little evidence of the efficacy of capital controls.
Glick et al. (2006) find that countries with liberalized capital accounts experience a lower
likelihood of currency crises. Fern´
                                   andez et al. (2015b) do not find evidence of capital controls
implemented as macroprudential tools in the period 1995­2011. We build on these empirical
works and complement them by adding an intensive dimension of capital controls to the
analysis.
      As mentioned above, a growing theoretical macro literature posits pecuniary external-
ities to motivate the use of capital controls. The lack of data on the intensive margin has
precluded evaluating the performance of these models empirically, to which we contribute
in this paper. Our work further complements these theoretical frameworks by adding a
friction--in the form of an (S, s) cost--which is shown to improve the performance of mod-
els relying on these types of externalities. Structural interpretations of the kind of (S, s)
costs that we put forth can be viewed as a call for future theoretical work to include a richer
set of policy constraints when considering the use of capital controls in models of pecuniary
externalities.
      The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the new dataset, while Section 3
documents the stylized facts. Section 4 presents the baseline model of capital controls,
postulates the extension including (S, s) costs, and discusses the solution method used.
Section 5 presents the quantitative analysis by first illustrating the effects of varying (S, s)
costs on the equilibrium dynamics, then calibrating the (S, s) costs for the countries in the
dataset and computing welfare gains. Section 6 discusses possible avenues to rationalize the
(S, s) costs. The last section concludes.




                                               6
2       A New Dataset
        We build a novel cross-country panel dataset of de jure measures on capital controls
with both the extensive margin--when controls are active or not--and also, importantly, the
intensive margin (i.e., the rates at which capital controls are set when they are active). The
frequency of observations is quarterly and covers 21 EMEs over the period 1995­2014. We
complement our data with other macroprudential instruments from alternative data sources.
In this section, we describe the set of controls documented in our dataset, the methodology
used to build it, and its coverage. For further details, we refer the reader to the online
dataset's Technical Appendix.


2.1      Definitions and Instruments

        In a country's balance of payments, international purchases and sales of financial as-
sets are recorded in the financial account. A capital control is a policy designed to limit or
redirect transactions on a country's financial account. In terms of de jure capital controls,
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) distinguishes between market-based and adminis-
trative restrictions. Market-based controls include price-based measures such as taxes on
cross-border capital movements, unremunerated requirements on cross-border flows, and
dual exchange-rate systems. Administrative controls include, for example, required prior
approvals for certain capital account transactions.
        In our analysis, we focus on two de jure price-based measures of capital controls that
capture the intensive margin of these instruments: taxes and unremunerated reserve require-
ments on cross-border flows. In addition to these quantitative measures, we add information
documenting quantitative restrictions and prohibitions as well as qualitative (or non-price-
based) administrative measures.8
    8
     Another way to classify capital controls is according to their direction. Chile, for example, regulated
capital inflows during the 1990s, as did Malaysia in 1994. Controls on capital outflows, in contrast, are
advocated to manage crises as they occur. Thailand imposed controls on capital outflows in 1997 as a
response to the Asian financial crisis, as did Malaysia in 1998. Of course, it is often difficult for policymakers
to separate neatly the effects of controls on inflows and outflows. Restrictions on outflows may deter inflows
as well, since investors are generally less willing to put their money into countries that restrict their exit.
We also explore the direction of flow in the dataset.




                                                        7
2.1.1     Capital Controls: Quantitative and Qualitative Measures


        Quantitative Measures. Within the quantitative measures, we focus on two price-
based capital controls.

   1. Unremunerated reserve requirements (URRs). These are recorded as rates applicable
        to cross-border inflows. They are requirements to constitute a compulsory deposit of
        a non-zero fraction of the intended transaction for a legally mandated period. For this
        measure, we also calculate the tax equivalent cost of the URR as in De Gregorio et al.
        (2000).

   2. Tax rates on cross-border inflows and outflows. These are compulsory contributions
        that are levied on transactions that imply cross-border flows and are payable to the
        national tax authorities. We collect this information across various types of assets,
        including bonds and stocks.9

        For completeness, we include in the analysis restrictions. These measures account for
any limit or restrictions on quantities, maturity or percentages that affect cross-border flows.
We also considerprohibitions when there is an explicit allusion that indicates that a certain
activity was not allowed at all.

Qualitative Measures. We consider two types of qualitative measures or controls. Autho-
rizations are special permits that are required to perform certain flows. We also include an
Others residual category that includes specific cases for each particular country, as detailed
in the Appendix.


2.1.2     Complementing the Data: Macroprudential Measures

        We complement our dataset with macroprudential measures, defined as measures di-
rected to the domestic financial system. We expand on work by Federico et al. (2014) on
reserve requirements to include additional countries needed to complete those in our dataset,
and we include information about reserve requirements on foreign exchange deposits.
   9
      This comes at a cost. Since we do not have the balance of payments data of each asset class, our analysis
is silent about volumes of flows.

                                                      8
       For additional macroprudential measures, we use the dataset in Cerutti et al. (2017)
covering changes across several other macroprudential instruments such as capital buffer
requirements of banks, concentration limits, interbank exposure, and loan-to-value caps.
Note that these are considered macroprudential measures and not capital controls. Section
II of the online dataset's Technical Appendix describes in detail the list of variables studied
with their respective definitions and acronyms.


2.2     Methodology

       In building the dataset, we followed these steps:

   1. Textual analysis. We implemented textual analysis on the IMF's Annual Report on
       Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER). Specifically, for URRs
       (which have two specific sections on the AREAER), we systematically focused on the
       words "unremunerated ", "nonremunerated ", "URR " or "reserve ". For taxes, the words
       we systematically identified were "tax " or "taxable ".

   2. Manual sorting. From the policy measures identified in 1, we cleared any regulation
       that was not specific to capital controls or did not provide a quantitative measure of
       the intensive margin.10

   3. National sources. For each country, we analyze legal documentation on capital con-
       trol regulations (e.g., decrees and any other country-specific economic legislation) to
       confirm, complement, or correct information found in 1. and 2. Whenever we found
       discrepancies across sources, we made a case-by-case analysis. We recorded each of
       those cases in the online dataset's Technical Appendix.

   4. Cross-validation. We cross-validated the data using two previous academic works on
       capital controls (Magud et al. 2018 and Ghosh et al. 2018). Additionally, we consulted
       with each of the central banks of the EMEs considered in our sample for them to
  10
     Trade measures (e.g., tariffs) were a recurrent example of a regulation that was included in 1 but
excluded in 2.




                                                  9
        validate the policy measures recorded in the dataset.1112


2.2.1     Coverage

        We cover 21 conventional emerging market countries. Importantly, these were not cho-
sen by any criteria of ex ante use of capital controls (or other macroprudential instruments).
They are conventional in the sense that they have been classified as emerging economies by
multilateral organizations and rating agencies (IMF, WB, MSCI, JP Morgan) or have been
included in the most recent peer-reviewed studies of EMEs' business cycles (see Caballero
et al. 2019).
        Those countries, grouped by region, are:

    · Latin America (7): Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru.

    · East Asia & Pacific (7): China, India, Indonesia, Republic of Korea, Malaysia,
        Philippines, Thailand.

    · Eastern Europe and Central Asia (5): Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Russia,
        Turkey.

    · Other Regions (2): South Africa, Israel.

        The four-step methodology described above is applied to form an unbalanced panel
dataset with quarterly frequency from 1995 to 2014.13 It begins in 1995, as this is the year
when the IMF´s AREAERs first introduced detailed information about policy measures
on cross-border flows, disaggregated by direction of flows and type of assets, among other
characteristics. To avoid truncation, whenever a policy measure is in place at the beginning
or the end of the dataset, we use national sources to extend the time series coverage so as to
  11
      More than half of the central banks we contacted responded to our inquires. None objected to the
dataset we had found. In a few cases, they complemented it with additional regulations. For Magud et al.
(2018) and Ghosh et al. (2018), we made a systematic comparison and found a nearly perfect overlap of 95%
of the policy measures in our dataset, conditional on the same countries, years, and types of controls.
   12
      Section III in the online dataset's Technical Appendix explains in detail the general rules and criteria
used for each instrument; Section IV shows how we calculated the tax equivalent of URR; Section V shows
the consistency check with other dataset;, and Section VI documents the cases where we found discrepancies
between multilateral and national sources.
   13
      Daily frequency is also partially available on some policy measures. Our analysis, however, is conducted
at the quarterly frequency unless otherwise specified.




                                                     10
document the enactment of the control or its repeal, hence the unbalanced structure of the
dataset.
     There are a total of 1,712 quarterly observations recorded for URRs and 1,680 for taxes
on capital flows across the 21 EMEs during the years covered. From these, 286 observations
(17%) had an active capital control in the form of a URR; 378 (22.5%) had it as a tax
on inflows; and 445 (26.4%) had it in the form of a tax on outflows. The online dataset's
Technical Appendix presents further descriptive statistics on the coverage of the dataset
(Section VI of this Appendix presents details regarding each country).



3    Stylized Facts
     In this section, we document six stylized facts on the properties of the intensive margin
of capital controls from the new dataset: (1) use of these instruments across countries and
time; (2) intensity with which they have been used; (3) frequency of adjustment ; (4) cyclical-
ity with other macro variables; (5) complementarity with other macroprudential instruments;
and (6) consistency with measures of the extensive margin of capital controls.


Fact 1. The use of (price-based) capital controls has not been systematic across countries
or time

     The top panel of Figure 1 shows, for each instrument (horizontal axis), the share of
countries that have used the two price-based capital controls in our dataset; that is, rates
have been strictly positive (vertical axis). Out of the 21 EMEs considered in the dataset,
only six countries (29%) used URRs or taxes on inflows at some point during the period
covered, while ten (48%) used controls on outflows.
     The bottom panel of Figure 1 shows the cross-country average share of time during
which each instrument was active. Their use has been limited to a small fraction of the
period covered by the dataset: taxes on inflows (outflows) were above zero in less than 20%
(25%) of the quarterly time series of the dataset, and URRs in less than 10%.
     Additional results in the Appendix contrast these findings with the use of other macro-
prudential instruments such as reserve requirements in domestic and foreign currency de-


                                              11
posits. More than 90% of the countries have imposed reserve requirements on accounts in
domestic currency, 80% on accounts in foreign currency, and have been used 75% and 95%
of the time, respectively. Marginal reserve requirements are much less pervasive, being used
by 13% of the countries and less than 5% of the time.

                                  Figure 1: Use of Capital Controls




Notes: In Panel A, the bars depict the share of countries that have used capital controls (i.e. value of the
instrument is not 0), at least during one quarter of our sample. In panel B, the bars depict the share of
periods in which an instrument was used. The sample was taken from 1995q1 to 2014q4; the maximum total
of quarters is 80 (100%).




                                                    12
Fact 2.     The intensity with which price-based capital controls have been used displays
considerable heterogeneity across countries

       The top two panels in Figure 2 document the mean intensities of URRs and their tax
equivalent for each country in the sample. Countries with no bars are those for which no use
of capital controls was found along the intensive margin. The bottom two panels document
the same information for taxes on inflows and taxes on outflows, respectively. Among the
countries that did implement capital controls, there is considerable dispersion of the intensity
with which capital controls were used. While URRs have ranged between 10% and 43%, with
an equivalent tax rate between 0.2% to 8%, taxes on inflows have ranged between 0.3% and
20% and those on outflows have been used across more countries and more intensively, with
the average tax variation ranging from 0.3% to 55%.
       Other macroprudential tools, documented in the Appendix, have been employed more
homogeneously across countries. For instance, reserve requirements in domestic and foreign
currency deposits display variations between 5%-10% and 4%-10%, respectively.


Fact 3. Changes to capital controls occur infrequently; and when they do, they remain in
place for long

       Figure 3 presents the frequency of changes across the three instruments of capital
controls in the dataset (URRs and taxes on capital inflows and outflows).14 For the three
instruments, the bulk of the distribution is skewed toward the origin, implying that changes
to capital controls occur infrequently, if at all. Conditional on their use, the average number
of changes to capital controls (in the quarterly frequency) is small: between 4 for URRs, and
6 (4) for taxes on inflows (outflows) during the 20 years covered by our dataset.
       Other macroprudential tools exhibit larger frequency of changes than capital control
instruments. For instance, reserve requirements in domestic and foreign currency deposits
display frequency of changes up to 37 times. We preserve the scale of number of changes
that considers such macroprudential tools in the horizontal axis of Figure 3.
       Figure 4 further documents the time series behavior of capital controls in episodes when
  14
    A change here is simply any instance when the value recorded for an instrument changes from one
quarter to the next.


                                                13
                       Figure 2: The Intensive Margin of Capital Controls




Notes: Each panel corresponds to a different instrument (URR, URR-Tax Equivalent, Taxes on Inflows, and
Taxes on Outflows). The bars represent the value of the instrument in each country. Only the periods in which
the instrument was active were considered. Countries with no bars are those for which the corresponding
instrument was never used in the period considered.


these instruments have been forcefully used, which we define as cases when they display
an increase of more than 10% from one quarter to the next, or when they are activated.
The figure presents the simple averages across all episodes, denoting time index "t" as the
moment this condition is met in each episode. The first panel shows the behavior of the three
instruments at a yearly frequency, while the second panel shows it at an quarterly frequency.
The evidence points to a large degree of persistence following these large movements in
capital controls: episodes identified in taxes on inflows (outflows) display large increases, on


                                                     14
average from 1% to 3% (0% to 25%); and 12 quarters later, they continue to exhibit values
above 2.5% (20%). In fact, the annual frequency plot shows that, on average, these measures
remain high after 7 to 8 years following the episode identified. As a result, capital controls
display very high serial autocorrelation, as documented in Figure 5.15

                       Figure 3: Frequency of Changes in Capital Controls




Notes: A change occurs when the value of an instrument in t was different than in t - 1. The countries that
at the beginning of the sample, 1995-Q1, had the instrument turned on and did not make any changes until
the end of the 2014-Q4 sample are coded in red. The countries that did not use the instrument at any time
in the sample are shown in blue.

  15
     In the Appendix, we document how the results in terms of the persistence of changes in capital controls
are robust across different exchange rate regimes.

                                                    15
                               Figure 4: Episodes of Capital Controls




Notes: The beginning of an episode was defined when for a given policy instrument at period t, xt , we have
that: xt > 1.1xt-1 . Then the values of each episode were averaged from t - 2 to t + 10. The first row
shows episodes of activation in the controls at a yearly frequency, and the second row shows such episodes
at a quarterly frequency. There are six episodes for URRs, five for taxes on inflows, and eight for taxes on
outflows.


Fact 4. The cyclicality of capital controls differs sharply across instrument

      Figure 6 documents the (demeaned) average deviation of GDP growth (right axis)
around the episodes of capital controls presented in Figure 4. While URRs have been used
countercyclically during episodes of large economic booms, taxes on both inflows and outflows




                                                    16
                         Figure 5: Serial Correlation of Capital Controls




Notes: The solid line represents the yearly cross-country mean autocorrelation of order t - j of taxes on
inflows. The dashed line represents the same variables on taxes on outflows. The dotted line corresponds to
URRs.


have been implemented in the contractionary phase of the GDP cycle.16


Fact 5. Complementarity in the use of capital controls and other macroprudential tools
has been negligible; if anything, the two type of instruments tend to be substitutes

       Figure 7 compares the evolution of domestic macroprudential instruments (right axis)
around the same episodes of capital controls in Figure 4 (left axis). The index of macropru-
  16
     The Appendix extends the results with the current account and real exchange rates instead of the GDP
cycle.


                                                    17
                 Figure 6: Episodes of Capital Controls and the Business Cycle




Notes: Each plot shows the episodes described in Figure 4 along with the cross-country mean deviation from
the average GDP growth.


dential instruments that we use comes from Cerutti et al. (2017).17 As can be seen, capital
controls do not move in tandem with the other macroprudential instruments, implying no
complementarity between the two types of instruments. In fact, as the intensity in capital
controls falls, the use of macroprudential instruments intensifies, signaling that, if anything,
the two have been substitutes.18
   17
      The index covers the changes across several macroprudential instruments: capital buffer requirements
of banks lending mortgages and others types of loans; concentration limits; interbank exposure; loan-to-value
caps; and reserve requirements in foreign and domestic currency.
   18
      Indeed, the correlation between macroprudential indices and our measures of capital controls is relatively
low: -0.05 for URRs; 0.03 for controls on inflows; and 0.45 for controls on outflows.



                                                      18
      More formal evidence is gathered in the Appendix, where we break down the cyclicality
in macroprudential tools between those countries that have used capital controls and those
that have not (identified in Fact 2). The evidence indicates that the cyclicality of macropru-
dential instruments has been stronger in the latter group of countries relative to that in the
former group, reinforcing the substitutability between the two types of instruments.


 Fact 6. Extensive measures of capital controls, which capture more non-price policy
measures relative to price-based ones, display a considerable degree of stickiness

      We now explore the overlap between the intensive margin captured in the new dataset
and standing measures of the extensive margin. For that purpose, we employed the dataset
in Fern´
       andez et al. (2016), which measures the evolution of the extensive margin for several
countries along a much wider array of assets, and reclassified all policy measures accounted
in their dataset in terms of price-based, akin to those in our dataset, and non-priced-based,
such as authorization requirements and other bureaucratic measures that do not directly
affect the relative cost of cross-border flows.
      Table 1 summarizes the results. It documents that priced-based measures, including
URR and taxes (and prohibitions, which implicitly is a tax of 100%) represent on average
less than half (36%) of all instruments. Regarding the remaining 64% of measures that are
non-price-based, a little less than half of those (28%) are authorization requirements and
the rest are classified as other bureaucratic red tape that hinders the cross-border flow of
capital.

                  Table 1: Price-Based and Non-Price-Based Capital Controls

                               Price-Based                          Non-Price-Based
                   URRs - Taxes - Quant Prohibitions             Authorizations Others
           Avg            27.7 %           8.3 %                    28.4 %      35.6 %

Notes: The table shows the cross-country average of the share of the use of each instrument over the total.
The first two columns of instruments correspond to price-based capital controls, and the last two to non-
price-based capital controls.


      A natural question is thus whether the previous stylized facts documented on the
intensive margin are robust to a broader set of regulations captured in the extensive margin


                                                    19
      Figure 7: Episodes of Capital Controls & Broader Macro Prudential Instruments




Notes: The beginning of an episode (episodes are depicted by red lines) was defined when when for a given
policy instrument at quarter t, xt , we have that xt > 1.1xt-1 . The values of each episode were then averaged
from t - 2 to t + 10. The sample of episodes was restricted from 2000q1 to 2014q4 to match the time periods
in the data of Cerutti et al. (2017). Deviations were plotted against the average of the accumulated Index of
Macroprudential Instruments from the database of Cerutti et al. (2017). This index (purple line) includes
the nine instruments on that database.


of capital controls, most of which account for non-price-based measures. Figure 8 reproduces
the methodology in Figure 4 by identifying episodes of large increases in the indices of inflow


                                                     20
and outflow controls in Fern´
                            andez et al. (2016) and reporting the average time series dynamics
around them. Since now we are analyzing the extensive margin, the vertical axis is not a
rate, as in Figure 4, but rather a scale that goes from 0 (when no controls exist in either of
the asset categories) and 1 (where controls exist in all categories). Results are quite robust.
Indeed, neither of the two indices displays any mean reversion, and the level of controls is
still higher several years after the initial increase in year "t."

                Figure 8: Episodes of Capital Controls: The Extensive Margin




Notes: Here we use the data for the extensive margin of capital controls in Fernandez et al. (2016). The
beginning of an episode was defined when for a given policy instrument at year t, xt , we have that: xt >
(1 + stdev (xt-1 )). The values of each episode were then averaged from t - 2 to t + 10.


      Taken together, the stylized facts presented in this section point to a large degree of
"stickiness" in capital controls, which materializes in countries not relying on these tools
systematically along the business cycle. When countries have relied on these instruments,
we observe that such policy tools have displayed little mean reversion and, hence, high
persistence over time. This is consistent with broader definitions of capital controls that
include more qualitative/administrative controls in measures of the extensive margin of these
policy tools. Lastly, such stickiness also appears to manifest in these tools being substitutes


                                                   21
with alternative macroprudential measures. It is thus pertinent to explore whether current
state-of-the-art models of optimal capital controls can account for this stickiness, which we
undertake in the next section.



4       Models of Capital Controls

4.1      Baseline Model

        In this section, we present our baseline model of optimal capital controls. Our starting
point is a small open economy with collateral constraints posited in Mendoza (2002), which
gives rise to pecuniary externalities that, in turn, are widely viewed as a benchmark theory
for rationalizing the use of capital controls. Our setup is cast in an infinite dynamic stochastic
environment as in Mendoza and Smith (2006), Uribe (2006), Bianchi (2011), Benigno et al.
(2011), Korinek (2018), Bianchi and Mendoza (2018), Schmitt-Groh´
                                                                e and Uribe (2017), and
Schmitt-Groh´
            e and Uribe (2020), among others.
        We briefly present the unregulated economy case, the Ramsey problem and the optimal
capital control derived from it. We further describe that this optimal policy is not designed
to account for the stickiness documented in the data. The next section presents an extension
to this setup, which improves the baseline model along this dimension.


4.1.1     The Unregulated Economy

        The economy has a continuum of identical, infinitely lived households of mass one, with
time-separable preferences of the form:

                                                 
                                            E0          t U (ct )                              (1)
                                                 t=0
                                                                        -
                                                                     c1   -1
        The utility function has a standard CRRA form: U (ct ) =      t
                                                                       1-
                                                                             ,   where  > 0 is the
constant risk aversion parameter,   (0, 1) denotes the subjective discount factor, and E0
is the expectations operator at period t = 0.
        Each period's aggregate consumption, ct , is a composite of tradable (cT
                                                                               t ) and non-

tradable goods (cN            T    N
                 t ): ct = A(ct , ct ), t  [0, ). The aggregator follows an Armington-type


                                                 22
                            T 1-1/               1-1/ 1/(1-1/ )
CES form: A(cT    N
             t , ct ) = [a(ct )    + (1 - a)(cN
                                              t )    ]          , where parameters a and  are,
respectively, the weight of tradables in the CES aggregator and the intratemporal elasticity
of substitution between tradable and non-tradable goods.
       Households have access to a one-period, internationally traded bond, denominated in
terms of tradable goods. The return of these bonds between periods t and t + 1 is the
exogenous risk-free rate rt . The households' sequential budget constraint is:

                                                                      dt+1
                                 cT       N         T       N
                                  t + pt ct + dt = yt + pt yt +                                           (2)
                                                                     1 + rt
where dt+1 represents the amount of debt incurred in period t and due in period t + 1 and
                                                                            T      N
pt is the relative price of non-tradables in terms of tradables. Variables yt and yt represent
the exogenous endowments processes for tradable and non-tradable goods, respectively, and
are the only source of uncertainty. Notice that debt is equivalent to negative holdings of the
aforementioned internationally traded bond.
       The (flow) collateral constraint is given by:


                                                  T       N
                                          dt+1  (yt + pt yt )                                             (3)

       with  > 0 being the fraction of income that can be pledged as collateral, which
determines the upper bound of debt that households can take on during the current period
and (completely) pay in the next one. This constraint is the key to the pecuniary externality:
Due to the atomistic nature of households, they take pt as given, although it is endogenously
determined in equilibrium. In other words, households do not internalize that their collective
absorption of tradables may increase the value of collateral through increases in the relative
price of non-tradables. This leads households to borrow more than they would have had
they internalized this externality. The literature refers to this as overborrowing.19
                                                                  
       Households choose a set of processes {cT    N
                                              t , ct , ct , dt+1 }t=0 to maximize (1) subject to (2)
  19
     Schmitt-Groh´    e and Uribe (2020) show that, under certain parametrizations, multiple equilibrium could
lead to self-fulfilling financial crisis and underborrowing. As we will explain in the Calibration section, we
abstract from this scenario by following to a large extent the calibration in Bianchi (2011), which does not
exhibit underborrowing. We leave for future research the study of the interaction between (S, s) costs in this
work with the possibility of underborrowing-type dynamics.




                                                     23
and (3) given the initial debt position d0 20 .


4.1.2     The Ramsey Planner

        The Ramsey planner internalizes the effects that households' decisions have over the
relative price, pt . Thus, by replacing pt from the first-order conditions of the unregulated
economy (see Appendix), the recursive planner's problem in this economy is to choose cT
and d such that21 :


                       v (y T , r, d) = max{U (A(cT    N             T
                                                  t , ct )) + E [v (y , r , d) ]}                     (4)

        Subject to:

                                                           d
                                        cT + d = y T +                                                (5)
                                                          1+r

                                                  1 - a cT 1/ N
                                   d   yT +            ( ) y                                          (6)
                                                    a yN
        Since the planner internalizes the effect that current borrowing has over the collateral
constraint in future periods, she borrows on average less than the household, leading to a
lower frequency of financial crises--defined here as episodes where the constraint binds--and
higher welfare. As an application of the second welfare theorem, there exists a capital control
tax (i.e., a tax on debt) that makes households as well off as those living under the Ramsey
planner, to which we turn next.


4.1.3     Optimal Capital Control Tax

        With the introduction of a capital control tax,  , the new budget constraints on house-
holds and the government become, in recursive format, respectively:

                                                  d
                                                     =l                                               (7)
                                                 1+r
  20
     The Appendix contains a full derivation of the equilibrium in this economy.
  21
     Henceforth, we use a recursive notation where prime variables denote the next period and the rest the
current period.




                                                   24
and
                                                                      d
                           cT + pcN + d = y T + py N + (1 -  )           + l,                           (8)
                                                                     1+r
where l is a lump-sum transfer from the government to the household.
       Combining the equilibrium conditions of the unregulated and Ramsey economies yields
the optimal capital control tax:

                                                       Et  R
                                      = 1 -                        ,                                    (9)
                                                 Et  R (1 - µ R  )
where µR is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the collateral constraint and  =
            T
 1-   ( )1/ -1 .22
    a1 c
  a  yN

       The optimal tax depicted in Equation 9 provides important insights as to the use of this
instrument within this setup. As can be seen, as long as the probability of a crisis is not zero,
the optimal policy will call for a capital control. Moreover, any change in the probability, be
it small or large, will trigger a change in the intensity with which this instrument is deployed,
implying that controls will actively be called upon along the business cycle. We therefore
conjecture that the baseline model is not designed to properly account for the stickiness in
the data documented above--which we will verify in the quantitative analysis below. This
disconnect between the baseline model and the stylized facts regarding the dynamic behavior
of capital controls suggests that a friction is needed in the ability with which this instrument
is employed. We next postulate an extension to the baseline model that incorporates such a
friction.


4.2     Extended Model with (S, s) Costs

       This section extends the baseline setup by introducing a friction that, we conjecture,
has the ability to bring the model closer to the data. The friction that we postulate is a cost
of imposing and further adjusting capital controls along the intensive margin. This cost has
an (S, s) structure, which has the ability to induce an inaction region that resembles that
observed in the data.
  22
     In the Appendix, we provide the first-order conditions in the Ramsey economy, as well as the derivation
of the optimal capital control's tax.



                                                    25
        There is a long tradition in economics using (S, s)-type costs to explain inertia in
durable goods consumption, investment, money demand and, perhaps most notably, in pro-
viding a rationale for price stickiness (Caplin and Leahy, 2010). We therefore borrow this
rationalization of stickiness in economic decision-making and extend it to the choice of im-
posing capital controls, hence the title of our work.
        In general terms, with an (S, s)-type framework, agents remain in an inaction region
until their losses generated by this choice surpass a particular threshold, which then triggers
an adjustment to a latent optimal value for their state. The environment that we postulate
is similar but adapted to the Ramsey planner, who internalizes a (reduced-form) cost in
terms of utility when capital controls are adjusted. The planner is thus confronted at every
moment with the choice between setting the level of capital controls to their optimal level
and hence paying the cost, or not adjusting the instrument and not incurring such cost.
        In the next section, we explore the validity of our conjecture that this friction can help
the model get closer to the data by calibrating the model, including the size of the (S, s)
cost, and assess the quantitative performance of the extended model.
        While reduced form, we believe the (S, s) cost structure captures deeper trade-offs that
policymakers face when confronted by the choice of using capital controls that are absent in
the baseline model. In the final section, we discuss possible deeper causes that could give
rise to such costs and relate them to the literature.23


4.2.1     Setup

        The inclusion of an (S, s) cost into the Ramsey planner problem implies that she now
has to chose between two value functions, one associated with adjusting the value of the
capital control tax and the other associated with not adjusting it. Formally, the recursive
formulation of the planner´s problem in this environment becomes:
  23
     It is natural to ask how other cost structures different from the (S, s) form would perform. We explore
this possibility in the Appendix by assuming that, instead of an (S, s) structure, there is a continuous convex
or concave cost of adjustment C (t ) paid by the government in terms of tradable goods. Neither of the two
costs features the highly non-linear feature of the (S, s) structure. Our main takeaway from this exercise is
that hardly any other type of reduced-form cost structure different than an (S, s) setup is able to provide a
rationale that explains the observed stickiness in capital controls.




                                                      26
                      V (y T , r, d,  ) = M ax(V A (y T , r, d,  ), V N A (y T , r, d,  ))            (10)

      subject to:

                                                              d
                                          cT + d = y T +         ,                                    (11)
                                                             1+r

                                                    1 - a cT 1/ N
                                   d   yT +              ( ) y ,                                      (12)
                                                      a yN
where we define V A as the value of adjusting the capital control tax from its initial value to
the one that is optimal in the absence of (S, s) costs,   . This adjustment carries out a fixed
(utility) cost K :


  V A (y T , r, d,  ) = [U (cT (  )) - K ] + E [M ax(V A (y T , r , d ,  ), V N A (y T , r , d ,  ))], (13)


and V N A captures the value of not adjusting the instrument and hence not incurring the
cost K :


      V N A (y T , r, d,  ) = U (cT ( )) + E [M ax(V A (y T , r , d ,  ), V N A (y T , r , d ,  ))]   (14)


      Note that, under this new environment, the previous period's capital control tax
becomes a state variable. An inaction region for this instrument exists for states when
V N A > V A , therefore giving the model a better chance to account for the stickiness observed
in the empirical counterparts of capital controls.
      Note also that the extended model encompasses, as two extreme cases, the unregulated
economy and the Ramsey planner cases described in the previous section. On one hand, the
case when K = 0 is equivalent to the Ramsey planner's world in the baseline model and
yields the largest gains in terms of welfare. On the other hand, Equation 13 implies that there
exists a sufficiently large K such that the planner never adjusts  . This case is equivalent
to the decentralized economy in the baseline model and yields the lowest possible welfare.
As a result, welfare in the extended model is bounded between the decentralized case in the
baseline model and the Ramsey planner without (S, s) costs.

                                                      27
4.2.2     Solution

        The lack of a closed-form solution in both baseline and extended models requires us
to solve the models using global methods in order to conduct a quantitative analysis of
them. In the unregulated economy of the baseline model, we use policy function iteration
procedures; in the Ramsey planner version, since there is no pecuniary externality, we use
standard value function iteration procedures. These methods allow us to derive numerically
the policy functions that map states--the two endowment processes and debt--into decision
variables with which we later conduct simulations in the quantitative analysis presented in
the next section.
        The solution method of the (S, s) model first requires us to solve for the baseline
Ramsey economy to obtain the policy functions of the control variables, including   . Then,
given the stochastic process of endowments, we simulate 1 million periods and obtain t
                                                                                T    N
for each period t (recall that each period corresponds to a state of the pair {yt , yt } and
dt ). Using the same simulated endowments, we simulate the decentralized (but regulated)
economy for all of the (1 million) values of t obtained in the previous step. By doing this,
we obtain all possible combinations of policy functions, given a simulated process for the
endowments, for each state of the economy and for each different   and its correspondent
indirect utility at each period. This process facilitates the solution of the Ramsey planner
problem with (S, s) costs. Once this is done, in the (S, s) model we need to keep track of
the state (t-1 ) and, without loss of generality, assume that the initial value of the tax is 0
(0 = 0). Then for each period in the simulation, given a calibrated value of K , we obtain VtA
and VtN A . In case the former is greater than the latter, we set t = t , otherwise t = t-1 .



5       Quantitative Analysis
        In this section, we run a quantitative analysis of the extended model presented above.
We begin with a simple illustration of the effects that varying levels of (S, s) costs have
on the equilibrium dynamics of the extended model using a standard calibration from the
literature. Next we undertake a formal, more comprehensive exercise where we calibrate the
extended model for each of the 21 EMEs in the dataset and asses the performance of the

                                               28
model in matching the stylized facts from Section 3.


5.1      Illustrating the Effects of (S, s) Costs

        To illustrate the effects of varying levels of (S, s) costs in the extended model, we use the
same parameters as in Bianchi (2011) and Schmitt-Groh´
                                                     e and Uribe (2017) and document
the results with alternative values for K .24 When assessing the results, we pay particular
attention to the dimensions directly linked to the stickiness in capital controls uncovered in
the stylized facts in Section 3.
        Employing the policy functions obtained in the solution of the models, we simulate
them for 1 million periods (years in the calibration) and report the results of the simulation
in Figure 9.25 The upper left panel shows the average share of time during which the optimal
tax is greater than zero. The first bar (light blue) corresponds to the Ramsey economy in the
baseline model (K = 0); the last bar (yellow) corresponds to the average share of time with
activated taxes on inflows and outflows in the data (Figure 1). The bars in between (dark
blue) show the results in the extended model for arbitrarily different values of K , which are
reported on the horizontal axis. While the baseline model implies that capital controls ought
to be active in every period, even relatively small values of (S, s) costs give the extended
model the ability to reduce the share of time in which the tax is active, with higher (S, s)
costs further reducing this share, bringing it more in line with the data.
        The upper right plot in Figure 9 documents the effects of K over the average frequency
of changes in the tax for every (nonconsecutive) 20 years in the simulation, the same duration
we observe in the data. While the baseline model predicts a very active use of the policy
instrument (i.e., 20 changes in each of the 20 years), thereby validating our earlier conjecture
that the baseline model would fail in generating stickiness in capital controls, the extended
model features a much lower frequency of changes, ranging from 6 to 1, as the (S, s) costs
increase, which is more in line with the empirical moment documented earlier. In other
words, (S, s) costs go a long way toward giving the model the chance to reproduce the
   24
     In particular we use these values:  = 2;  = 0.91; r = 4%;  = 0.83; and a = 0.31.
   25
     More precisely, conditional on an initial debt level and simulated series for the two endowment processes,
we use the policy functions obtained in the solution to derive time series for the choice variables in the model
(consumption, next-period debt) for the range of years considered in the simulation.


                                                      29
             Figure 9: (S, s) Costs in Capital Controls: A Quantitative Illustration




Notes: The figure shows the effects of higher (S, s) costs over the relevant moments regarding stickiness
in capital controls. The first two figures in the upper row show in the blue bars for different values of K ,
respectively, the share of time with a positive capital control tax (left figure) and the number of changes in
it (right figure). The yellow bars correspond to the cross-country average between the tax on inflows and the
tax on outflows. The two figures in the lower row show for different values of K , respectively, the episodes of
activation in the controls (left figure) and their serial autocorrelation (right figure). The red lines correspond
to the cross-country averages for the mean between taxes on inflows and outflows.


stickiness in the data of capital controls.
      The lower left panel reproduces episodes of a forceful use of capital controls in the
simulated data, akin to those found in the dataset and presented in Figure 4. The results
of the simulation document a strong non-linearity in the behavior of capital controls in the


                                                       30
(S, s) model as K increases. For values of K lower than a certain threshold, episodes of
activation of this tool resemble those in the data: the tax begins the episode at 0% (or
close to that value) and forcefully increases above 10%. However, for values of K above
that threshold, (S, s) costs are so high that capital controls do not activate, which is also
reminiscent of the stylized facts presented above in that capital controls have not been used
by several of the countries considered.
        Lastly, the lower right panel documents the effects of varying levels of (S, s) costs on
the serial autocorrelation of capital controls of one and two years. It illustrates how higher
levels of K help increase the autocorrelations of the tax, bringing the simulated moments
closer to the high values in the data.


5.2       Calibration

        While the results in the previous section are useful for illustrating the quantitative
effects of alternative (S, s) costs, a more formal calibration of these costs is needed in order
to assess their empirical relevance. We now undertake this task by calibrating the extended
model to each of the 21 EMEs in the dataset.
        Our calibration strategy is summarized in Table 2. It involves fixing a subset of the
parameters equally across countries and then having a country-specific calibration for the
remaining subset. When setting the first subset of parameters equally across countries, we
follow the literature once more: (1) the inverse of the elasticity of substitution ( ) is set
equal to 2; (2) the discount factor ( ) is set to 0.91; (3) the annual real interest rate (r) is
set to 4%; (4) the intratemporal elasticity of substitution ( ) is calibrated to 0.83; and (5)
the share of tradables in the CES aggregator (a) is set at 0.31.
        The second subset of parameters that we calibrate on a country-by-country basis com-
prises the two endowment processes for tradable and non-tradable income {y T ; y N } that
constitute the driving forces of the model and the parameters that govern the strength of the
collateral constraint () and the stickiness in capital controls (K ). Regarding {y T ; y N }, we
build tradable and non-tradable time series for each country from World Development Indi-
cators.26 As Schmitt-Groh´
                         e and Uribe (2017), we estimate a 2-variable vector autoregression
  26
                               e and Uribe (2017) and defined y T as the sum of manufacturing and agricul-
       We followed Schmitt-Groh´

                                                    31
                                    Table 2: Baseline Calibration

      Parameter                         Value                       Description
 Mean  Baseline Model                   0.3131          Parameter of collateral constraint
 Mean K Baseline Model                     0                 S-s cost of policymaking
  Mean  (S, s) Model                    0.3257          Parameter of collateral constraint
  Mean K (S, s) Model                   0.0102               S-s cost of policymaking
                                           2         Inverse of intertemporal elast. of subst.
                                         0.91               Subjective discount factor
          r                              0.04                  Annual interest rate
                                         0.83             Intratemporal elast. of subst.
          a                              0.31        Weight on tradables in CES aggregator
                                                     Targeted Moments
                                 Frequency of Crisis         Number of Changes in 
           Data                         18.8                             1.4
  Baseline Model (Mean)                18.36                           13.88
   (S, s) Model (Mean)                 19.62                            1.64

Notes: The second and third rows in the upper panel of the table show, respectively, the cross-country mean
values of  and K calibrated in the baseline model (the latter is zero by definition). The third and fourth
rows show, respectively, the same two cross-country mean parameters calibrated in the (S, s) model. The
lower panel of the table shows in the row for Data the two targeted moments used to calibrated  and K in
the (S, s) model. The last two rows show the cross-country means for two two moments generated by both
the baseline model and the (S, s) model.


for both variables, and discretize the process into a 4-state Markov chain.
      Our calibration strategy for  and K selects values for these two parameters such that
the distance between model and data along two key moments is minimized: the frequency
of adjustment in the intensive margin of capital controls from the new dataset, and the
frequency of occurrence of financial crises. The rationale for this strategy is as follows.
On the one hand, as we illustrated in the previous section, the frequency of changes in
capital controls can be informative about the extent to which (S, s) costs (K ) are relevant.
This is akin to the way in which the literature on price stickiness has pinned down the
strength of menu costs (a form of (S, s) costs) by using the frequency of price adjustments
in the data (Golosov and Lucas 2007; Midrigan 2010). On the other hand, the frequency
of financial crises in the data can provide information regarding . Indeed, higher values of
this parameter will imply, ceteris paribus, a less restrictive collateral constraint and therefore
fewer states where the constraint binds (a financial crisis in the model). For instance, Bianchi
ture, while y N was the residual from subtracting y T from total GDP.


                                                    32
(2011) pinned down  in his calibrated model for Argentina in order to match the frequency
of crises in this country.27
        Figure 10 further validates our calibration strategy for these two parameters. The
panels document how, in the model, both  and K relate to the frequency of crisis, defined
as the share of time that the constraint binds in our simulations. Other things being equal,
a higher  yields a lower frequency of crisis (upper left panel). Likewise, lower values of K
yield a lower share of years in crisis as capital controls can be deployed with more flexibility,
thereby allowing the economy to be more insulated against crises (lower left panel). This
warrants our choice of the two moments to jointly pin down both parameters.
        The upper right panel in Figure 10 presents the relationship between our estimates
of intensity in capital controls from the new dataset and the empirical estimates for the
incidence of financial crises that we use in our calibration, taken from Reinhart (2010).
While this work provides estimates for the incidence of a variety of crises on a panel of
countries, we focus on their measure of currency crisis (i.e., large depreciations), which we
believe is closest to the kind of financial crises in the extended model, since episodes when the
financial constraint binds are accompanied by large movements in the relative price of non-
tradables. There are two things worth noting in the scatter plot. First, there is a negative
and statistically significant correlation between the intensity of controls and the incidence
of crises. Second, and perhaps more important for the relevance of (S, s) costs, virtually
all countries that did not make use of the intensive margin of capital controls (i.e., those
on top of the vertical axis of the plot) still exhibit a relatively high incidence of currency
crises. It is therefore plausible to argue that, for those countries, an additional friction may
have been present that prevented them from using capital controls despite the occurrence of
crises, which would be captured in our (S, s) cost.28
   27
      Schmitt-Groh´e and Uribe (2020) make a case for multiple equilibrium in this class of models, where
instead of overborrowing, the decentralized economy could display underborrowing (i.e., the central planner
borrows more than private agents). Specifically, for d = d0 = d  ~, they show that there is multiple equilibrium
                               ~  ~       1-a   1 1 T       d~     ~)1/ -1 > 1. This condition is not met in the
with underborrowing when S (d; d)  ( a ) 1+r  (y + 1+r - d
calibration of any of our countries.
   28
      Out of the 21 EMEs in our dataset, there are three that are three exceptions to this claim. Two of
them--Israel and the Czech Republic, which are included in our dataset--are not in the scatter plot as
Reinhart (2010) does not provide data of the incidence of crises in these two countries. The third, China, is
the only country that does not have a financial crisis, while no use of the intensive margin of capital controls
was recorded in our dataset (i.e, it is the only point in the origin of the scatter plot). This can be explained


                                                      33
                                  Figure 10: Calibrating (S, s) Costs




Notes: The upper left figure shows how a higher  in the collateral constraint leads to, other things being
equal, lower frequency of crisis (measured as share of years in crisis on the vertical axis). The upper right
figure shows the mean capital control taxes on inflows and outflows (horizontal axis) for each country in
our sample, compared to the number of currency crises during the period 1995­2010 taken from Reinhart
(2010). The last figure shows how a higher (S, s) cost of policy-making K leads to, other things equal, higher
frequency of crisis (measured as share of years in crisis on the vertical axis).


      Table 2 presents the average values for K and  across the 21 EMEs in the dataset,
as well as the performance of the extended model along the two targeted moments. The
Appendix contains the country-by-country results. The table also presents the results of
calibrating the baseline model with no (S, s) costs and its performance along the same two
moments. In the latter case, the mean value of  is 0.31 and the frequency of crisis is 18.4%,
by recalling that, as documented in Section 3, a large fraction of the regulations on capital controls in China
are non-price-based, as was further documented in Fern´   andez et al. (2016).


                                                      34
similar to the empirical counterpart of 18.8%. However, the baseline model predicts a very
active use of capital controls by implying that such instruments change, on average, 13.8
times for every 20 years simulated. This is at odds with the data by an order of magnitude
where, on average, controls are only changed 1.4 times for every 20 years. In contrast, in the
extended model, the average  is 0.33 and the mean value of (S, s) costs (K ) is 0.01. This
delivers a much better fit in terms of the number of changes in capital controls delivered
by the model (1.6 times every 20 years) without a cost in terms of the performance of the
model when accounting for the frequency of crisis (19.6%).


5.3     Results

       We assess the performance of the extended model in matching more dimensions in the
data that were not directly targeted in the calibration and that relate to the aforementioned
stickiness of capital controls. For comparison, we also present the results of the baseline
model.29
       Figure 11 summarizes the results of the various comparisons. Results are averages
across the models calibrated for each of the countries in the dataset (the Appendix contains
country-by-country results). The panel in the upper left corner documents the share of
time that controls are predicted to be active (strictly positive) by each model. It shows
how the presence of (S, s) costs brings the model closer to the data: while the baseline
model continues to assume a very active use of controls, being active at every period in the
simulation, the extended model predicts controls to be active only above 40% of the time,
closer to the 20% in the data.
       The upper right panel presents the results in terms of the mean value of the tax,
capturing the intensity with which capital controls were used. The baseline model predicts
an average  of about 5.5%, far above the 3% in the data. The extended model predicts a
lower  of about 2%, closer to the cross-country mean for taxes on inflows and outflows in
  29
     When comparing model and data, for the latter we use the mean of taxes on inflows and outflows since
the model does not distinguish between gross inflows and outflows. However, results are robust if we compare
the model with taxes on inflows and outflows separately. This is due to the fact that, in our dataset, controls
on inflows and outflows comove--a result that was previously documented by Fern´    andez et al. (2015a) using
the extensive margin of capital controls over a large panel of countries.



                                                      35
                                    Figure 11: Quantitative Results




Notes: The first figure compares how the share of time with the capital control's tax is activated in the data
(third bar) with respect to the baseline and (S, s) models (first and second bars, respectively). The second
figure (first row) does the same than the first one, but for the mean value of the capital control tax. The
first figure in the second row shows such comparison for the number of changes in the tax. The second figure
in the second row depicts the episodes of activation of capital controls in the data (solid line), the baseline
model (dotted line), and the (S, s) model (dashed line). The last figure has the same format of the previous
one, and shows the serial autocorrelation of the capital control taxes up to two years. For all figures, the
data is the cross-country average of the mean between taxes on inflows and outflows.


the data.
      The middle left panel represents the number of changes in both the baseline and ex-
tended model--which, as mentioned above, was a moment targeted in the calibration. The
middle right panel depicts episodes of forceful use of controls identified in the simulated data
in the same way that episodes were identified in the new dataset (Figure 4), which we repli-


                                                      36
cate for comparison. Again, results show that (S, s) costs help to account for the stickiness
in capital controls: while the baseline model (dotted line) does not yield periods of inaction
in the use of controls, which change rather frequently, the extended model with (S, s) costs
(dashed line) exhibits initial periods of inactive controls that do not revert to their mean
when they become active.
         Lastly, the lower left panel further documents the mean reversion properties of the
models by reproducing the first and second-order serial autocorrelations implied by both
frameworks and comparing them with the one in the data presented earlier (Figure 5). In
this dimension, the difference between the baseline model (dotted line) and the extended
model (dashed line) is starker. While the former yields a counterfactual negative first-order
serial correlation, the latter more closely resembles the relatively high value in the data (solid
line).


5.4       Welfare Analysis

         We compute the welfare gains of implementing capital controls in the baseline model
and contrast them with those in the extended model, given the calibrated values of (S, s) costs
presented above. As mentioned before, by construction, welfare gains with (S, s) costs will
be lower than those in the frictionless baseline model. It is still relevant to consider by how
much gains are lowered when the calibrated (S, s) costs are used. The welfare gains that we
compute are consumption-equivalent factors that make households in both the unregulated
baseline economy and the (S, s) economy to be as well off as in the Ramsey economy with
frictionless capital controls. Formally, we calculate U R and Ss such that:

                                                                     
                                      t
                                      u       CtU R   1+   UR
                                                                =          t u CtR           (15)
                               t=0                                  t=0

and
                                                                    
                                          t
                                      u       CtSs    1+   Ss
                                                                =          t u CtR           (16)
                                t=0                                 t=0

         The cross-country means of U R and Ss are 0.94% and 0.76%, respectively.30 These
  30
       Country-by-country estimations are reported in the Appendix



                                                       37
results (summarized in table Table 3) document how on the one hand, there are sizable gains
in terms of welfare when implementing capital controls in a frictionless environment. Indeed,
consumption by agents in the unregulated economy would have to be close to one percentage
point higher for them to be as well off as those living under the Ramsey planner with no
(S, s) costs.31 On the other hand, the same consumption equivalent compensation for agents
living in the economy with (S, s) costs is also considerable--about 4/5 that of agents living
in the unregulated economy. This implies that the magnitude of (S, s) costs calibrated in
the previous section is large enough to eliminate most--though not all--of the welfare gains
obtained in an environment where capital controls can be used without cost.32

                                       Table 3: Welfare Analysis

                                        Unregulated Economy           S-s Economy
                     Welfare Gains          U R = 0.94%               S -s = 0.76%

Notes: The second column of the table shows the increase in consumption that would be needed for the
household in the unregulated economy to have the same welfare as in the Ramsey economy with no (S, s)
costs, U R . The third column shows the increase in consumption that would be needed for the household in
the (S, s) economy to have the same welfare as the Ramsey economy with no S-s costs, U R . Both values
are cross-country means.




6        On the Deeper Causes of (S, s) Costs: A Discussion
         The (S, s) costs in the extended model are evidently a reduced form to capture the
large set of deeper constraints that policymakers may face when confronted with the choice
of using capital controls, absent from the simple environment in the model. While we believe
that providing complete microfoundations of (S, s) costs is beyond the scope of this paper,
this section offers a discussion of such constraints, relating them to a broader literature on
international finance. There are at least three alternative deeper causes for (S, s) costs in
the extended model that can be related to the literature. First, such costs may be capturing
    31
      This number goes in the same direction as that calibrated for Argentina in Bianchi (2011). However,
our results differ quantitatively, since (1) our results are cross-country means and (2) due to the heavy
computational burden of our algorithm, we use have to use a coarser grid for net foreign debt.
   32
      An alternative way to measure the welfare implications of (S, s) costs is to derive the consumption
equivalent factor (U R-alt ) that makes households in the unregulated baseline economy to be as well off as
                                                              
in the (S, s) economy:          t
                          t=0  u Ct
                                      UR
                                          1 + U R-alt = t=0  t u Ct     Ss
                                                                           . In line with the previous result,
U R-alt is relatively small (0.11%).


                                                     38
a more complex cost-benefit analysis that incorporates negative effects and/or unintended
consequences of capital controls not picked up by standard models. More generally, a second
explanation may be related to political economy considerations driving policymaking, which
can be also linked to credibility and signaling from the use of these tools that end up
affecting policy choices. Third, model robustness and (perceptions of) ineffectiveness of
capital controls may also play a role in policymakers' cautious use of these instruments.
     A potential cost of capital controls can be related to the negative effect on the develop-
ment of deeper financial markets. In light of this possibility, and given that most countries
aim to maintain/develop financial markets, they may refrain from imposing capital controls
or other draconian measures on the flow of capital, except under episodes of large volatility
of these flows. Related to this, research has documented that capital controls may negatively
affect liquidity and reduce firms' financing, particularly those that are small (Forbes 2007;
Alfaro et al. 2017; Andreasen et al. 2019).
     Policymakers may also worry about the general perception of capital control policies
on market participants, as well as more broadly defined political economy considerations.
Bartolini and Drazen (1997), for example, argue that countries that lift capital controls
can signal "good behavior," while those that impose them could be perceived as following
inconsistent policies that would reduce credibility. Research has documented how controls
can be linked to corruption insofar as capital controls can be put in place to benefit certain
private interests (Johnston and Tamirisa 1998). There may also be spillovers and interac-
tions across markets (Cole and Kehoe 1998). Thus, even if policymakers are willing to use
controls as the Ramsey planner would, they may be discouraged from doing so if, given
imperfect information, markets view them as signals of possibly inconsistent policies. Under
such circumstances, it is plausible to assume that policymakers may be deterred from using
these tools except under extreme cases. Another set of explanations as to why countries
may opt to impose controls on capital flows centers around the distributive consequences of
policies. While an economy as a whole can benefit from opening up to international mar-
kets, some groups may lose in the absence of necessary compensating transfers (Alesina and
Tabellini 1989; Rodrik and Van Ypersele 2001). This constraint raises the possibility that
the compensatory adjustments in the national tax rates may not be feasible in the absence of


                                              39
coordination among countries (Alfaro and Kanczuk 2004). Changes in the political equilib-
ria in these environments can thus yield non-linearities in capital controls that are captured
through reduced (S, s) costs.
     Policymakers may also be concerned about issues related to model specification, robust-
ness and effectiveness of capital controls. Indeed, complexities surrounding the transmission
mechanism of capital controls that are not well understood and thus hard to capture in stan-
dards frameworks may inhibit policymakers from actively using these controls. Regarding
model specification, most theoretical frameworks, for example, tend to focus on consumption
smoothing benefits with non-contingent assets while abstracting from different interactions
and variables: debt/equity financing/hedging and contingent assets, capital accumulation,
firm financing, and the development of financial markets. Another concern is that regulations
do not properly discriminate between short-term and long-term capital flows. Short-term
loans are often rolled over, while long-term assets can be sold in secondary markets.
     Related to this, there are also concerns regarding model robustness. Policy prescrip-
tions of models of optimal capital are far from being robust to deviations from the baseline
model in terms of calibration, timing of the collateral constraints, or endogenizing production
(Schmitt-Groh´
             e and Uribe 2020; Benigno et al. 2011). Furthermore, optimal rules have been
shown to be time-inconsistent, and simpler rules may even be welfare reducing (Bianchi and
Mendoza 2018; Hernandez and Mendoza 2017). Evidently, concerns about model specifica-
tion and robustness are amplified in light of the inconclusive evidence regarding effectiveness
of capital controls (Klein 2012; Baba and Kokenyne 2011; De Gregorio et al. 2000; Goldfajn
and Minella 2005; Carvalho and Garcia 2008; etc.), with some exceptions--in particular,
draconian cases (e.g., Argentina, Venezuela) or "walls" (China). Hence policymakers may
be reluctant to use them unless macro conditions really warrant extreme measures, acting
as if there were costs of using them in normal times.


7    Conclusion
     One of the legacies of the 2007­2008 Global Financial Crisis has been a reassessment of
the potential for non-conventional policy tools to curb imbalances that can trigger financial


                                              40
crises and sudden stops. Capital controls have, once again, been seen as a policy tool worth
considering.The use and effectiveness, however, remains much debated.
     In this paper, we have aimed to contribute to this debate by addressing both positive
and normative features of capital controls. On the positive front, our efforts were devoted to
describing the key stylized facts observed from a new dataset on the use of de jure controls
for a panel of EMEs along their extensive and intensive margins as to improve our character-
ization of how these policy tools have been implemented. Our view is that any meaningful
test for a theory of capital controls needs to able to account for a richer set of stylized facts.
     The key empirical finding is that controls display certain statistical properties that
characterized them as "sticky." Changes to capital controls do not occur frequently, and
when they do, they remain in place for a long time. Overall, they have not been used
systematically across countries or time, and there has been considerable heterogeneity across
countries in terms of the intensity with which they have been used.
     On the normative side, we extend a model of capital controls relying on pecuniary
externalities augmented to include an (S, s) cost of implementing such policies. We illustrate
how this friction goes a long way toward bringing the model closer to the data. When the
extended model is calibrated for each of the countries in the new dataset, we find that the
size of these (S, s) costs is large, thus substantially reducing the welfare-enhancing effects of
capital controls compared with the frictionless Ramsey benchmark.
     Our broad view of the findings is not that the workhorse model of pecuniary exter-
nalities is unsuitable for empirical analysis. Instead, we subscribe to a view that calls for a
richer set of policy constraints when considering an optimal use of optimal capital controls
in models that rely on such externalities. Our work has, nonetheless, been silent about the
formal microfoundations of such costs and goes only as far as to discuss some of the possible
deeper causes. In that regard, an obvious further avenue that comes out of our work is the
formal modeling of the primitive frictions that can give rise to the stylized facts documented
of capital controls.




                                               41
References
Ahmed, S. and Zlate, A. (2014). Capital flows to emerging market economies: A brave new
  world? Journal of International Money and Finance, 48:221­248.
Aizenman, J. and Pasricha, G. K. (2013). Why do emerging markets liberalize capital
  outflow controls? fiscal versus net capital flow concerns. Journal of International Money
  and Finance, 39:28­64.
Alesina, A. and Tabellini, G. (1989). External debt, capital flight and political risk. Journal
  of international Economics, 27(3-4):199­220.
Alfaro, L., Chari, A., and Kanczuk, F. (2017). The real effects of capital controls: Firm-level
  evidence from a policy experiment. Journal of International Economics, 108:191­210.
Alfaro, L. and Kanczuk, F. (2004). Capital controls, risk, and liberalization cycles. Review
  of International Economics, 12(3):412­434.
Andreasen, E., Bauducco, S., and Dardati, E. (2019). Capital Controls and Firm Perfor-
  mance. ILADES-UAH Working Papers inv331, Universidad Alberto Hurtado/School of
  Economics and Business.
Baba, C. and Kokenyne, A. (2011). Effectiveness of Capital Controls in Selected Emerging
  Markets in the 2000's. IMF Working Papers 11/281, International Monetary Fund.
Bartolini, L. and Drazen, A. (1997). When liberal policies reflect external shocks, what do
  we learn? Journal of International Economics, 42(3-4):249­273.
Benigno, G., Chen, H., Otrok, C., Rebucci, A., Young, E. R., et al. (2011). Revisiting
  overborrowing and its policy implications. Monetary Policy under Financial Turbulence,
  Central Bank of Chile, pages 145­184.
Bianchi, J. (2011). Overborrowing and systemic externalities in the business cycle. American
  Economic Review, 101(7):3400­3426.
Bianchi, J. and Mendoza, E. G. (2018). Optimal time-consistent macroprudential policy.
  Journal of Political Economy, 126(2):588­634.
Caballero, J., Fern´andez, A., and Park, J. (2019). On corporate borrowing, credit spreads
  and economic activity in emerging economies: An empirical investigation. Journal of
  International Economics, 118:160­178.
Caplin, A. and Leahy, J. (2010). Economic theory and the world of practice: A celebration
  of the (s, s) model. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(1):183­202.
Carvalho, B. S. d. M. and Garcia, M. G. (2008). Ineffective controls on capital inflows under
  sophisticated financial markets: Brazil in the nineties. In Financial Markets Volatility and
  Performance in Emerging Markets, pages 29­96. University of Chicago Press.
Cerutti, E., Claessens, S., and Laeven, L. (2017). The use and effectiveness of macropruden-
  tial policies: New evidence. Journal of Financial Stability, 28:203­224.
Chinn, M. D. and Ito, H. (2006). What matters for financial development? Capital controls,
  institutions, and interactions. Journal of Development Economics, 81(1):163­192.
Cole, H. L. and Kehoe, P. J. (1998). Models of sovereign debt: Partial versus general
  reputations. International Economic Review, 39(1):55­70.
De Gregorio, J., Edwards, S., and Valdes, R. O. (2000). Controls on capital inflows: Do they
  work? Journal of Development Economics, 63(1):59­83.
Eichengreen, B. and Rose, A. (2014). Capital controls in the 21st century. Journal of
  International Money and Finance, 48:1­16.

                                              42
Farhi, E. and Werning, I. (2014). Dilemma not trilemma? capital controls and exchange
  rates with volatile capital flows. IMF Economic Review, 62(4):569­605.
Federico, P., Vegh, C. A., and Vuletin, G. (2014). Reserve requirement policy over the
  business cycle. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Fern´andez, A., Klein, M. W., Rebucci, A., Schindler, M., and Uribe, M. (2015a). Cap-
  ital control measures: A new dataset. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Fern´andez, A., Klein, M. W., Rebucci, A., Schindler, M., and Uribe, M. (2016). Capital
  control measures: A new dataset. IMF Economic Review, 64(3):548­574.
Fern´andez, A., Rebucci, A., and Uribe, M. (2015b). Are capital controls countercyclical?
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 76:1­14.
Forbes, K. J. (2007). One cost of the chilean capital controls: Increased financial constraints
  for smaller traded firms. Journal of International Economics, 71(2):294­323.
Galati, G. and Moessner, R. (2018). What do we know about the effects of macroprudential
  policy? Economica, 85(340):735­770.
Ghosh, A. R., Ostry, J. D., and Qureshi, M. S. (2018). Taming the tide of capital flows: A
  policy guide. MIT Press.
Glick, R., Guo, X., and Hutchison, M. (2006). Currency crises, capital-account liberalization,
  and selection bias. Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(4):698­714.
Goldfajn, I. and Minella, A. (2005). Capital flows and controls in brazil: What have we
  learned? Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Golosov, M. and Lucas, R. E. (2007). Menu costs and phillips curves. Journal of Political
  Economy, 115(2):171­199.
Hernandez, J. M. and Mendoza, E. G. (2017). Optimal v. simple financial policy rules in
  a production economy with "liability dollarization". Ensayos sobre Pol´     itica Econ´
                                                                                        omica,
  35(82):25­39.
Jahan, M. S. and Wang, D. (2017). Capital account openness in low-income developing
  countries: Evidence from a new database. International Monetary Fund.
Jim´enez, G., Ongena, S., Peydr´  o, J.-L., and Saurina, J. (2017). Macroprudential policy,
  countercyclical bank capital buffers, and credit supply: evidence from the spanish dynamic
  provisioning experiments. Journal of Political Economy, 125(6):2126­2177.
Johnston, R. B. and Tamirisa, N. T. (1998). Why Do Countries Use Capital Controls? IMF
  Working Papers 98/181, International Monetary Fund.
Klein, M. W. (2012). Capital controls: Gates versus walls. Technical report, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.
Korinek, A. (2018). Regulating capital flows to emerging markets: An externality view.
  Journal of International Economics, 111:61­80.
Lorenzoni, G. (2008). Inefficient credit booms. Review of Economic Studies, 75(3):809­833.
Lubis, A., Alexiou, C., and Nellis, J. G. (2019). What can we learn from the implementation
  of monetary and macroprudential policies: a systematic literature review. Journal of
  Economic Surveys, 33(4):1123­1150.
Magud, N. E., Reinhart, C. M., and Rogoff, K. S. (2018). Capital controls: Myth and
  reality­A portfolio balance approach. Annals of Economics and Finance, 19(1):1­47.
Mendoza, E. G. (2002). Credit, prices, and crashes: Business cycles with a sudden stop. In
  Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging markets, pages 335­392. University of Chicago

                                              43
  Press.
Mendoza, E. G. and Smith, K. A. (2006). Quantitative implications of a debt-deflation theory
  of sudden stops and asset prices. Journal of International Economics, 70(1):82­114.
Midrigan, V. (2010). Is firm pricing state or time dependent? evidence from us manufactur-
  ing. Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(3):643­656.
Pasricha, G. K. (2012). Recent trends in measures to manage capital flows in emerging
  economies. North American Journal of Economics and Finance, 23(3):286­309.
Pasricha, G. K., Falagiarda, M., Bijsterbosch, M., and Aizenman, J. (2018). Domestic
  and multilateral effects of capital controls in emerging markets. Journal of International
  Economics, 115:48­58.
Quinn, D. (1997). The correlates of change in international financial regulation. American
  Political Science Review, 91(3):531­551.
Rebucci, A. and Ma, C. (2019). Capital controls: A survey of the new literature. Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Reinhart, C. M. (2010). This time is different chartbook: Country histories on debt, default,
  and financial crises. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Rodrik, D. and Van Ypersele, T. (2001). Captial mobility, distributive conflict, and interna-
  tional tax coordination. Journal of International economics, 54(1):57­73.
Schindler, M. (2009). Measuring financial integration: A new data set. IMF Staff papers,
  56(1):222­238.
Schmitt-Groh´ e, S. and Uribe, M. (2017). Is optimal capital control policy countercyclical in
  open economy models with collateral constraints? IMF Economic Review, 65(3):498­527.
Schmitt-Groh´ e, S. and Uribe, M. (2020). Multiple equilibria in open economies with collateral
  constraints. Review of Economic Studies, Forthcoming.
Uribe, M. (2006). On overborrowing. American Economic Review, 96(2):417­421.




                                              44
Appendix

A.1 Models' Derivations

A.1.1 Unregulated Economy

     Defining t and µt as, respectively, the Lagrange multipliers on the sequential budget
constraint and the collateral constraint, the Lagrangian is:
         
                                                       dt+1
L = E0          t {U (A(cT    N         T       N
                         t , ct ))+ t [yt + pt yt +          - cT       N                 T       N
                                                                t - pt ct - dt ]+ t µt [(yt + pt yt ) - dt+1 ]
         t=0
                                                      1 + rt
                                                                                                         (17)
     The first-order conditions are (2), (3), and:

                                  [cT           T    N        T    N
                                    t ] : U (A(ct , ct ))A1 (ct , ct ) = t                               (18)



                                 [cN           T    N        T    N
                                   t ] : U (A(ct , ct ))A2 (ct , ct ) = pt t                             (19)


                                                   1
                                   [dt+1 ] : (          - µt )t = Et t+1                                 (20)
                                                 1 + rt


                                                     µt  0                                               (21)

     and
                                                   T       N
                                      µt [dt+1 - (yt + pt yt )] = 0                                      (22)

     Combining (18) with (19) and using the functional forms for the utility function and
the consumption aggregator, we obtain:

                                                    1 - a cT
                                            pt =         ( t )1-                                         (23)
                                                      a cN t


     The market for non-tradables clears in equilibrium:

                                                    cN    N
                                                     t = yt                                              (24)


     We can use the results from (18) and (23), respectively, into (20) and (3) and the

                                                       45
market-clearing condition into all the first-order conditions to define the competitive equi-
librium:
      Definition 6.1. Competitive equilibrium - Baseline economy. Given the exogenous
                                    T    N
endowments and interest rate: rt , yt , y2 , and the initial debt position d0 , a competitive
equilibrium in the baseline economy is a set of processes cT    N
                                                           t , ct , dt+1 , µt , satisfying:




                  1
            (          - µt )U (A(cT    N        T    N              T      N          T      N
                                   t , yt ))A1 (ct , yt ) = Et U (A(ct+1 , yt+1 ))A1 (ct+1 , y+1 )    (25)
                1 + rt


                                                                dt+1
                                            cT          T
                                             t + dt = y t +                                           (26)
                                                               1 + rt

                                           T          1 - a T 1/ N 1-1/
                                   dt+1  [yt +             (ct ) (yt )  ]                             (27)
                                                        a


                                                       µt  0                                          (28)

      and
                                    T      1 - a T 1/ N 1-1/
                              µt [(yt +         (ct ) (yt )  ) - dt+1 ] = 0                           (29)
                                             a

A.2 Baseline Ramsey Planner Economy

      For the Ramsey planner, the Lagrangian is:
           
                                                   dt+1                           1 - a cT
                                                                                         t 1/ N
L = E0            t {U (A(cT    N     R T
                           t , ct ))+ t [yt +            - cT         R R     T
                                                            t - dt ]+ t µt [(yt +      ( N ) yt ) - dt+1 ]}
           t=0
                                                  1 + rt                            a yt
                                                                                                      (30)
      The first-order conditions are:

                                                                   1 - a 1 cT
                                                                            t 1/ -1
                    [cT           T    N        T    N     R R
                      t ] : U (A(ct , yt ))A1 (ct , yt ) + t µt           ( N )     = R
                                                                                      t               (31)
                                                                     a  yt


                                                    1
                                    [dT
                                      t+1 ] : (          - µR  R      R
                                                            t )t = Et t+1                             (32)
                                                  1 + rt

                                              1 - a cT
                                                     t 1/ N
                                  µR   T
                                   t [yt    +      ( N ) yt - dt+1 ]  0                               (33)
                                                a yt

                                                         46
                                                   µR
                                                    t  0                                                  (34)

       and
                                    T     1 - a cT
                                                 t 1/ N
                                  [yt   +      ( N ) yt ] - dt+1  0                                       (35)
                                            a yt
       By comparing the first-order conditions of the decentralized economy and the Ramsey
planner's economy shown in equations (18) and (31), we get the first remark obtained by
Bianchi (2011): When the constraint binds, private agents undervalue wealth (equivalently,
when the constraint binds, households overvalue consumption).
       The result above emerges from the fact that, as shown by the second term of the left-
hand side in equation (31), an additional unit of tradable consumption reduces its marginal
utility when the constraint binds, due to the fact that the agent will have to deleverage down
to the point where the collateral constraint is not violated (i.e., a binding constraint implies
less future consumption of tradable goods). As a result, private agents in the decentralized
economy consume more by borrowing from abroad than the Ramsey planner, which leads to
the standard result of overborrowing33 .
       Given the overborrowing result, a direct application of the second welfare theorem is
to implement a capital control tax (i.e., a tax on debt) such that the decentralized economy
reaches the same allocations of the Ramsey Planner (which dominate in welfare)34 .


A.3 Regulated Economy - Optimal Tax

       The optimality conditions (25)- (29) are unchanged except for the debt Euler Equation
(25), which now takes the form:

                                            1 - t
                                        (         - µt )t = Et t+1
                                            1+r
  33
      Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2016) make a case for multiple equilibrium in this class of models, where
instead of overborrowing, the descentralized economy could display underborrowing (i.e., the central planner
borrows more than private agents). Specifically, for d = d0 = d ~, they show that there is multiple equilibrium
                                 ~ ~       1-a   1 1 T        ~
                                                              d      ~)1/ -1 > 1. However, we use the same
with underborrowing when S (d; d)  ( a ) 1+r  (y + 1+r - d
calibration as in Bianchi (2011), where such condition is not met; hence the economy has a unique equilibrium
with overborrowing.
   34
      This capital control tax is designed to reach a constrained first-best allocation in terms of welfare.
However, clearly an economy without the financial friction represented by the collateral constraint welfare
dominates that of the Ramsey planner.



                                                      47
Definition 7.1. Competitive equilibrium - Economy with capital control taxes. A competitive
equilibrium in the economy with capital control taxes is then a set of processes cT
                                                                                  t , dt+1 , t , µt

and pt satisfying:


                                                             dt+1
                                         cT         T
                                          t + dt = yt +                                       (36)
                                                            1 + rt

                                                  T        T
                                          dt+1  [yt + pt y N ]                                (37)


                                  t = U (A(cT    N        T    N
                                            t , yt ))A1 (ct , yt )                            (38)


                                        1 - t
                                    (          - µt )t = Et t+1                               (39)
                                        1 + rt

                                                   A2 (cT    N
                                                        t , yt )
                                            pt =                                              (40)
                                                   A1 (cT    N
                                                        t , yt )


                                              T       N
                                        µt [(yt + pt yt ) - dt+1 ]                            (41)

      and
                                                   µt  0                                      (42)

                                                                       T    N
      Given a policy process t , the exogenous process for endowments yt , yt , interest rate
rt and the initial level of debt d0 .
      The difference between the equilibrium described in definition 3.1 and the one described
in 3.2 relies on (39), which is the first-order condition with respect to dt+1 and now has t
reducing the marginal utility of debt.


A.4 Alternative Costs of Policy Making - First-Order Conditions

      The first-order conditions of the Ramsey planner's problem become (now we need to
take directly the derivative with respect to t ):




                                                     48
 [cT           T    N        T    N
   t ] : U (A(ct , yt ))A1 (ct , yt )-

R     1 - t         -1/ - + 1/              1/(1-1/ )
                                                                             - +1/
                                                                N 1/(1-1/ ) 1-1/ -1           a            1/
t (         ){(cT
                t )    (           )[a(cTt )          +(1-a)(yt  )         ]             (        )(cTt )
                                                                                                          1-1/
      1+r                 1 - 1/                                                           1 - 1/
                        1                                                       -  +1 /
                      - (cT  )-1/ -1 [a(cT
                                         t )
                                             1/(1-1/ )            N 1/(1-1/ ) 1-1/
                                                       + (1 - a)(yt )         ]          }
                        t
                                                                                       T
                                                                      R 1 - a 1 ct 1/ -1
                                                               + R  µ
                                                                   t t             (   N
                                                                                          )      = Rt     (43)
                                                                           a  yt


                                                   R
                                                   1
                                      [dt+1 ] :       = R     R R
                                                        t+1 + t µt                                       (44)
                                                  1+r



                                    R
                                    1       -1/
                                                            1                    1   - +1/
              [t ] : -R
                      t C (t ) +      [(cT )    [ a ( c T 1-1/
                                                          )    + (1 - a )( y N 1-1/ 1-1/
                                                                              )    ]       ]=0           (45)
                                   1+r t                t                   t




                                              1 - a cT
                                                     t 1/ N
                                   µR   T
                                    t [yt +        ( N ) yt - dt+1 ]  0                                  (46)
                                                a yt


                                                    µR
                                                     t  0                                                (47)

        and
                                      T     1 - a cT
                                                   t 1/ N
                                    [yt +        ( N ) yt ] - dt+1  0                                    (48)
                                              a yt




                                                      49
A.5 Additional Figures

                       Figure 12: Use of Capital Controls: All Instruments




Notes: In Panel A, the bars depict the share of countries that have used (i.e., value of the instrument is
not 0), even for a single quarter, any of the instruments out of the 21 countries in the sample. In panel B,
the bars depict the share of periods in which an instrument was used. The sample was taken from 1995q1
to 2014q4, the maximum total of quarters is 80 (100%). Here we include capital controls (URRs, Taxes on
Inflows, and Taxes on Outflows), and macroprudential instruments (Reserve Requirements and FX Reserve
Requirements).




                                                    50
         Figure 13: Episodes of Activation in Capital Controls: Country by Country




Notes: The beginning of an episode was defined as when, for a given policy instrument at period t, xt , we
have that: xt > 1.1xt-1 . Then the values of each episode were averaged from t - 2 to t + 10. The first
row shows episodes of activation in the controls at a quarterly frequency, and the second row shows such
episodes at a yearly frequency. Here we show for each capital control instrument--URRs (first row), Taxes
on Inflows (second row), and Taxes on Outflows (third row)--the episodes of activation in each country.




                                                   51
           Figure 14: Serial Correlation of Capital Controls: Country by Country




Notes: The figure shows for each capital control instrument--URRs (first row), Taxes on Inflows (second
row), and Taxes on Outflows (third row)--the t-order serial autocorrelation for each country.



                                                  52
    Figure 15: Episodes of Capital Controls & the Macroeconomy: All Capital Controls




Notes: The figure shows the episodes described in Figure 4 along with the cross-country mean deviation from
the average GDP growth. The plots shown the following number of episodes: URRs (7), Taxes on Inflows
(6) and Taxes on Outflows (11). We also include the URRs Tax Equivalent (7 episodes).




                                                    53
   Figure 16: Episodes of Activation in Capital Controls & Macroprudential Instruments




Notes: The beginning of an episode (episodes are depicted by red lines) was defined when for a given policy
instrument at quarter t, xt , we have that: xt > 1.1xt-1 . Then the values of each episode were averaged from
t - 2 to t + 10. Here we included the macroprudential instruments from our data base: Reserve Requirements
(and the Marginal Reserve Requirements) and Reserve Requirements on Foreign Exchange (and the Marginal
FX Reserve Requirements).




                                                     54
    Figure 17: Capital Controls, Macroprudential Instruments, and the Business Cycle




Notes: The figure shows the serial correlation of the Macroprudential Instruments' Indexes and the GDP
growth for each category, broken down into countries that have not used the instruments (left column of
graph) and countries that have (right column). The episodes of boom and bust correspond to the period
from 2000q1 to 2014q4 given the availability of data from macroprudential instruments.




                                                  55
                 Figure 18: Price-Based and Non-Price-Based Capital Controls




Notes: The bars show what share of instruments corresponds to non-price-based measures (dark shade) and
to price-based measures (light shade) for each country. This is based on data for the extensive margin of all
instruments.




                                                     56
          Figure 19: Serial Correlation of Capital Controls: The Extensive Margin




Notes: The solid line represents the cross-country mean autocorrelation of order t - j of the extensive
margin (considering both price-based and non-price-based instruments) of taxes on inflows. The dashed line
represents the same variable on taxes on outflows.




                                                   57
                  Figure 20: Capital Controls with Alternative Cost Functions




Notes: The top row of the figure shows in a three-period framework a recursive simulation of the capital
control's tax with convex costs of adjustment in period 1 (left panel) and period 2 (right panel). The
horizontal axis displays different values for the endowment of the tradable good in period 2. Periods 1 and 3
are assumed to have a fixed endowment of 1. The bottom row shows in a three-period framework a recursive
simulation of the capital control's tax with concave costs of adjustment in period 1 (left panel) and period 2
(right panel). The horizontal axis displays different values for the endowment of the tradable good in period
2. Periods 1 and 3 are assumed to have a fixed endowment of 1. This simulation is constraint to real and
non-negative values of the tax.



                                                     58
A.6. Additional Tables

Table 4: Share of Each Capital Control Instrument over the Total Amount of Instruments
per Country

                                        Price-Based                               Non-Price-Based
     Country           URR        Taxes Quantitative          Prohibitions     Authorizations Others
   Argentina          16.40%      0.00%     27.87%               0.00%            28.31%      27.42%
      Brazil          0.00%      13.20%     15.40%               8.56%            17.85%      44.99%
       Chile          5.68%      8.65%      21.89%              16.49%            32.97%      14.32%
      China           0.00%      0.00%      14.40%              19.15%            30.33%      36.12%
    Colombia          7.05%      0.00%      18.27%               3.21%            28.53%      42.95%
 Czech Republic       0.00%      0.00%      23.63%               0.00%            15.38%      60.99%
     Ecuador          0.00%      32.29%     27.08%               0.00%            0.00%       40.63%
     Hungary          0.00%      0.00%      15.00%               0.00%            30.00%      55.00%
       India          0.00%      0.00%      28.15%              10.18%            28.38%      33.30%
    Indonesia         0.00%      0.00%      29.01%              25.00%            4.94%       41.05%
      Israel          4.35%      0.00%      36.23%              14.49%            18.84%      26.09%
  Korea, Rep.         0.00%      0.00%      27.71%               3.03%            36.36%      32.90%
    Malaysia          0.00%      1.41%      34.81%               3.53%            32.86%      27.39%
     Mexico           0.00%      0.00%      25.75%               9.51%            18.79%      45.94%
       Peru           0.00%      37.50%     37.50%               0.00%            0.00%       25.00%
   Philippines        0.00%      0.00%      16.78%               9.80%            30.07%      43.36%
     Poland           0.00%      0.00%      21.78%               3.51%            38.41%      36.30%
      Russia          0.00%      0.00%      15.65%               3.67%            36.92%      43.77%
  South Africa        0.00%      0.00%      28.04%               2.17%            40.43%      29.35%
    Thailand          0.00%      0.00%      33.98%               7.04%            36.62%      22.36%
     Turkey           0.00%      0.00%      32.88%               7.80%            11.86%      47.46%
  All (Average)       1.52%      1.63%      24.45%               8.29%            28.35%      35.77%

Notes: The table corresponds to Stylized Fact 6. It shows for each country the share of each instrument over
the total. Thus, for each country, the sum of each row is equal to 1. The first four instruments correspond
to price-based capital controls, and the last two to non-price-based controls.




                                                    59
                                                          Table 5: Baseline Calibration: Country Results
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SIMULATED MOMENTS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CALIBRATED PARAMETERS
                                                     TARGETED MOMENTS                               CALIBRATED PARAMETERS        SIMULATED MOMENTS                                SIMULATED K=0                                                    CALIBRATED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WITH K=0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   =0 AND K=0
                 Number of               Number of crisis              Frequency of changes
   Country
               Currency Crisis            every 100-Y                  in tau (avg Inf-Out)                      K          Simulated Crisis   Simulated Changes   K=0 simulated crisis   K=0 simulated changes                  K        Simulated Crisis   Simulated Changes
    Name
                 1995­2010       Sovereign+External Debt Crisis   = Number of Changes in 20 Years
  Argentina          1                        6.3                               5.0                 0.3250    0.012000            2.88               4.02                  1.87                   13.16           0.3200       0.0000          1.90                13.14
     Brazil          5                        31.3                              7.0                 0.3050    0.016930           32.92               4.09                 18.92                   16.30           0.2950       0.0000          30.29               17.12
     Chile           1                        6.3                               0.5                 0.3300    0.000400            2.38               0.62                  2.38                   12.93           0.3100       0.0000          2.48                12.98
     China           0                        0.0                               0.0                 0.3500    0.000100            0.00               0.00                  0.00                   11.77           0.3300       0.0000          0.00                11.77
   Colombia          6                        37.5                              2.0                 0.3250    0.009500           28.08               2.38                 28.04                   16.10           0.3250       0.0000          28.04               16.10
Czech Republic       0                        0.0                               0.5                 0.3400    0.000001            0.00               0.00                  0.00                   10.27           0.3400       0.0000          0.00                10.27
    Ecuador          6                        37.5                              2.5                 0.3200    0.015530           59.52               7.34                 32.60                   10.59           0.3200       0.0000          32.60               10.59
    Hungary          4                        25.0                              0.0                 0.3270    0.019000            1.99               0.00                  1.57                   10.73           0.3220       0.0000          18.62               14.65
     India           4                        25.0                              0.0                 0.3200    0.018000           48.55               0.00                  1.59                   13.70           0.2950       0.0000          28.89               17.94
   Indonesia         1                        6.3                               1.0                 0.3290    0.000001            1.66               0.00                  1.66                   13.63           0.3270       0.0000          1.97                13.72
     Israel          0                        0.0                               0.0                 0.3400    0.000001            0.00               0.00                  0.00                    9.60           0.3300       0.0000          0.00                 9.79
 Korea, Rep.         2                        12.5                              2.5                 0.3240    0.015600            3.43               3.21                  1.63                   12.08           0.2915       0.0000          15.68               12.05
   Malaysia          3                        18.8                              2.5                 0.3152    0.015600           48.37               2.64                 25.39                   12.42           0.3152       0.0000          25.39               12.42
    Mexico           1                        6.3                               0.0                 0.3290    0.000005            1.60               0.00                  1.60                   12.03           0.3281       0.0000          2.70                12.08
      Peru           1                        6.3                               0.5                 0.3250    0.014000           25.75               0.71                  1.28                   11.62           0.3150       0.0000          11.50               14.21
  Philippines        2                        12.5                              0.0                 0.3260    0.004000            1.75               0.00                  0.09                   10.97           0.2950       0.0000          27.80               16.80
    Poland           5                        31.3                              0.0                 0.3240    0.015000           21.44               0.00                 12.67                   13.71           0.3220       0.0000          29.40               16.41
     Russia          6                        37.5                              1.5                 0.3200    0.018900           17.39               1.58                 16.97                   13.39           0.3100       0.0000          29.59               15.41
 South Africa        2                        12.5                              2.0                 0.3263    0.005100           47.68               4.67                  1.54                   13.41           0.3200       0.0000          17.79               16.42
   Thailand          8                        50.0                              0.0                 0.3200    0.017000           39.22               0.00                 38.78                   13.13           0.2500       0.0000          50.09               11.05
    Turkey           5                        31.3                              1.5                 0.3200    0.016600           27.35               3.16                 27.35                   16.50           0.3150       0.0000          30.92               16.49
     Mean           3.0                       18.8                              1.4                 0.3257     0.0102            19.62               1.64                 10.28                   12.76           0.3131       0.0000          18.36               13.88




Notes: The table shows in the fifth and sixth columns the country-by-country calibrated values of  and K .
The targeted moments, which are the frequency of crisis every 100 years, and the frequency of changes in
capital controls every 20 years, are shown in the third and fourth columns respectively. The simulated mo-
ments that correspond to each of the two targeted moments are in the seventh and eighth rows, respectively.
Columns nine and ten show the same two simulated moments that result by keeping the calibrated , but
setting K = 0. The last for columns columns show the calibration of  when K = 0, and show the simulated
crisis and changes in capital controls for this scenario.



                                                                  Table 6: Welfare Analysis: Country results
      Country                        Welfare Des                  Welfare Ramsey                       Cons. Eq UR to Rams                        Welfare (S, s)                   Welfare Ramsey                          Cons. Eq (S, s) to Ramsey
    Argentina                           -1.92                      -1.718712896                               1.53%                                   -1.88                         -1.746985316                                    1.01%
       Brazil                           -1.73                      -1.574422556                               1.24%                                   -1.81                         -1.624850886                                    1.45%
       Chile                            -1.84                      -1.652840017                               1.50%                                   -1.77                         -1.766147372                                    0.06%
       China                            -1.76                      -1.759292411                               0.00%                                   -1.76                         -1.753570251                                    0.04%
     Colombia                           -1.83                      -1.731663447                               0.78%                                   -1.83                         -1.726008275                                    0.82%
  Czech Republic                        -1.76                      -1.764315351                               0.00%                                   -1.76                         -1.758273023                                    0.05%
      Ecuador                           -1.88                      -1.718662970                               1.22%                                   -1.88                         -1.717366716                                    1.23%
      Hungary                           -1.92                      -1.730591078                               1.48%                                   -1.76                         -1.748411373                                    0.12%
       India                            -1.71                      -1.585714260                               0.97%                                   -1.88                         -1.711029946                                    1.34%
     Indonesia                          -1.76                      -1.747010307                               0.11%                                   -1.76                         -1.758236699                                    0.03%
       Israel                           -1.76                      -1.761844890                               0.00%                                   -1.76                         -1.755737458                                    0.05%
   Korea, Rep.                          -1.69                      -1.558136423                               1.08%                                   -1.90                         -1.722211523                                    1.42%
     Malaysia                           -1.85                      -1.688853810                               1.24%                                   -1.85                         -1.692457802                                    1.21%
      Mexico                            -1.75                      -1.751031894                               0.00%                                   -1.75                         -1.746979382                                    0.02%
        Peru                            -1.86                      -1.663182555                               1.53%                                   -1.85                         -1.718132555                                    1.03%
    Philippines                         -1.71                      -1.585963020                               0.98%                                   -1.78                         -1.742702211                                    0.30%
      Poland                            -1.91                      -1.728568142                               1.44%                                   -1.89                         -1.733108336                                    1.24%
       Russia                           -1.83                      -1.679795452                               1.21%                                   -1.93                         -1.729221194                                    1.53%
   South Africa                         -1.90                      -1.707596649                               1.49%                                   -1.80                         -1.736873046                                    0.47%
     Thailand                           -1.43                      -1.350117202                               0.64%                                   -1.88                         -1.721024266                                    1.23%
      Turkey                            -1.85                      -1.675946863                               1.33%                                   -1.87                         -1.706515464                                    1.27%
       Mean                             -1.79                          -1.67                                  0.94%                                   -1.83                             -1.73                                       0.76%

Notes: The table shows in the fourth column the country-by-country consumption equivalence of the house-
holds in the unregulated economy to be as well as of those in the frictionless Ramsey economy. The last
column shows the consumption equivalence of the households in the (S, s) economy to be as well as of those
in the frictionless Ramsey economy.




                                                                                                                     60
