                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THREE PRONGS FOR PRUDENT CLIMATE POLICY

                                        Joseph E. Aldy
                                     Richard J. Zeckhauser

                                      Working Paper 26991
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26991


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2020




This paper was prepared for the Southern Economic Journal based on Zeckhauser's keynote
address to the Annual Conference of the Southern Economic Association, Fort Lauderdale,
Florida, November 2019. Ken Norris and Lorae Stojanovic provided excellent research
assistance. We thank Jim Poterba and seminar participants at Harvard University and the
Southern Economic Association Annual Conference for feedback on an earlier version of this
work. Aldy's work has been supported by the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs,
BP, the Roy Family Fund, and Resources for the Future. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Joseph E. Aldy and Richard J. Zeckhauser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Three Prongs for Prudent Climate Policy
Joseph E. Aldy and Richard J. Zeckhauser
NBER Working Paper No. 26991
April 2020
JEL No. F53,Q54,Q58

                                          ABSTRACT

For three decades, advocates for climate change policy have simultaneously emphasized the
urgency of taking ambitious actions to mitigate greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and provided
false reassurances of the feasibility of doing so. The policy prescription has relied almost
exclusively on a single approach: reduce emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) and other GHGs.
Since 1990, global CO2 emissions have increased 60 percent, atmospheric CO2 concentrations
have raced past 400 parts per million, and temperatures increased at an accelerating rate. The one-
prong strategy has not worked. After reviewing emission mitigation's poor performance and low-
probability of delivering on long-term climate goals, we evaluate a three-pronged strategy for
mitigating climate change risks: adding adaptation and amelioration ­through solar radiation
management (SRM) ­ to the emission mitigation approach. We identify SRM's potential, at
dramatically lower cost than emission mitigation, to play a key role in offsetting warming. We
address the moral hazard reservation held by environmental advocates ­ that SRM would
diminish emission mitigation incentives ­ and posit that SRM deployment might even serve as an
"awful action alert" that galvanizes more ambitious emission mitigation. We conclude by
assessing the value of an iterative act-learn-act policy framework that engages all three prongs for
limiting climate change damages.


Joseph E. Aldy
Harvard Kennedy School
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
joseph_aldy@hks.harvard.edu

Richard J. Zeckhauser
Harvard Kennedy School
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
richard_zeckhauser@harvard.edu
1. Introduction

        Recent warnings from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) provide

clear guidance on the necessary timing and magnitude of actions required to combat climate

change (IPCC 2018, 2019. "Today" ­ the next decade in climate terms ­ is the last clear chance

to avoid the catastrophic impacts of climate change. Taking ambitious actions today could

feasibly limit warming to 2°Centigrade above pre-industrial temperatures, barely avoiding

catastrophic outcomes across much of the planet. Time is short, especially given the long

lifetimes of greenhouse-gas-emitting capital (measured in decades), and the fact today's global

temperatures are already 1°C above pre-industrial levels.

       Does this sound familiar? The urgency of the warnings and the call to limit warming to

no more than 2°C has not shifted substantially in three decades. In 1990, the Advisory Group on

Greenhouse Gases­ created by the World Meteorological Organization, the International Council

of Scientific Unions, and the UN Environment Programme and the effective predecessor to the

IPCC ­ issued a report on targets and indicators for long-term, global climate action. The

Advisory Group recommended two warming goals: to limit warming to 1°C and 2°C, coupled

with a rate of change goal of 0.1°C per decade. They acknowledged that exceeding the lower

target "may be unavoidable due to greenhouse gases already emitted," but emphasized that

"temperature increases beyond 1.0°C may elicit rapid, unpredictable, and non-linear responses

that could lead to extensive ecosystem damage" (Rijsberman and Swart 1990, p. viii).

       To date, environmental advocates, major international environmental agreements, and

domestic policy programs have focused on one strategy to fight climate change: mitigation; that




                                                2
is, curbing the emission of greenhouse gases (GHGs). 2 That strategy has not been successful in

stabilizing and then lowering the level of GHG emissions. Over the past sixty years, there has

been a steep increase in the emissions of GHGs and their concentration in the atmosphere.

Global surface temperatures have increased apace, and have accelerated more recently. The path

that we are told can keep the warming of our planet to 2°C (see Figure 4) looks almost

impossible to achieve. The costs are too high; the economic transformations required too

extensive; and the political will too weak. And at slightly below 1°C of warming, our current

status, the planet is encountering severe stresses such as major melts and super storms.

        Since the 1980s, policies and public discourse on climate change have focused on

mitigation alone. Repeatedly, we have been told that there will be catastrophic consequences if

we do not reduce the amount of carbon dioxide entering the atmosphere, and that we can do it. A

primary finding of this essay is that the warnings seem accurate; the reassurances do not. A

second downbeat finding is that the levels of emissions cuts advocates say are necessary, and

often claim are feasible, are extremely unlikely to be achieved.

        Given this dreary assessment, two prongs of action for reducing climate change risks in

addition to mitigation merit policy attention. They are adaptation (limiting damages from

whatever climate arises), and amelioration (reducing climate change given the level of GHG

concentrations). Hence our title, "Three Prongs for Prudent Climate Policy." To illustrate,




2
  For example, refer to how Climate Action Network International (2018), a coalition of more than 1,200 civil
society organizations addressing climate change from across the world, responded to the IPCC special report on
1.5°C. It called on countries to enhance their emission mitigation pledges under the Paris Agreement. This
statement was silent on the issues of adaptation or solar radiation management, the latter of which Climate Action
Network International (2019) explicitly criticized. Some environmental groups support adaptation, such as
Environmental Defense Fund and The Nature Conservancy, and several groups support limited research and
development for solar radiation management, including Environmental Defense Fund, Natural Resources Defense
Council, and Union of Concerned Scientists.

                                                        3
adaptation includes investments to offset of the damages associated with rising seas and

changing weather such as sea walls and moving populations away from threatened areas.

Amelioration includes investments to counteract the climate impacts induced by high CO2

concentrations in the atmosphere. Such investments on a large scale are referred to as

geoengineering. In this paper, we assess the case for solar radiation management (SRM), a

geoengineering instrument, as an amelioration measure. The most promising SRM measure

would inject aerosols into the upper atmosphere to reflect back incoming solar energy. This

would lower the temperature for a given accumulation of atmospheric GHGs.

       The paper proceeds as follows. Part 2 discusses the policy choices that were made along

the path to the "climate emergency" of today. It addresses the information long ignored about

climate change, and the more recent false reassurances, notably from the environmental

community, about the ability of a mitigation-alone policy to control it. It then introduces the

economics that underlie climate change. Part 3 broadens the policy palette. It presents the three

prongs available for effective policy: mitigation, adaptation and amelioration. It then employs a

wolf-based fable revealing how a society can go wrong by slighting adaptation and amelioration.

Part 4 assesses our ability to limit warming to 2°C (or less), a goal specified in multiple

international environmental agreements. It shows that goal is neither feasible nor sufficient to

avoid catastrophic climate change. Part 5 discusses the economic costs associated with the use of

the three prongs: mitigation, adaptation, and SRM prongs. Part 6 addresses the moral hazard

issue among the three prongs, with a focus on solar radiation management. Part 7 analyzes how a

three-prong strategy for coping with climate change might proceed. Part 8 summarizes the

potential consequences and benefits of deploying all three prongs to combat climate change.




                                                  4
2. The Path to Today's Climate Emergency

       The history of climate change policy is one where information has consistently been

misused. Arrhenius, conducting research in the late nineteenth century, first demonstrated how

human activity increased CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere, which in turn increased

temperature. These findings were largely ignored until the 1980s. Then followed a period of false

denials and policies at both the national and international level that failed to control GHGs

enough to stabilize temperatures.

       Present recognition is far different. Oxford Dictionaries declared its 2019 Word of the

Year to be "climate emergency," which it defined as "a situation in which urgent action is

required to reduce or halt climate change and avoid potentially irreversible environmental

damage resulting from it" (Oxford University Press 2019). 3 Indeed, a group of 11,000 scientists

published their warning that "planet Earth is facing a climate emergency" in November 2019

(Ripple et al. 2019).

       The public is in accord. A strong majority of Americans, and far greater fractions of

individuals in most other developed countries, believe that climate change is a significant

problem and that the world is at a critical point (Leiserowitz et al. 2019; DG Communication

2019). They would broadly favor major efforts to cut our production of GHGs, but would argue

about how vigorous we have to be in our efforts to curtail these gases, who would bear the

burdens for reducing emissions, and what constitute desirable and feasible climate targets.




3
 Oxford found that the use of "climate emergency" in public discourse increased dramatically,
citing a hundred-fold increase in the use of the term in September 2019 compared to a year
earlier.

                                                 5
       The international policy community, with scientists playing a major role, has been issuing

urgent calls for action since the 1990s. The standard response to the climate emergency by policy

advocates has highlighted the dire circumstances and the feasibility of preventing catastrophic

climate change. In 2006, prominent climate scientist James Hansen stated that "we have at most

ten years ­ not ten years to decide upon action, but ten years to alter fundamentally the trajectory

of global greenhouse emissions" (Hansen 2006). In that year, former Vice President Al Gore

gave a similar 10-year prognosis for undertaking drastic measures to reduce emissions (Germain

2006). A decade later, we hear similar reassurances ­ the climate crisis is serious but, if we take

action now, we can prevent it. In 2018, Al Gore commented on the release of the IPCC's 2018

Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C (SR15) by noting that "time is running out, so we

must capitalize and build upon solutions available today" (Gore 2018). In 2019, James Hansen

stated that "Earth is not lost today, but time for action is short" (Hansen 2019).

       If in 2006 we had but 10 years to cut our emissions substantially, and emissions actually

increased, then similar reassurances today ring false. What has led to the current moment? In this

section, we survey a number of not surprising human failings, even within the expert community,

that have so far prevented us from stabilizing our planet's climate. These include the

considerable heterogeneity among economic analyses of the likely damages associated with

climate change; the willingness of environmental experts to focus on unachievable means to

reach unachievable goals as a political measure to motivate action; and the intentional inattention

of such experts to adaptation and amelioration for fears of moral hazard. A summary assessment

of these failings is that policy preferences led analyses, rather than the reverse.



Clashing Economic Models



                                                  6
           Dating back to Cline (1991) and Nordhaus (1993), economists have employed integrated

assessment models (IAMs) to characterize the relationships among economic activity, energy

consumption, greenhouse gas emissions, and the global climate (Pizer et al. 2014). These IAMs

estimate the marginal damage from an incremental ton of carbon dioxide emissions. The damage

comes from reduced agricultural productivity, inundation of coastal areas by sea level rise, health

impacts from vector-borne diseases and higher temperatures, increased energy demand for

cooling, losses from extreme weather events such as flooding and hurricanes, and an array of

other climate change impacts. As the understanding of climate change science and economics

has improved, estimates of the social cost of carbon (SCC) have likewise evolved. Take two

examples. First, the famed DICE model's estimate of the SCC has increased from about $14/ton

in a 2008 estimate to nearly $36/ton in a 2017 analysis (Nordhaus 2008, 2017). 4 Second, the

Interagency Working Group on the Social Cost of Carbon (2010) in the U.S. government

employed the three most prominent IAMs in the research literature to estimate the SCC for use in

regulatory impact analyses. Over 2010-2016, this Interagency Working Group updated its

preferred SCC estimates from $28/ton to $43/ton (Interagency Working Group on the Social

Cost of Carbon 2010, 2016). This updating of the SCC increased the present value of economic

damages from about $1 trillion to about $1.5 trillion for the carbon dioxide emitted globally in

the year 2015.

           Yet these models inadequately reflect our evolving understanding of climate impacts and

mask key factors that influence the potential magnitude of climate change damages. Some

scholars argue that IAMs' underlying damage functions do not adequately reflect the science and




4
    These SCCs are for the emission of a ton of carbon dioxide in the year 2015 expressed in 2018 U.S. dollars.


                                                            7
economics of climate change (Weitzman 2009; Pindyck 2013; Stern 2013; Heal 2017; Diaz and

Moore 2017). Others have expanded the approach to enable a broad assessment of potential

future states of the world. For example, Cai and Lontzek (2019) model stochastic economic

growth and account for uncertainty in climate change impacts. They find that the standard

deviation of the SCC increases faster than its mean, reflecting the potential for low-probability,

large-magnitude climate damages. Daniel et al. (2019) find that uncertainty yields a higher initial

social cost of carbon ­ in excess of $100/tCO2 today ­ then would result from an analysis

ignoring uncertainty.

       To address shortcomings in IAMs' damage functions, recent research has focused on

identifying causal pathways of specific climate change-related impacts. In the past decade, an

extensive literature has employed longitudinal data to exploit variations in weather (temperature,

precipitation, and windstorms) to estimate the impacts of weather shocks on economic output,

premature mortality, worker productivity, crime and conflict, and other outcomes (Dell et al.

2014). Burke et al. (2015) employ panel econometric methods to estimate how temperature

influences economic output. They project that unabated climate change would reduce global

incomes by about 23 percent by 2100 and exacerbate income inequality across countries.

Carleton et al. (2018) develop the first global panel of mortality and temperature data, with

extensive accounting for sub-national spatial coverage, for use in estimating how mortality risk

responds to increases in temperature. They estimate that the mean willingness to pay to avoid

increasing mortality risk under unabated climate change would be on the order of $40 per ton of

carbon dioxide.

       Pindyck (2019) employs an alternative approach, an expert elicitation survey focusing on

economists and scientists active in the climate change literature. On average, these experts stated



                                                 8
that unmitigated climate change would reduce world GDP by 12 percent in fifty years, and that

there was about a 1 in 4 chance that the decline in output would exceed 20 percent. These

estimates, albeit large, may significantly understate the risks. DeFries et al. (2019) documents the

disconnect between the climate science risks and the economic monetization of these risks,

reflecting the limitations and omissions of the economic models of climate change impacts.



Factors Undermining Effective Policy Responses

       Policy responses, which often reflect political expediency, may amplify climate change

damages. For example, Kahn (2005) documents that democracies and countries with higher-

quality institutions experience less natural disaster-related mortality than other nations,

conditional on the frequency and intensity of natural disasters. Poorly designed insurance

policies ­ such as the U.S. National Flood Insurance Program ­ may implicitly subsidize

residential location in areas prone to climate-related flood risk (Michel-Kerjan 2010), and thus

amplify damages. Large-scale climate-related migration, a likely prospect, would impose

significant stresses on governments around the world. The resulting immigration policies, which

respond to the politics of the moment, may rule out least-cost adaptation to a changing climate.

While we have sufficient research evidence and experience to speculate on the major adverse

impacts of climate change, impacts beyond our current understanding of science, economics and

societal panics may dramatically affect human civilization in a period of rapidly changing

climate. Recent experience with responses to a manageable, different global threat, COVID-19,

is hardly reassuring.



False Reassurances on Manageability



                                                  9
        In 2010, the UN Environment Programme (2010) estimated that the world would need to

cut emissions by about 12 gigatons of CO2-equivalent from a forecast ("business as usual") level

of 56 gigatons in 2020 to limit warming to 2°C. Then­executive director of UNEP, Achim

Steiner, notes in his introduction that "The Emissions Gap Report emphasizes that tackling

climate change is still manageable, if leadership is shown" (UNEP 2010, p.3; italics added for

emphasis). Five years later, after global carbon dioxide emissions had grown more than 7% since

publication of the 2010 report, UNEP (2015) identifies 23 gigatons of emission cuts necessary to

achieve the 2°C objective. Steiner optimistically opens the 2015 Emissions Gap Report by

stating: "I firmly believe that if we act on the findings in this report, there is nothing to stop us

closing the emissions gap" (UNEP 2015, p. xiii).

        With global greenhouse emissions reaching 55.3 gigatons in 2018, the UN Environment

Programme (2019) projects emission cuts for 2030 of at least 23 gigatons for a 2°C goal and 39

gigatons for 1.5°C goal. Inger Andersen, the Executive Director of UNEP, describes the

emission-mitigation policy implication of this report:

        "Emissions must drop 7.6% per year from 2020 to 2030 for the 1.5°C goal and
        2.7% per year for the 2°C goal. The size of these annual cuts may seem shocking,
        particularly for 1.5°C. They may also seem impossible, at least for next year. But
        we have to try.... We need quick wins or the 1.5°C goal of the Paris Agreement
        will slip out of reach" (UNEP 2019, p. xiii).


While Andersen acknowledges the "collective failure to act strongly and early" in this report

(UNEP 2019, p. xiii), we are not told that given economic and political realities ­ both within

and across nations ­ it is almost inconceivable that the world will reach either of these goals.

        The almost universal commentary from the environmental community is that this decade

is the last time to take action, but, if we do, we can stop disastrous warming. Greta Thunberg, the

climate activist named Time's Person of the Year for 2019, has effectively emphasized the

                                                  10
urgency of addressing the climate emergency: "We can't just continue living as if there was no

tomorrow, because there is a tomorrow" (Alter et al. 2019).

        However, Thunberg has fallen into the trap of issuing false reassurances about

mitigation-only policies. In December 2019, Thunberg addressed the annual UN climate

negotiations in Madrid, Spain and focused exclusively on the need to reduce emissions and keep

fossil fuels in the ground in order to limit warming to 1.5°C. She closed her remarks by noting:

"In an emergency, you change your behavior.... And without the sense of urgency, how can we,

the people understand that we are facing a real crisis.... Right now we are desperate for any sign

of hope. Well I'm telling you, there is hope. I have seen it but it does not come from the

governments or corporations. It comes from the people" (Thunberg 2019). Similarly,

Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (D-NY) has framed many younger voters' concerns as

"the world is going to end in 12 years if we don't address climate change" (Cummings 2019) as

part of her advocacy of the Green New Deal. 5 Christiana Figueres, the former head of the

UNFCCC Secretariat, highlighted the findings of the IPCC's special report on 1.5°C in a recent

op-ed, but noted that limiting warming to this level through emission mitigation is technically

feasible if "there is political will" (Figueres 2018).

        The environmental community merits plaudits for awakening us to the dangers of human-

caused climate change. However, it merits blame for issuing false reassurances about the ability

of a mitigation-only policy to cope with the problem. Time is late. Failure to recognize the

dangers that loom is sure to lead to an insufficient and inappropriate mix of actions to cope with

climate change.



5
 H. Res. 109, 116th Congress, "Recognizing the duty of the Federal Government to create a Green New Deal."
https://www.congress.gov/116/bills/hres109/BILLS-116hres109ih.pdf.


                                                      11
Misunderstanding the Nature of the Problem: Flows and Stocks

         In a model world, the control of pollution flows whose stocks impose costs can be

modeled as an optimal control problem. A social planner could take appropriate account of all

individuals living at present and into the future when choosing the settings for its control

variables (Keeler, Spence and Zeckhauser, 1971). Almost all policy discussion on climate

change addresses greenhouse gas flows into the atmosphere. Compare a polluted river and a

polluted lake. Staunch the pollution flow into the river, and the problem is mostly solved as the

pollutants flow away and become increasingly dilute. With the lake, the stock of pollutant

remains. Climate change is a stock problem; the damages are due to the GHGs accumulated in

the atmosphere. We need to focus on the impacts of higher concentration of GHGs in the

atmosphere, and not merely on the rate at which we emit GHGs.

         Since 1990, global carbon dioxide emissions from the combustion of fossil fuels have

increased more than 60 percent, despite numerous international conferences calling for emission

cuts (see Figure 1). 6 From the pre-industrial period through 1990, the atmospheric concentration

of carbon dioxide increased by about 75 parts per million. Since 1990, the concentration has

jumped another 55 parts per million, and the annual growth rate in concentrations is accelerating

(Figure 2). Global temperatures have increased on a near-linear basis by about 0.6 o C over the

past thirty years (Figure 3). In short, the record to date is extremely discouraging. Emissions and




6
 Emissions of other greenhouse gas emissions, such as methane, nitrous oxide, hydrofluorocarbons,
perfluorocarbons, and sulfur hexafluoride also increased over this time period. We will focus on carbon dioxide
emissions associated with fossil fuel combustion and industrial processes for illustrative purposes in this paper,
although it should be noted that many of the other GHGs exhibit similar trends over time and in long-term
projections. The 55 gigatons estimate discussed below in the 2015 Paris Agreement covers all greenhouse gas
emissions.


                                                         12
atmospheric concentrations show strong and consistent upward trends. Global temperatures show

a strong and accelerating upward trend.



Insert Figures 1-3



Cheap Riding and Inadequate Coordination

       The actual world does not have the social planner just mentioned. Rather, it has myriad

decision makers including individuals, firms, and nations. These decision makers choose on the

basis of their own welfares. Those welfares may include doses of altruism, but experience

suggests that the welfare of others counts relatively little to one's own. Cheap riding ­ behavior

just short of free riding ­ will persist, even if parties make pollution control agreements with

others, as the nations of the world have done. It is a daunting task to craft durable, effective

climate policy that accommodates disparate decision makers in multiple generations, both within

and across political jurisdictions, and among many political jurisdictions with varied levels of

development and vulnerability to climate change (Barrett 2003; Aldy 2016).



3. Broadening the Policy Palette: The Three Prongs for Policy

       In a problem where a stock of a pollutant (GHGs in the atmosphere) creates impacts that

in turn impose costs (losses of productivity, health, quality of life), what policy approaches are

available to curb those costs? We identify three: limit the flows into the stock, reduce the impacts

from the stock, and reduce the costs from any impacts. In the climate change context, these

policies are respectively called mitigation (reducing greenhouse gas emissions), amelioration




                                                 13
(SRM), and adaptation (e.g., building marshes and ocean barriers; reducing human activity near

the oceans).

       As we have seen, international groups, environmental organizations and most concerned

political leaders have focused both discussion and action on the first policy prong, mitigation.

Moreover, they have issued assurances that mitigation alone can keep losses within acceptable

levels. As we have shown, this single-prong policy has failed to slow GHGs enough to reduce

the risk of climate change. Assurances about the potential for mitigation alone to control losses

are severely overstated. Given any realistic levels of emission reductions, the planet is on a path

to almost surely exceed 2o C in a few decades and much more thereafter, hence to vast

environmental damages. Given the massive looming losses from climate change, there could be

substantial benefits from deploying all three policy prongs ­ mitigation, amelioration, and

adaptation ­to limit those losses.

       Environmental advocates have downplayed discussion of adaptation measures, and

fiercely opposed discussion and research on amelioration due to concerns about moral hazard.

Indeed, adaptation and geoengineering, such as solar radiation management, were once forbidden

terms in environmental and scientific circles. For example, Jake Jacoby of MIT noted in 2015

that "Earlier on, you wouldn't use the `A' word in polite conversation. People thought you

weren't serious about mitigation," where `A' referred to adaptation (Helm 2015). Similarly, John

Shepherd (2009), the chair of a 2009 Royal Society study on geoengineering, recommended that

participants in climate policy debates get over their fears about mentioning "the `G' word." The

reasoning, often kept in the background, is that serious consideration of adaptation measures and

geoengineering would undermine the policy argument for vigorous mitigation efforts. (We




                                                 14
address this argument in Part 6 below.) However, even vigorous mitigation in the future would

not stave off serious to catastrophic climate-change damages.

        In this section, we look at how a mix of mitigation, adaptation, and amelioration will be

needed, given the climate path we are on, to limit the catastrophic outcomes of climate change.

The academic literature as well as the media have dedicated significantly less attention to

amelioration than to emission mitigation. 7 The most promising amelioration technology to date,

in terms of feasibility and cost, as mentioned, is solar radiation management. It would inject

aerosols, most likely sulfur particles delivered by airplane, into the upper atmosphere to reflect

back incoming solar energy. This would lower the temperature for a given accumulation of

atmospheric GHGs. This technology draws on research about the cooling impacts of introducing

sulfur dioxide (SO2) into the atmosphere ­ from volcanic eruptions as well as the combustion of

sulfur-intensive coal and petroleum products (Crutzen 2006; Wigley et al. 1996). An SRM

strategy would have side effects, perhaps extremely costly side effects.

        Implementation of solar radiation management on a scale sufficient to cool the planet will

take considerable time and money, though a slight fraction of the costs of climate change (see

section five for a discussion of costs of various prongs of reducing climate change risks). While

scientists are quite confident of its efficacy, experiments are still needed to demonstrate the

feasibility of implementation. To deliver the SO2 to the lower stratosphere will require a new

type of plane, and planes take years to develop. Such change will require research on feasibility,




7
 We classify negative emission technologies within the mitigation prong. Some negative emission technologies,
such as bioenergy power plants with carbon capture and storage technology, share similar incentives to high-cost
emission mitigation technologies. Direct air capture of carbon dioxide, which has drawn recent attention but
requires significantly more research and development, shares some characteristics with carbon capture and
storage technology that could be applied to fossil power plants. Similarly, tree planting should be viewed as a
mitigation strategy intended to cut the planet's emissions of GHGs.


                                                       15
safety and governance, and it could take many years to achieve grudging acceptance of this

technology and then move to actual implementation at any scale. 8

        Adaptation, will require considerable time and money as well. For example, if physical

barriers are to be built to protect against rising sea levels and more intense storms, it will take

years to figure out the engineering requirements, develop the plans, and secure the political will

to produce the required resources. For example, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (2019) has

identified a six-mile long sea barrier with storm surge gates as a potential investment to protect

New York City from climate change. It estimates that the wall would take 25 years to construct.

Moving human activity away from the coasts will require decades and trillions of dollars. In

short, the monies expended on adaptation will vastly exceed those required for solar radiation

management. That is true even if political realities prevent many worthwhile protective projects

from being undertaken.

        Mitigation efforts, which will require immense efforts and vast expenditures, will likely

take decades to even cut emissions in half. Large-scale renewable power, for example, would

likely require years of innovation and commercialization of large-scale battery storage, and the

hopeful development of nuclear fusion.)

        In short, a three-prong strategy for climate policy will require political will, policy

attention, and major expenditures over a period of many decades. The potential effort will be

great, the potential savings in environmental costs far greater.

        In the sections that follow, we explore the three prongs of an optimal climate change

policy. We first look at the risk-reduction efficacy of our efforts toward mitigation: we have set a



8
 Marine cloud brightening, which focuses on lower-altitude interventions to increase the reflectivity of clouds,
also merits experimental research. If the costs prove modest and the interventions efficacious, it could become a
part of the broader risk mitigation toolkit.

                                                        16
target that will not keep us safe, and we are extremely unlikely to meet it. We then explore the

comparative costs of mitigation, adaptation, and solar radiation management; consider the moral

hazard problems in choosing strategies, and then consider the first steps in determining the

optimal mix of mitigation, adaptation, and SRM. First, we illustrate the choices we face with a

fable.



Fable of the Wolf and the Three Prongs for Prudent Climate Policy

         An extremely analytic boy lives in a village high in the mountains. The village used to

have a traditional crop-based economy, with a few scraggly sheep on the side. However, outside

technology produced hybrid sheep that yield ample wool and mutton, and thrive at high altitudes.

The village turned to mainly raising sheep, and ever more sheep.

         When sheep were few, they could graze nearby the village. But when they became

abundant, they had to graze well beyond where the villagers lived, namely in the outlands. The

village had been warned that sheep without humans living nearby bring wolves. 9 The boy has

seen wolves and noticed that sheep have disappeared in unusual numbers. The boy's pleas for a

shift back toward a less-profitable crop economy have been ignored. Moreover, the boy is

warning that more wolves are likely to take up residence nearby, and those wolves may

reproduce. Changing the mix in the economy significantly back towards crops (a mitigation

measure), will lower the wolf threat. 10 As the first prong of defense, he recommended a 50%




9
  The boy, who had studied economics, labelled the cheap-rider situation that developed an outlands problem. The
abundance of sheep outside the village attracted wolves, to the detriment of all.
10
   Unfortunately, the wolf threat would not abate quickly once the hybrid sheep numbers is cut. It is the odor of
the sheep that primarily attracts the wolves, and the odor persists in the environment for a long time. It is true
that if sheep became much harder to catch in the village, wolves would drive elsewhere. Notice the parallel with
GHGs, which degrade slowly, hence persist in the atmosphere for a long time.

                                                       17
cutback in sheep, thus significantly reducing their attracting smell and their presence in the

outlands.

       The villagers heard the boy's message, and they responded, albeit in a woefully

insufficient fashion. Whereas previously they had raised 20 sheep per family, they cut back to 18

and raised some vegetables. But evidently wolf numbers were still below equilibrium, and the

losses to them increased.

       Given the pace of sheep loss, and the unwillingness of the villagers to cut back sharply,

the boy recommended that another layer of protective fencing (an adaptation technology) be

erected in the outlands, even where the terrain is steep. This would be a second prong of the

defense strategy. The village made a half-hearted effort; after all, fencing is expensive,

particularly in rocky and hilly domains. Some new fences were built, but the wolves readily

evaded most of them. After a minor dip, the losses continued to rise.

       Finally, the boy in desperation recommended that the village raise a hunting posse to

search out and kill or scare away the wolves (an amelioration strategy), a third prong of defense.

The villagers are very reluctant. They are farmers turned shepherds, not hunters. There may be

riding accidents or gun accidents; indeed, a wolf may even turn on the posse. The village council

votes against raising a posse. A few more fences are built, and the council implores the villagers

to cut their flocks, and return to agriculture, but few villagers follow that course. Raising large

numbers of hybrid sheep, even with the current 20% annual loss rate, is more profitable than

growing crops.

       As the annual loss rate climbs to 25 percent, the boy cries: "Please, can't we move

forward on all three fronts? Someday the wolves will come to snatch our children, and that will

end the world as we know it."



                                                 18
       And so it is with climate change. We've been told, correctly, that the world is running out

of time to curb its emission-profligate ways. The world did little mitigation and ran out of the

urgent time it was given. And matters have gotten worse, much worse. Emissions cutting, drastic

emissions cutting, is still the recommended primary prong of our defense. Experience suggests,

and economics reveals, that the magnitude of needed cutting will be almost impossible to

achieve in the time available. Moreover, even if the prescribed level of mitigation is met, it may

already be too late. A second prong of defense, adaptation, has received some discussion, but

very little actual implementation. Adaptation would consist of such measures as building barriers

to the ocean, restoring absorptive marshes, repositioning sensitive equipment from cellars to

roofs, and preventing new construction in threatened areas. This analysis considers a third prong,

amelioration through solar radiation management to complement mitigation and adaptation.



4. Why Mitigation Alone Will Not Control Climate Losses

       In the 1992 UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, the global community

agreed on the ultimate objective of "stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the

atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate

system" (Article 2). The 2009 Copenhagen Accord represented the first meaningful elaboration

of this goal; it recognized "the scientific view that the increase in global temperature should be

below 2 degrees Celsius" (Paragraph 1). At the 2015 UN climate conference in Paris, the

international community agreed on "holding the increase in the global average temperature to

well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase

to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels, recognizing that this would significantly reduce the risks




                                                 19
and impacts of climate change" (Article 2, Paris Agreement). 11 As in previous negotiations,

national emission goals served as the primary focus of efforts to mitigate climate change risk. In

the Paris Agreement, these goals took the form of "nationally determined contributions" ­

voluntary emission pledges set by national governments. In this section we show that mitigation

alone will not prevent catastrophic climate change impacts.



Catastrophic Outcomes Even if Temperatures are Kept to 2°C

           Recent events demonstrate that catastrophic outcomes could arise even if temperature

increases remain modest, particularly since current temperatures are well below the targeted

threshold. Major ice melts in the Arctic, Antarctic, and Greenland are well above what scientific

models had previously projected. The July 2019 ocean temperature was the highest ever recorded

since records began in 1880 (see Figure 3 above). Moreover, the 9 highest ocean temperature

readings are all since 2006.

           Ocean temperatures are a primary factor in hurricane strength. Hurricane Dorian of 2019,

which went on to tie with the 1935 Labor Day hurricane for the strongest ever Atlantic hurricane

to make landfall, picked up strength from an extremely warm ocean. The increasing frequency of

category five hurricanes in the Atlantic basin is further evidence of how climate change amplifies

the risks of extreme storms. In 2019 alone, the world witnessed such dramatic weather events as

catastrophic droughts in eastern and southern Africa, record monsoon floods in India, and

monumental fires in Australia due to an unprecedented hot and dry summer.

           Climate change may induce vast migrations. Myriad animal species have changed locales

and migration patterns already. They provide a portent for massive movements of humans in



11
     UN Paris Agreement to the UNFCCC. https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/english_paris_agreement.pdf.

                                                         20
response to warming temperatures and the droughts that come from shifting precipitation

patterns. Human migrants can create tremendous social, economic, and political disruptions.

Indeed, some have associated climate change with the Syrian drought that contributed to the civil

war and millions of refugees (Kelley et al. 2015). This example illustrates a key characteristic of

catastrophic impacts ­ they can be local, such as the drought in a nation or the swallowing up of

a low-lying island state by rising seas, but their impacts will spill over to other peoples and

countries.

        In short, 2°C is not a safe harbor; it is an extremely hazardous location. Indeed, the 2018

IPCC Special Report on 1.5°C makes this point clearly across many dimensions of climate

change impacts. That raises the question as to why the negotiators and heads of state at the 2009

Copenhagen Conference and the 2015 Paris Conference (among other UN gatherings), as well as

many scientists and policy experts would talk regularly as though this should be our target. The

answer, we believe, was strategic: This is the lowest possible value that an expert could plausibly

identify as an achievable level. If you want decision makers to get busy cutting emissions

significantly, you had better tell them that a feasible target will do the trick.



Emission Reductions Will Fall Short

        International agreements, including those where the United States refused to be a

signatory, have been routinely failed to deliver sufficient emission abatement effort. The 1992

UN Framework Convention on Climate Change established a voluntary goal of returning

greenhouse gas emissions to their 1990 levels by 2000 for industrialized nations ­ the members

of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and much of the former Soviet




                                                  21
bloc. 12 While some countries failed to meet this goal (e.g., the United States), others had

emissions well below this aim (e.g., Russia), and overall these countries met the overall goal:

emissions were 3 to 9 percent below 1990 levels in 2000. 13 The 1997 Kyoto Protocol imposed

legally binding commitments for these industrialized nations that would reduce their emissions

by at least 5 percent below their 1990 levels over the 2008-2012 period, but imposed no

quantitative emission commitments on developing countries. 14 In aggregate, these industrialized

nations met their 2008-2012 commitment, even when including the United States and Canada,

which were not parties to the Kyoto Protocol by the end of its commitment period. The total

industrialized countries' greenhouse gas emissions were 8 to 16 percent below 1990 levels over

the 2008-2012 period. Nonetheless, global carbon dioxide emissions grew 57 percent over the

1990-2012 period (see Figure 1). The model of the 1990s ­ focusing on emission reductions

among OECD and some former Soviet bloc countries ­ left too much of the world's emissions

outside the goals and commitments; global emissions growth continued.

        The Paris Agreement established a new policy architecture premised on a voluntary

"pledge and review" approach, as opposed to a legally binding approach to national mitigation

actions. The Agreement engages virtually every country in the world. The breadth of the Paris

Agreement's initial pledges to mitigate emissions through 2030 are unlikely to be sufficiently

ambitious ­ assuming every country delivers on its voluntary pledge ­ to prevent warming of

more than 2°C. Assuming countries continue to decarbonize their economies at the same rate




12
   Article 4, UN Framework Convention on Climate Change.
https://unfccc.int/files/essential_background/background_publications_htmlpdf/application/pdf/conveng.pdf
13
   The range depends on the measure of emissions. The UNFCCC Secretariat reports four measures of emissions
from these countries, and the decision of whether to include land use change related carbon dioxide emissions
explains the variation in estimates.
14
   Article 3, UN Kyoto Protocol to the UNFCCC. https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/convkp/kpeng.pdf.

                                                      22
beyond 2030, as implied by their initial pledges through 2030, this would limit warming to 2°C

with merely an 8 percent probability (Fawcett et al. 2015). This course of action ­ continuing the

decarbonization rate of the Paris pledges through the rest of the century ­ translates into a 50

percent chance of reaching 2°C by 2061 (Rogelj 2019). By 2100, the expected temperature

increase would be close to 3°C on average globally, contributing to significant risks across the

planet. Climate Action Tracker, an independent group of analysts that publishes evaluations of

countries' emission mitigation actions, reports that India is the only G20 country making

progress consistent with a 2°C goal, and that Morocco and the Gambia are the only countries

making progress consistent with a 1.5°C goal (Akpan 2019).

           This is not a surprise to those who negotiated the Paris Agreement. The text of the

agreement acknowledged that full implementation of the voluntary emission mitigation pledges

through 2030 would lead to 55 gigatons of carbon dioxide, an emission level that does "not fall

within least-cost 2°C scenarios" (Paragraph 17, Decision to Adopt the Paris Agreement). 15 These

"least-cost 2°C scenarios" are integrated assessment modeling scenarios compiled by the

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change for its fifth assessment report (Clarke et al. 2014).

           The assessments reveal that current pledges to reduce emissions cannot hold back

warming to the intended level, as four observations make clear. First, the voluntary emission

pledges are simply inconsistent with the 2°C goal. Aldy et al. (2016) show that least-cost

implementation of these pledges ­ through a globally harmonized carbon price (the approach

taken in IAMs to model cost-minimizing emission mitigation) ­ deliver carbon prices of about

$10 to $20 per ton of carbon dioxide. The average carbon price for 2030 among the IPCC Fifth




15
     Adoption of the Paris Agreement to the UNFCCC, https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2015/cop21/eng/l09r01.pdf.

                                                        23
Assessment Report (AR5) 2°C scenarios exceeds $100 per ton. To put this price in context,

about 20 percent of global carbon emissions bear ­ or are scheduled to bear ­ a carbon price

from either a carbon tax or a cap-and-trade program, and less than half of these emissions face a

price of at least $10 per con carbon dioxide (World Bank 2019).

       Second, none of the emission pathways in the IAMs prevent warming beyond 2°C with

certainty. Typically, any reference to an emission pathway ­ and a global emission target for any

given year along that pathway ­ corresponds to either limiting warming to 2°C to a 66 percent or

50 percent likelihood. (The latter is used for identifying the range of carbon prices for least-cost

pathways to 2°C in Aldy et al. 2016.) As noted above, Fawcett et al. (2015) show that the

probability is slim that warming will stay below 2°C without accelerating emissions cuts beyond

the Paris pledges.

       Third, the full suite of IAMs that have evaluated such ambitious temperature goals show

that the challenge of limiting warming by transforming the energy foundation of the global

economy is daunting. Figure 4 presents global carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuel

combustion and industrial processes over 1960 to 2017, as well as two projections of these

emissions over 2020 through 2100. The historical series illustrates how, with few exceptions

(most of which are associated with declines in economic activity), global carbon dioxide

emissions have increased steadily over 50+ years. One projection of emissions reflects the

average of the 100+ least-cost pathways in the IPCC AR5 database that limit warming to no

more than 2°C with at least a 50 percent probability. Some pathways have higher emissions

trajectories and others have lower trajectories, but the characteristics of this profile over the rest

of the century are robust. Global emissions must peak immediately, fall precipitously, and

eventually fall below zero.



                                                  24
Insert Figure 4



        In these IAMs, negative global carbon dioxide emissions from the energy system is

achieved with the near full electrification of transportation, buildings, and industry coupled with

widespread generation of electricity from bioenergy-based power plants designed with carbon

capture and storage technology. In these models, there can be no cumulative global carbon

dioxide emissions from energy and industry over the second half of the 21st century. The

complete transformation of the energy foundation of the modern economy must occur over a

very short timeframe given the economic lifetimes of energy infrastructure. These "overshooting

scenarios" ­ where global carbon dioxide emissions must be negative in the latter years of this

century ­ require that a fully electrified planet (electric transport, electric heating, electric

industrial processes, etc.) rely on zero-emitting sources, such as renewable and nuclear power,

coupled with negative-emitting sources of energy (or direct air capture of carbon dioxide on a

massive scale).

        In contrast, the other projection reflects the average global emissions for all reference

scenarios that are no-new-policy (effectively zero carbon price) analogues corresponding to each

IAM's 2°C scenario used to construct the previous projection. While there is considerable

variation across the individual scenarios represented by this average, they all forecast

considerable growth in global emissions absent emission mitigation policies. The growth in

global carbon dioxide emissions projected over the next 50 years is similar to the growth in

global emissions over the first two decades of this century.




                                                   25
         The 2°C scenarios permit only about 15 percent of the cumulative carbon dioxide

emissions over the rest of this century that would occur in "business as usual" scenarios. This

rather limited "carbon budget" ­ the allowable emissions of carbon dioxide consistent with a 2°C

goal ­ requires dramatic energy system transformation. The energy intensity of economic output

would need to decline 90 percent through 2100 to limit warming to 2°C and the carbon intensity

of energy would need to become negative early in the second half of this century (Clarke et al.

2014).

         The IAMs account for the long-lived nature of much of the energy-consuming capital in

the economy. Cars and light trucks operate for 15 or more years, power plants operate for 40 to

60 years, and building shells may be used for a century or more. Thus, economic decisions today

have long-term impacts on the global climate along two dimensions: first, burning fossil fuels

results in the emissions of carbon dioxide that may reside in the atmosphere for centuries; and

second, investing in fossil fuel consuming capital today may lock in emission-intensive activities

for decades. Indeed, recent analyses based on industry- and sector-specific data suggest that

using the already-built energy infrastructure around the world through the end of its economic

lifetime would cause warming to exceed 1.5°C and exhaust at least two-thirds of the carbon

budget of a 2°C scenario (Tong et al. 2019).

         Fourth, all of these analyses are predicated on a strong assumption that national

governments can overcome their strong incentives to ride cheaply on the emission mitigation

efforts of other countries (Barrett 1990, 2003; Carraro and Siniscalco 1993). Some governments

may pledge ambitious emission goals but undertake action that yields only a fraction of the

necessary effort (Barrett and Dannenberg 2016). While countries may have a variety of domestic

incentives for reducing such emissions, such as to deliver local air quality benefits, to reward



                                                 26
specific industries, etc. (Ostrom 2010), national governments almost inevitably will significantly

underweight the external benefits of their emission mitigation efforts. Accordingly, they will

deliver less emission mitigation than would be in their collective self-interest, an amount well

below what would be necessary to achieve an ambitious temperature goal.

       For example, national governments have revealed little appetite for raising energy prices

consistent with ambitious climate change policy programs. Most of the world's population lives

in countries that subsidize transportation fuels and electricity. The design of carbon tax and cap-

and-trade policies have often included mechanisms to offset energy price impacts, including:

exempting energy-intensive industries from policy coverage (e.g., Denmark's carbon tax); using

the revenue of allowances to minimize electricity price increases (e.g., California's cap-and-trade

program); implementing a cap-and-trade program on power plants that sell electricity into

markets with rates set by the state without regard to the carbon price (e.g., China's pilot cap-and-

trade programs). The back-and-forth on carbon dioxide mitigation policies in Australia and the

United States illustrates the fragile political support for durable climate change policy.

       In short, the developments of recent years cast doubt on the prospects of reaching the

emissions targets that will be necessary to hold temperature increases to 2°C. National politics,

nations' cheap-riding incentives, and the time and vast expenditures required to transform the

world's energy economy and economies more generally, are each a sufficient force for

pessimism. It is hardly reassuring that countries are falling short of their Paris Agreement

commitments, and that those commitments, even if met, are well below the emissions targets that

would be required. These findings emphasize the importance of considering a multi-prong

strategy that pursues multiple avenues to mitigating climate change risks, including mitigation,

adaptation, and solar radiation management.



                                                 27
5. Comparative Costs of the Three Prongs

       Posit that the world does move to a three-prong strategy. To determine an appropriate

mix among them, will require careful consideration of their costs and risk-mitigation benefits.

The resource needs for each of emission mitigation, adaptation, and solar radiation management

strategies will vary, to some degree, with the extent of deployment of the other approaches, as

well as with a better understanding of climate change damages over time (Aldy 2015; Heutel et

al. 2018). Given the opportunities to substitute one strategy for another in reducing climate

change risk, as well as the uncertainties associated with projecting resource costs through the end

of this century and beyond, we focus on ranges of estimates and compare the general

magnitudes of the costs of each approach.



Emission Mitigation Costs

       The costs of mitigating emissions in line with ambitious temperature goals, such as

limiting warming to 1.5°C or 2°C, have typically been estimated with integrated assessment

models of the global energy economy over a century or more (Clarke et al. 2014). The integrated

assessment models, which often include a detailed representation of energy generating

technologies, their costs, and their potential to supply a range of quantities, show how investment

in and subsequent generation from new natural gas, new nuclear, and new renewable power

plants will likely respond to a specific carbon price. For example, they may model the potential

to reduce petroleum consumption in transportation through substitution to biofuels, electric

drivetrains, and other technologies. The assessment models also characterize how demand for

energy responds to increasing energy prices under a carbon pricing regime, typically drawing on


                                                28
real-world energy system data and estimated elasticities. They typically assume a globally

harmonized carbon tax, which creates a downward bias in estimated costs. These models often

abstract away from other considerations, such as making technological change endogenous or

revenue recycling to reduce the distortions in government tax codes. If so, they would exert an

upward bias on estimated costs. Nonetheless, these models provide a sense of the relative scale

of costs necessary to deliver on long-term temperature goals exclusively through emission

mitigation.

       The IPCC's fifth Assessment Report reviewed the integrated assessment literature and

found that scenarios generally consistent with limiting warming to 2°C (or lower) required

resources on the order of $500 billion to $2 trillion per year to mitigate emissions in 2030,

increasing to $1.5 to $5 trillion per year in 2050 (Clarke et al. 2014 and authors' calculations

based on the IPCC AR5 database). The globally harmonized carbon tax in 2020 would be about

$60/tCO2 on average across modeling scenarios that limit warming to 2°C. The required price

vastly exceeds today's implicit price. Nordhaus (2019) estimates that the current global carbon

price ­ when applying existing carbon tax and cap-and-trade programs scaled to their scope of

coverage ­ corresponds to no more than $3/tCO2.



Adaptation Costs

       Adaptation can take a wide array of forms. Many adaptation investments will be made by

individuals and businesses following their own interests. For example, households will respond

to higher temperatures by increasing their use of air conditioning (Davis and Gertler 2015;

Deschênes and Greenstone 2011). Farmers will alter the timing of planting and harvesting, the

choice of seeds, and water, nutrient, and pesticide inputs (Schlenker et al. 2005). A second broad


                                                 29
category of adaptation investments will have public good characteristics, and thus will likely

require direct public procurement. This would include everything from sea walls to protect

coastal cities from storm surge and sea level rise to enhanced public health efforts to counter

vector-borne diseases. Much of the literature on adaptation focuses on specific types of

adaptation investment or specific geographic areas.

       The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) produces an "adaptation gap"

report periodically, akin to its emission gap reports. The original 2014 report suggested that

adaptation financing needs would increase over time given any temperature trajectory, but at a

higher rate for higher-trajectory temperature profiles. By 2050, UNEP (2014) estimates that

about ½ of 1 percent of gross world product would be used for climate adaptation under a

scenario where temperatures stabilize at 2°C, but nearly double this estimate for warming of 4°C.

The more recent estimates place annual adaptation financing needs for 2030 in the $140 to $300

billion range (UNEP 2018). The Global Commission on Adaptation (2019), co-chaired by former

UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, World Bank CEO Kristalina Georgieva, and Bill Gates,

estimate the need for $1.8 trillion in adaptation and resilience spending over the 2020-2030

period. To put these magnitudes in context, UNEP (2018) identifies $23 billion in annual global

public finance ­ resources transferred from developed countries and development banks to

developing countries ­ currently dedicated to climate adaptation.



Amelioration Costs

       The costs of amelioration are most speculative, given the absence of any full-scale

amelioration intervention. The general premise that injecting sulfur particles into the atmosphere




                                                30
can deflect incoming sunlight and produce a net cooling effect on the planet reflects scientific

understanding distilled from natural experiments (Crutzen 2006; Wigley et al. 1996).

        The technology works. That eliminates a major uncertainty. But what would it cost?

Researchers have developed preliminary engineering cost estimates for delivering sulfur particles

(and other light-reflecting particles) into the stratosphere that would be sufficient to alter the

global energy balance and offset (at least some of) the increase in warming due to increasing

atmospheric GHG emissions. Smith and Wagner (2018) estimate the costs of deploying solar

radiation management by injecting sulfate aerosols into the stratosphere. Offsetting all of the

incremental warming associated with continued greenhouse gas emissions over 15 years would

average about $4 billion per year. 16 Keith et al. (2017) suggest that an ambitious intervention of

solar radiation management, that held radiative forcing at current levels as carbon dioxide

emissions continue unabated through 2100, could offset about 100 gigatons of CO2 emissions

associated with changes in energy demand, permafrost melting, and carbon-cycle feedbacks.

Keith et al. estimate that this would cost less than 50 cents per ton carbon dioxide.

        This brief review of the global cost estimates suggests three key conclusions. First, costs

being incurred today to mitigate emissions and to facilitate adaptation are an order of magnitude

less than what is necessary for these two strategies to combat climate change on par with a 2°C

goal. Second, the costs of emission mitigation and adaptation appear to be one to two orders of

magnitude greater than the cost of solar radiation management in achieving the same targets.

Third, emission mitigation and adaptation to climate change are likely characterized by




16
  This assumes that the world's emissions trajectory is consistent with limiting warming to about 3.2°C above pre-
industrial levels by 2100 (the so-called RCP 6.0 scenario). If emissions mitigation is more ambitious, the costs of
this solar radiation management strategy would be lower to prevent incremental warming, but if the mitigation is
less ambitious, then the costs would be higher.

                                                        31
increasing marginal costs, but solar radiation management ­ in terms of its direct costs of

implementation ­ appear to be linear in the scale of deployment. Thus, each year of further

inadequate action on emission mitigation would likely increase significantly the costs of

lowering emissions consistent with long-term temperature goals and, as a result, improve the

relative attractiveness on economic grounds of solar radiation management. A key outstanding

question is whether the potential unintended consequences of solar radiation management are

convex in its scale of application.



6. Solar Radiation Management and Moral Hazard

        There are many legitimate concerns about solar radiation management. Four stand out.

First, dumping a chemical into the stratosphere on a continuing basis at unprecedented levels will

affect the Earth's ecosystem in ways that science does not understand, and cannot predict.

Second, it will be essential to curb GHG emissions; otherwise, as GHGs continue to increase in

the atmosphere the pace of solar radiation management will have to increase alongside to keep

temperatures at a roughly even level. Third, solar radiation management only targets the

temperature dimension of climate change. It may do nothing for ocean acidification due to

increased CO2 concentrations; indeed, it could exacerbate acidification if sulfate is deposited in

the oceans. Fourth, while initial discussions among scientists and policy experts conceive of a

global governance regime, there is no assurance that one will emerge before some rogue nation

undertakes solar radiation management on its own. 17 In short, there are significant dangers or




17
  These problems are exacerbated because, as extensive work in psychology demonstrates, people are more
concerned with errors of commission than errors of omission.

                                                     32
shortcomings inherent in solar radiation management, or indeed in any geoengineering

technique. They have been a source of hostility from scientists and environmentalists.

       Moral hazard concerns have been a major second component of that hostility: If you tell

citizens that there may be some technological corrective for climate change, they will be less

willing to curb emissions (Keith 2000; Burns et al. 2016).

       Yet moral hazard may go in the opposite direction: If observers are too tied to mitigation

as our prime strategy for dealing with climate change, they will underplay the potential roles of

adaptation and solar radiation management. There are three reasons to be concerned that moral

hazard is flowing in this direction. First, the discussion in the scientific, environmental and

public spheres has focused very heavily on mitigation in contrast to adaptation and SRM, as

noted above.

       Second, the world has expended extremely few resources on adaptation and solar

radiation management. Even before consideration of deployment, there has been virtually no

research and development undertaken on solar radiation management. Over 2008-2018, global

R&D spending on solar radiation management never surpassed $10 million per year (Necheles et

al. 2018). There are hints that the situation may be changing, that hostility may be dampening,

and that SRM will get greater attention. In 2019, for the first time, the U.S. Congress

appropriated funds, the modest sum of $4 million (Temple 2019), to a federal agency to study

climate interventions.

       Third, although the overwhelming policy focus has been on mitigation, conditions in the

environment have gotten far worse in the past few decades. This makes it evident that it is highly

unlikely that a mitigation strategy alone will prove sufficient to save the world from extreme

expected damages. It also indicates that the returns to adaptation and solar radiation management



                                                 33
efforts are far greater than they would be had mitigation proceeded at a much faster pace. It is

too late to rely overwhelmingly on merely a single prong for climate policy.

        A solar radiation management intervention may even spur additional emission mitigation,

rather than substitute for it. In effect, solar radiation management could serve as an "awful action

alert." If the general public does not sufficiently appreciate the current risks posed by climate

change, then deploying solar radiation management ­ what some environmental advocates would

label "an awful action" ­ would signal the extreme danger policymakers believe the world faces

with climate change.

        For a recent illustration of the phenomenon of an awful action alert, consider the response

of financial markets to surprise news on policy actions taken to curb the COVID-19 pandemic.

Equity markets melted down in March 2020 in response to the pandemic. The days with the two

biggest drops were days with extremely surprising news about dramatic actions taken to curb the

pandemic. Figure 5 shows the dates with the largest daily declines in the S&P500 index and the

text of the first three paragraphs of the lead story in the New York Times on those days. 18

        In an analogous manner, injecting sulfate particles in the stratosphere could highlight for

the public the need for immediate, ambitious action on climate change and thus it could

galvanize public support for more ambitious emission mitigation. Indeed, some preliminary

investigation of this with focus groups that varied in the participants' concern about climate

change suggests that solar radiation management would motivate individuals to find ways to

reduce their carbon footprints (Shepherd 2009).




18
  The day with the third biggest drop, - 7.6% on March 9, had an irrelevant lead story about Donald J. Trump
taking over the Republican Party, and no stories about surprises on page 1.

                                                       34
       Burns et al. (2016) review the emerging social science literature on the link between

learning about solar radiation management and individuals' decisions to pay voluntarily for

emission offsets (i.e., contribute to emission mitigation). Merk et al. (2016), in an experiment

find no impact. Mahajan et al. (2019) survey of American households and find that even

respondents concerned about moral hazard were supportive of research on solar radiation

management.



7. Toward a Three-Prong Approach to Reducing Climate Change Risks

       In recent years, as the world's failure to dramatically reduce GHG emissions became

clear and as some symptoms of climate change became more threatening, discussion of

adaptation strategies became more acceptable. For example, after Hurricane Sandy hit New

York, relatively inexpensive adaptation strategies, such as moving electrical equipment out of

basements and developing coverings for subway entrances began to be contemplated and

undertaken. Still, on an expected value cost-benefit basis they were woefully insufficient and

considerable risks of a category 3 or higher hurricane persist for the greater New York area

(Klinenberg 2017). Moreover, many vulnerable American cities have not even initiated modest-

scale planning efforts on how they might make adaptation expenditures. The good news,

however, is that adaptation expenditures have become a politically acceptable part of the

conversation. Adaptation as a strategy to cope with climate change has at most modest moral

hazard consequences with respect to curtailing emissions. While the need to control emissions is

reduced through adaptation, it seems that only a small fraction of climate-change losses could be

affordably controlled by adaptation. Moreover, consideration of expensive adaptation highlights

the costs associated with the failure to effectively control emissions.



                                                 35
       The risks posed by climate change are large and uncertain. The policy response to date ­

primarily efforts of emission mitigation ­ has not proved effective. A more comprehensive

approach to climate risk mitigation holds potential to significantly improve outcomes as

atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations continue to increase. Figure 6 illustrates the various

policy levers at the disposal of government. Policymakers may price carbon or employ other

greenhouse gas mitigation policies to reduce emissions, i.e., to prevent the problem. They may

employ geoengineering, such as solar radiation management to lower the solar energy reaching

the earth's surface, to limit temperature increase, i.e., to ameliorate the problem. They may

facilitate adaptation, such as the construction of sea walls, investment in new treatments for

vector-borne diseases, etc., to reduce some of the adverse impacts of a changing climate.

Research and development can influence the design and efficacy of policy levers across each of

these dimensions, as well as on economic activity more generally and the emission intensity of

economic output. Economic growth may influence greenhouse gas emissions as well as reflect

the impacts from climate change.

       This figure is a stylized illustration and omits a variety of interactions and nuances of the

policies. For example, adaptation efforts, such as air conditioning, may increase the costs of

GHG mitigation by increasing energy demand. Conversely, higher energy prices due to carbon

pricing would raise the marginal cost of air conditioning and hence the costs of adaptation. The

change in temperature ­ and SRM's impact on temperature change ­ is not the only factor

influencing the impacts of carbon dioxide emissions. For example, the acidification of oceans is

largely unrelated to temperature changes, but instead reflects increased accumulation of carbon

dioxide in the atmosphere and subsequent oceanic absorption. Solar radiation management may

also impose adverse impacts unrelated to its direct effect on temperatures. While acknowledging



                                                36
these caveats, the diagram illustrates the potential for solar radiation management and adaptation

to mitigate climate change risks when emission mitigation is insufficient.

       Uncertainty is a prime characteristic of every arrow in this diagram. It is embedded in the

relationship: between R&D and innovation and in turn with economic growth; between

emissions mitigation and temperatures; between temperatures and impacts; between SRM and

temperature; and between adaptation and impacts. These uncertainties suggest opportunities for

policy learning to inform subsequent actions. They highlight the value of mitigating climate

change risks through an act-learn-act approach (Manne and Richels 1992). This learning

approach to policy would need to account for the irreversibilities in climate change, including

those due to climate-risk-mitigation policies that have been long recognized in economics (e.g.,

Arrow and Fisher 1974).

       This learning and subsequent execution of insights gained also requires time, a resource

in short supply. Consider several examples. The City of Venice began constructing a flood

barrier at the mouth of the Venetian lagoon in 2003, which may become fully operational by

2022. In the aftermath of the Northern California Camp Fire disaster and the prospects of future

forest fire risk, Pacific Gas and Electric indicates that it may take a decade to fully replace its

aging transmission infrastructure. In the interim, PG&E will implement "public safety power

shutoffs" ­ cutting power to millions of customers for days at a time ­ to reduce the risk of

another major fire. In 2006, the Southern Company initiated a permit application to build two

new nuclear power generating units at its Vogtle power plant in Georgia. The units may enter

into service by 2022. And, as we noted above, it may take more than a decade to develop a

delivery system for SRM.




                                                  37
       The large potential adverse impacts of climate change ­ including the prospect of

catastrophic impacts ­ suggest that further deployment of policies to promote solar radiation

management and adaptation may be merited. While we do not want to dismiss adaptation, we

recognize its limits. Climate change may pose existential risks to low-lying island nation-states

and to populations living in already hot, arid climates. Even in large countries, such as the United

States, sea level rise and storm surge may require those living in coastal communities, such as in

Florida, to retreat to higher land. There are also private incentives for (at least limited)

adaptation, such as air conditioning in homes and changes to agricultural practices by farmers.

We prefer to focus on the economics of SRM to inform understanding of the potential policy

steps on this policy lever.



8. Summing Up: Dynamic Decision-Making and the Three Prongs

       To date, climate change policy has followed an approach that entails extensive

discussions of and promises on emissions reduction, and some modest efforts involving

adaptation. Solar radiation management, which is strongly discouraged by many in the scientific

and environmental communities, is at best in the early stages of R&D.

       If civilization is to be saved from catastrophic losses through the end of this century, our

current strategy has shown itself to be insufficient. An effective strategy will require, at a

minimum, three elements: a significant expenditure of resources, the effective use of all three

prongs of climate policy, and significant technological advance within each prong. And those

elements in turn will require time, time to get the nations of the world on board, and time to

develop and implement the technologies that are required. Figure 6 illustrates.




                                                  38
       It is controversial to recommend that solar radiation management be pursued on a serious

basis. Even with significant research and experimentation, some of its major possible

consequences will not be fully understood. The alternative would be to leave all efforts to control

temperature increases to the single prong of reducing GHGs. The analysis above reveals that this

one-prong strategy almost inevitably will lead to severe, possibly catastrophic, adverse

consequences. Solar radiation management has the potential to substantially attenuate these

consequences.

       To avoid possible misunderstanding, we should stress that however effective is solar

radiation management, emission reductions and SRM are complementary policies. Absent

significant emission curtailment, the world would be confronted with the increasingly perilous

problem of conducting ever more extensive SRM efforts.

       In closing, we should stress that there are massive uncertainties associated with each of

the three policy prongs, and with their interplay, as well as with the consequences of a warming

planet. Hence, pursuing effective policy will be a complex problem of optimizing dynamic

decision making under uncertainty. We will learn as we go; the climate is not waiting.




                                                39
References



Aldy, J. E. 2015. Pricing climate risk mitigation. Nature Climate Change 5(5):396-398.

Aldy, J.E. 2016. Mobilizing political action on behalf of future generations. The Future of

       Children 26(1):157-178.

Aldy, J., Pizer, W., Tavoni, M., Reis, L. A., Akimoto, K., Blanford, G., ... & McJeon, H. C.

       2016. Economic tools to promote transparency and comparability in the Paris

       Agreement. Nature Climate Change 6(11):1000-1004.

Alter, C., S. Haynes, and J. Worland. 2019. Time 2019 Person of the Year: Greta Thunberg.

       Time, https://time.com/person-of-the-year-2019-greta-thunberg/.

Akpan, N. 2019. Only 2 countries are meeting their climate pledges. Here's how the 10 worst

       could improve. PBS News Hour, September 26, 2019.

       https://www.pbs.org/newshour/amp/science/only-2-countries-are-meeting-their-climate-

       pledges-heres-how-the-10-worst-could-improve

Arrow, K., and A.C. Fisher. 1974. Environmental preservation, uncertainty, and

       irreversibility. Quarterly Journal of Economics 88(2):312-319.

Baker, P. 2020. U.S. limits travel after W.H.O. cites pandemic. New York Times, March 12, p.

       A1.

Barrett, S. 2003. Environment and Statecraft: The Strategy of Environmental Treaty-making.

       Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Barrett, S. 1990. The problem of global environmental protection. Oxford Review of Economic

       Policy 6(1):68-79.




                                                40
Barrett, S., and A. Dannenberg. 2016. An experimental investigation into `pledge and review' in

       climate negotiations. Climatic Change 138(1-2):339-351.

Burke, M., S.M. Hsiang, and E. Miguel. 2015. Global non-linear effect of temperature on

       economic production. Nature 527: 235-239.

Burns, E.T., J.A. Flegal, D.W. Keith, A. Mahajan, D. Tingley, and G. Wagner. 2016. What do

       people think when they think about solar geoengineering? A review of empirical social

       science literature and prospects for future research. Earth's Future 4: 536-542.

Cai, Y., and T.S. Lontzek. 2019. The social cost of carbon with economic and climate risks.

       Journal of Political Economy 127(6):2684-2734.

Carleton, T., M. Delgado, M. Greenstone, T. Houser, S. Hsiang, A. Hultgren, ... and J. Rising.

       2018. Valuing the Global Mortality Consequences of Climate Change Accounting for

       Adaptation Costs and Benefits. University of Chicago Becker-Friedman Institute

       Working Paper 2018-51.

Carraro, C., and D. Siniscalco. 1993. Strategies for the international protection of the

       environment. Journal of Public Economics 52(3): 309-328.

Clarke, L., K. Jiang, K. Akimoto, M. Babiker, G. Blanford, K. Fisher-Vanden, ... and D.

       McCollum. 2014. Assessing transformation pathways. In: Climate Change 2014:

       Contribution of Working Group III to the fifth assessment report of the Intergovernmental

       Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press.

Climate Action Network International. 2018. Briefing: the IPCC's Special Report on Global

       Warming of 1.5C SR1.5 at COP24 and the Talanoa Dialogue. November.

       http://www.climatenetwork.org/sites/default/files/can_briefing_ipcc_sr_1.5_november20

       18.pdf.



                                                 41
Climate Action Network International. 2019. Position on Solar Radiation Management.

       September.

       http://www.climatenetwork.org/sites/default/files/can_position_solar_radiation_managem

       ent_srm_september_2019.pdf

Cline, W. R. 1991. Scientific basis for the greenhouse effect. The Economic Journal 101(407):

       904-919.

Crutzen, P. J. 2006. Albedo enhancement by stratospheric sulfur injections: A contribution to

       resolve a policy dilemma? Climatic Change 77(3-4):211-219.

Cummings, W. 2019. `The world is going to end in 12 years if we don't address climate change,'

       Ocasio-Cortez says. USA Today, January 22.

       https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/onpolitics/2019/01/22/ocasio-cortez-

       climate-change-alarm/2642481002/

Daniel, K. D., R.B. Litterman, and. G. Wagner. 2019. Declining CO2 price paths. Proceedings of

       the National Academy of Sciences 116(42):20886-20891.Davis, L. W., and P.J. Gertler.

       2015. Contribution of air conditioning adoption to future energy use under global

       warming. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112(19): 5962-5967.

DeFries, R. S., O. Edenhofer, A.N. Halliday, G.M. Heal, T. Lenton, M. Puma, ... and D.

       Stainforth. 2019. The missing economic risks in assessments of climate change impacts.

       Policy Insight, The Earth Institute at Columbia University, Grantham Research Institute

       on Climate Change and the Environment, and Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact

       Research, September.

Dell, M., B.F. Jones, and. B.A. Olken. 2014. What do we learn from the weather? The new

       climate-economy literature. Journal of Economic Literature 52(3): 740-98.



                                               42
Dell, M., B.F. Jones, and B.A. Olken. 2012. Temperature shocks and economic growth:

       Evidence from the last half century. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics

       4(3):66-95.

Deschênes, O., and M. Greenstone. 2011. Climate change, mortality, and adaptation: Evidence

       from annual fluctuations in weather in the US. American Economic Journal: Applied

       Economics 3(4):152-85.

DG Communication. 2019. Special Eurobarometer 490 Report on Climate Change. Brussels:

       European Commission.

Diaz, D. and F. Moore. 2017. Quantifying the economic risks of climate change. Nature Climate

       Change 7(11):774-782.

Executive Office of the President. 2013. The President's Climate Change Plan. June.

       https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/image/president27sclimateactionpla

       n.pdf

Fawcett, A. A., G.C. Iyer, L.E. Clarke, J.A. Edmonds, N.E. Hultman, H.C. McJeon, ... and J.

       Creason. 2015. Can Paris pledges avert severe climate change? Science 350(6265):1168-

       1169.

Figueres, C. 2018. Limiting warming to 1.5C is possible ­ if there is political will. The

       Guardian, October 8. https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2018/oct/08/limiting-

       warming-to-15c-is-possible-if-there-is-political-will-climate-change

Germain, D. 2006. Al Gore Does Sundance. CBS News, January 26.

       https://www.cbsnews.com/news/2006-al-gore-does-sundance/

Global Carbon Project. 2018. Supplemental data of Global Carbon Budget 2018 (Version 1.0)

       [Data set]. Global Carbon Project. https://doi.org/10.18160/gcp-2018



                                                43
Global Commission on Adaptation. 2019. Adapt Now: A global call for leadership on climate

       resilience. https://cdn.gca.org/assets/2019-09/GlobalCommission_Report_FINAL.pdf.

Gore, A. 2018. Statement by Former Vice President Al Gore on the IPCC Special Report on

       Global Warming. October 7. https://www.algore.com/news/c439f640-2507-4040-b996-

       c18edc46ee32

Hansen, J. 2006. The Threat to the Planet. NY Review of Books, July 13.

       https://www.nybooks.com/articles/2006/07/13/the-threat-to-the-planet/

Hansen, J. 2019. Saving Earth. June 27.

       http://www.columbia.edu/~jeh1/mailings/2019/20190627_SavingEarth.pdf

Heal, G. 2017. The economics of the climate. Journal of Economic Literature 55(3):1046-63.

Helm, B. 2015. Climate change's bottom line. New York Times, February 1, p. BU1.

Heutel, G., J. Moreno-Cruz, and S. Shayegh. 2018. Solar geoengineering, uncertainty, and the

       price of carbon. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 87: 24-41.

Interagency Working Group on the Social Cost of Carbon. 2010. Technical Support Document:

       Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis under Executive Order 12866.

       Washington, DC: The Obama Administration.

Interagency Working Group on the Social Cost of Greenhouse Gases. 2016. Technical Support

       Document: Technical Update of the Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact

       Analysis under Executive Order 12866. Washington, DC: The Obama Administration.

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2018. Summary for Policymakers. In: Global

       warming of 1.5°C: An IPCC special report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C

       above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the

       context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable


                                               44
       development, and efforts to eradicate poverty. Geneva: World Meteorological

       Organization.

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2019. Summary for Policymakers. In: IPCC

       special report on the ocean and cryosphere in a changing climate. Geneva: World

       Meteorological Organization.

Kahn, M.E. 2005. The death toll from natural disasters: the role of income, geography, and

       institutions. Review of Economics and Statistics 87(2):271-284.

Keeler, E., M. Spence, and R. Zeckhauser. 1972. The optimal control of pollution. Journal of

       Economic Theory 4(1):19-34.

Keith, D.W. 2000. Geoengineering the climate: History and prospect. Annual Review of Energy

       and the Environment 25(1): 245-284.

Keith, D. W., G. Wagner, and C.L. Zabel. 2017. Solar geoengineering reduces atmospheric

       carbon burden. Nature Climate Change 7(9): 617.

       https://www.nature.com/articles/nclimate3376

Kelley, C. P., S. Mohtadi, M.A. Cane, R. Seager, and Y. Kushnir. 2015. Climate change in the

       Fertile Crescent and implications of the recent Syrian drought. Proceedings of the

       National Academy of Sciences 112(11):3241-3246.

Klinenberg, E. 2017. Is New York ready for another Sandy? New Yorker, October 27.

Leiserowitz, A., E. Maibach, S. Rosentthal, J. Kotcher, P. Berquist, M. Ballew, M. Goldeberg,

       and A. Gustafson. 2019. Climate Change in the American Mind: April 2019. Yale

       University and George Mason University. New Haven, CT: Yale Program on Climate

       Change Communication. doi:10.17605/OSF.IO/CJ2NS.




                                               45
Mahajan, A., D. Tingley, and G. Wagner. 2019. Fast, cheap, and imperfect? U.S. opinion about

       solar geoengineering. Environmental Politics 28(3): 523-543.

Manne, A. S., and R.H. Richels. 1992. Buying greenhouse insurance: the economic costs of

       carbon dioxide emission limits. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Merk, C., G. Ponitzsch, and K. Rehdanz. 2016. Knowledge about aerosol injection does not

       reduce individual mitigation efforts. Environmental Research Letters 11: 054009.

Michel-Kerjan, E.O. 2010. Catastrophe economics: the national flood insurance

       program. Journal of Economic Perspectives 24(4):165-86.

Necheles, E., L. Burns, A. Chang, and D. Keith. 2018. Funding for solar geoengineering from

       2008 to 2018. Solar Geoengineering Research Blog, Harvard University.

       https://geoengineering.environment.harvard.edu/blog/funding-solar-geoengineering

Nordhaus, W.D. 2019. Climate Change: The Ultimate Challenge for Economics. American

       Economic Review 109(6):1991-2014.

Nordhaus, W. D. 2017. Revisiting the social cost of carbon. Proceedings of the National

       Academy of Sciences 114(7):1518-1523.

Nordhaus, W. D. 2008. A question of balance: economic modeling of global warming. New

       Haven: Yale University Press.

Nordhaus, W. D. 1993. Optimal greenhouse-gas reductions and tax policy in the" DICE"

       model. American Economic Review 83(2):313-317.

Ostrom, E. 2010. Polycentric systems for coping with collective action and global environmental

       change. Global Environmental Change 20(4):550-557.

Oxford University Press. 2019. Word of the Year 2019. https://languages.oup.com/word-of-the-

       year/2019/.



                                              46
Pindyck, R. S. 2019. The social cost of carbon revisited. Journal of Environmental Economics

       and Management 94:140-160.

Pindyck, R. S. 2013. Climate change policy: what do the models tell us? Journal of Economic

       Literature 51(3):860-72.

Pizer, W., M. Adler, J. Aldy, D. Anthoff, M. Cropper, K. Gillingham, M. Greenstone, B. Murray,

       R. Newell, R. Richels, and A. Rowell. 2014. Using and improving the social cost of

       carbon. Science 346:1189-1190.

Rijsberman, F.R., and R.J. Swart, eds. 1990. Targets and Indicators of Climatic Change: Report

       of Working Group 2 of the Advisory Group for Greenhouse Gases. Stockholm:

       Stockholm Environment Institute.

Ripple, W. J., C. Wolf, T.M. Newsome, P. Barnard, and W.R. Moomaw. 2019. World scientists'

       warning of a climate emergency. BioScience: biz088.

       https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/biz088

Rogelj, J. 2019. Personal communication via email, October 31, 2019.

Schlenker, W., W.M. Hanemann, W. M., and A.C. Fisher. 2005. Will US agriculture really

       benefit from global warming? Accounting for irrigation in the hedonic

       approach. American Economic Review 95(1): 395-406.

Shepherd, J. 2009. Do mention the `G' word. New Scientist 203(2724):24-25.

Smialek, J. and N. Irwin. 2020. Fed cuts rates to near zero; virus toll soars. New York Times,

       March 16, 2020, p. A1.

Smith, W., and G. Wagner. 2018. Stratospheric aerosol injection tactics and costs in the first 15

       years of deployment. Environmental Research Letters 13(12):124001.




                                                47
Stern, N. 2013. The structure of economic modeling of the potential impacts of climate change:

       grafting gross underestimation of risk onto already narrow science models. Journal of

       Economic Literature 51(3):838-59.

Temple, J. 2019. The U.S. government has approved funds for geoengineering research. MIT

       Technology Review, December 20. https://www.technologyreview.com/s/614991/the-us-

       government-will-begin-to-fund-geoengineering-research/

Thunberg, G. 2019. Greta Thunberg UN Speech in Full. The Express, December 13.

       https://www.express.co.uk/news/science/1216452/Greta-Thunberg-UN-speech-full-

       COP25-Greta-Thunberg-speech-transcript-climate-change

Tong, D., Q. Zhang, Y. Zheng, K. Caldeira, C. Shearer, C. Hong, ... and S.J. Davis. 2019.

       Committed emissions from existing energy infrastructure jeopardize 1.5° C climate

       target. Nature 572(7769):373-377.

United Nations Environment Programme. 2010. The Emissions Gap Report: Are the

       Copenhagen Accord pledges sufficient to limit global warming to 2C or 1.5C? UNEP,

       November.

United Nations Environment Programme. 2014. The Adaptation Gap Report 2014: A

       Preliminary Assessment. UNEP.

United Nations Environment Programme. 2015. The Emissions Gap Report 2015. UNEP,

       November.

United Nations Environment Programme. 2019. Emissions Gap Report 2019. UNEP, November.

United Nations Environment Programme. 2018. The Adaptation Gap Report 2018. UNEP.

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 2019. New York ­ New Jersey Harbor and Tributaries Coastal

       Storm Risk Management Feasibility Study, Interim Report and Current Study Status



                                               48
       Update. New York District.

       https://www.nan.usace.army.mil/Portals/37/docs/civilworks/projects/ny/coast/NYNJHAT/HAT

       %20Presentation%20for%20Great%20Neck%20NY%20on%2024%20Oct%2019.pdf?ver=2019-

       10-25-115255-550

Weitzman, M. L. 2009. On modeling and interpreting the economics of catastrophic climate

       change. Review of Economics and Statistics 91(1):1-19.

Wigley, T. M., R. Richels, and J.A. Edmonds. 1996. Economic and environmental choices in the

       stabilization of atmospheric CO2 concentrations. Nature 379(6562):240.

World Bank. 2019. State and Trends of Carbon Pricing 2019. Washington, DC: World Bank

       Group.




                                              49
Figure 1. Global Carbon Dioxide Emissions (gigatons CO2) and Major UN Climate Conferences,

1959-2017




Notes: Figure represents carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuel combustion and industrial

processes. "Historic CO2 Emissions" over 1959-2017 from the Global Carbon Project (2018).




                                              50
Figure 2. Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide Concentrations, parts per million, 1959-2018




Notes: Data from Trends in Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide, Earth System Research Laboratory,

NOAA. Figure presents the Mauna Loa annual mean carbon dioxide concentrations.

https://www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/ccgg/trends/data.html




                                             51
Figure 3. Global Land and Ocean Surface Temperature Departure from Average, July, 1880-

2019




Notes: Data from NOAA National Centers for Environmental information, Climate at a Glance:

Global Time Series, published September 2019, retrieved on October 1, 2019

from https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/cag/.




                                             52
Figure 4. Global Carbon Dioxide Emissions over 1960-2100, Gigatons CO2




Notes: Figure represents carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuel combustion and industrial

processes. "Historic CO2 Emissions" over 1960-2017 from the Global Carbon Project (2018).

"Limiting Warming to 2°C Scenario CO2 Emissions" represents the average global emissions in

that year for all scenarios in the IPCC AR5 Modeling Database that limit warming to less than

2°C in the year 2100 by at least a probability of 0.5. "No New Climate Policy CO2 Emissions"

represents the average global emissions that year for all reference scenarios that are the no-policy

(zero carbon price) analogs corresponding to each model's 2°C scenario in this database.




                                                53
Figure 5. Financial Responses to Awful Action Alerts: Two Days with Greatest Losses in S&P
500 and Lead Stories from the New York Times

 Date        S&P500 Percent         New York Times, opening paragraphs from lead story on
             Change from            the awful action alerts
             Previous Day's Close
 March 12,          -9.51%                "President Trump on Wednesday night blocked
 2020                               most visitors from continental Europe to the United
                                    States and vowed emergency aid to workers and small
                                    businesses as the World Health Organization declared
                                    the coronavirus a global pandemic, stock markets
                                    plunged further and millions of people cut themselves off
                                    from their regular lives.
                                          "In a prime-time address from the Oval Office, Mr.
                                    Trump outlined a series of measures intended to tackle
                                    the virus and its economic impact as he sought to
                                    reassure Americans that he was taking the crisis
                                    seriously after previously playing down the scope of the
                                    outbreak. He said he would halt travelers from Europe
                                    other than Britain for 30 days and asked Congress to
                                    support measures like a payroll tax cut.
                                          "`The virus will not have a chance against us,' Mr.
                                    Trump declared in his 10-minute speech, reading from a
                                    teleprompter in an uncharacteristic monotone. `We are
                                    all in this together'" (Baker 2020, p. A1).
 March 16,         -11.98%               "With the fast-spreading coronavirus posing a dire
 2020                               threat to economic growth, the Federal Reserve on
                                    Sunday night took the dramatic step of slashing interest
                                    rates to near zero and unveiled a sweeping set of
                                    programs in an effort to backstop the United States
                                    economy.
                                         "In addition to cutting its benchmark interest rate by
                                    a full percentage point, returning it to a range of 0 to 0.25
                                    percent, the Fed said it would inject huge sums into the
                                    economy by snapping up at least $500 billion of
                                    Treasury securities and at least $200 billion of mortgage-
                                    backed debt `over coming months.'
                                         "The remarkable Sunday afternoon action -- a
                                    drastic move unlike any since the depths of the global
                                    financial crisis a dozen years ago -- reflected the
                                    imminent peril facing the global economy as the virus
                                    shutters factories, quarantines workers and disrupts
                                    everyday life" (Smialek and Irwin 2020, p. A1).



                                             54
Figure 6. Policy Levers for Mitigating Climate Change Risk




                                             55
