                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE MACROECONOMIC STABILIZATION OF TARIFF SHOCKS:
                  WHAT IS THE OPTIMAL MONETARY RESPONSE?

                                         Paul R. Bergin
                                        Giancarlo Corsetti

                                       Working Paper 26995
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26995


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Giancarlo Corsetti gratefully acknowledges support by
the Cambridge INET institute.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Paul R. Bergin and Giancarlo Corsetti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Macroeconomic Stabilization of Tariff Shocks: What is the Optimal Monetary Response?
Paul R. Bergin and Giancarlo Corsetti
NBER Working Paper No. 26995
April 2020
JEL No. F4

                                           ABSTRACT

In the wake of Brexit and the Trump tariff war, central banks have had to reconsider the role of
monetary policy in managing the economic effects of tariff shocks, which may induce a
slowdown while raising inflation. This paper studies the optimal monetary policy responses using
a New Keynesian model that includes elements from the trade literature, including global value
chains in production, firm dynamics, and comparative advantage between two traded sectors. We
find that, in response to a symmetric tariff war, the optimal policy response is generally
expansionary: central banks stabilize the output gap at the expense of further aggravating short-
run inflation--contrary to the prescription of the standard Taylor rule. In response to a tariff
imposed unilaterally by a trading partner, it is optimal to engineer currency depreciation up to
offsetting the effects of tariffs on relative prices, without completely redressing the effects of the
tariff on the broader set of macroeconomic aggregates.


Paul R. Bergin
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Ave.
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
prbergin@ucdavis.edu

Giancarlo Corsetti
Faculty of Economics
Cambridge University
Sidgwick Avenue
CB3 9DD Cambridge, Cambs
United Kingdom
giancarlo.corsetti@gmail.com
1. Introduction
        Brexit and the Trump trade wars have ignited a debate over the economic effects of
tariffs, and the appropriate monetary policy response to the economic slowdown potentially
induced by these shocks. Much of recent research on the macroeconomic effects of trade
policy shocks has been conducted in the context of real trade models, or in empirical
exercises without consideration of monetary policy.1 In the classical literature, there are
examples of studies focusing on trade policy also as a tool of macroeconomic management.
But the question facing numerous central banks has been how to respond to a trade policy
that is either imposed by a foreign country over which it has no control, or reflects a
domestic government political agenda best modeled as an exogenous shock.
        Tariff shocks combine elements of both demand and supply disturbances, creating a
policy trade-off between stabilizing inflation (rising per effect of the tariff) or the output
gap (possibly reflecting a fall in activity). In recent theoretical research on the topic,
however, monetary policy is modelled using Taylor rules, without deriving them from
optimal policy exercises. This approach is tantamount to assuming that monetary
authorities would focus on countering the inflationary effects of a tariff with monetary
contraction, possibly exacerbating the associated fall in output (See Barattieri et al. (2018),
Caldara et al. (2020), and Linde and Pescatori (2019) for examples.) However, given the
mix of demand and supply implications of tariffs, it is far from clear that the optimal
monetary policy response can be approximated by the standard mold of inflation targeting.
        This paper studies Ramsey optimal monetary policy responses to tariff shocks in a
New Keynesian model that exhibits nominal rigidities, along with several other features
borrowed from the trade literature particularly relevant for understanding the effects of
tariffs. The model features (if only in a stylized way) value chains in production, in which
imported goods are used in the production of exports. This implies that raising tariff
protection of domestic exporters can also raise the cost of production for domestic firms.


1
 See for example Bloom, et al. (2019), Born et al. (2019), Breinlich et al. (2017), Caliendo et al. (2017),
Davies and Studnicka (2018), Dhingra et al. (2017), Sampson (2017), Steinberg (2019), and Van Reenen
(2016). Some recent contributions use monetary models with standard monetary policy rules in the
background, but these do not derive optimal policy or focus on the monetary response. Important examples
are Linde and Pescatori (2019), Erceg et al. (2018) and Caldara et al. (2020), as well as Barattieri et al.
(2018), which goes on to consider two alternative monetary regimes of a zero lower bound and a fixed
exchange rate.

                                                     1
The model also features two traded sectors, one consisting of monopolistically competitive
differentiated goods, characterized by sticky prices and sunk entry cost, and the other
perfectly competitive non-differentiated goods, where a country's comparative advantage
between sectors is endogenous. As shown in the trade literature, optimal tariff policy can
be designed with the goal to manipulate comparative advantage. In previous work of ours,
we have reconsidered the same goal in relation to the optimal design of monetary and
exchange rate policy (see Bergin and Corsetti, 2019). In this paper, we bring our two-
country model to bear on both the macroeconomic effects of tariff shocks, and the optimal
response of monetary policy to such a shock. We carry out our analysis numerically, at first
focusing on a version of our model with one sector only, then extending our exercises to
the richer setting.
        Our results are as follows. A symmetric tariff war, in which countries impose
symmetric tariffs on exports from each other, implies that output falls and inflation rises in
both countries. The optimal (cooperative) monetary policy response is distinctly
expansionary. Central banks lower interest rates to stimulate flagging export demand,
consumption demand, and investment demand. Stabilizing the output gap comes at the
expense of further aggravating inflation. The characterization of the optimal monetary
response as expansionary may be surprising, in light of the fact that an unexpected hike in
tariffs is commonly seen as a supply shock, because of its effect on marginal costs and thus
on the price of domestic goods. The Ramsey solution is also at odds with the prescription
arising from imposing a standard Taylor rule with a large inflation coefficient.
        The optimal domestic response to the alternative scenario of a unilateral tariff shock
imposed by a trading partner is similarly expansionary. In this scenario, however, the
optimal home monetary stance engineers currency deprecation with the primary goal to
offset the impact of the tariff on relative prices, thus containing the distortions impinging
on efficient production and trade. Yet the optimal policy only imperfectly redresses the
effects of the tariff on the broader set of macroeconomic aggregates.
        The above results are qualitatively similar in the one- and two-sector versions of our
model. Quantitatively, however, the two models have different implications. When we
allow tariff shocks to induce shifts in comparative advantage between multiple sectors, our
model predicts a significant amplification of their macroeconomic effects, in particular in

                                              2
terms of firm entry dynamics. In this case, monetary policy has a much larger role to play
in counteracting trade policy distortions.
       Our work is related to a number of recent papers studying macroeconomic effects of
trade policies in dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models. Barrattieri et al. (2017)
and Erceg et al. (2018) study whether tariffs or combinations of trade policies can
potentially serve as effective tools of macroeconomic stimulus in environments with
nominal frictions. Caldara et al. (2018) study how trade policy uncertainty can have
contractionary macroeconomic implications. Linde and Pescatori (2019) study the degree
to which endogenous exchange rate movements in a macroeconomic environment work to
offset the real effects of tariffs and export subsidies. These papers share with our work a
nominal dimension that goes beyond the standard trade literature, in that they have nominal
rigidities and specify monetary policy behavior. However, we differ in that our focus is on
the monetary policy choice. These papers focus on the design and efficacy of tariff policies,
in an environment that includes a given, standard Taylor monetary policy rule in the
background. In contrast, we compute the design of the welfare-optimizing monetary policy
response of a central bank faced by a given, exogenous tariff shock. We also differ in
considering economic features found important in the trade literature, such as international
production chains and multiple traded sectors with the resulting shifts in comparative
advantage.
       The paper proceeds as follows. The next section describes the model environment
and calibration. Section 3 presents simulation experiments for scenarios in a one-sector
version of the model, including a symmetric tariff war and a unilateral foreign tariff.
Section 4 then shows how results change in the full two-sector model, and section 5
concludes.


2. Model
       The theoretical framework builds upon the monetary comparative advantage model
developed in Bergin and Corsetti (2019), wherein two countries, home and foreign, each
produce two types of tradable goods. The first type comes in differentiated varieties
produced under monopolistic competition. Firms in this sector face a sunk investment cost
to enter the market with a new variety, and set prices subject to nominal rigidities;

                                             3
moreover, production may require intermediates in a round-about production structure. The
second type of good is modeled according to the standard specification in real business
cycle models, assuming perfect substitutability among producers within a country, but
imperfect substitutability across countries.
         In the text to follow, we present the households' and firms' problems as well as the
monetary and fiscal policy rules from the vantage point of the home economy, with the
understanding that similar expressions and considerations apply to the foreign economy--
foreign variables are denoted with a "*".


2.1.     Goods consumption demand and price indexes
       Households consume goods produced in both sectors, of domestic and foreign origin.
The differentiated goods come in many varieties, produced by a time-varying number of
monopolistically competitive firms in the home and foreign country, nt and nt*
respectively, each producing a single variety. Each variety is an imperfect substitute for
any other variety in this sector, either of home or foreign origin, with elasticity . The non-
differentiated goods come in a home and foreign version, which are imperfect substitutes
with elasticity . However, within each country, all goods in this sector are perfectly
substitutable with each other, and are produced in a perfectly competitive environment.
We will refer to the differentiated sector as "manufacturing," and denote this sector with a
D; we will denote the non-differentiated sector with a N.
         Tariffs are specified as ad-valorem duties imposed at the dock. They directly enter
the relative prices observed by consumers, and which enter the demand equations. Tariff
revenue is collected by the government of the importing country and rebated to domestic
consumers, thus canceling out in the consolidated national budget constraint.
         The overall consumption index is specified as follows:
                                                   
                                             Ct  C D   C 1
                                                     ,t N ,t ,

                                                                             
                                       nt                                     1
                                                        *
                                               1     nt              1
where                       C D ,t      ct  h   d h   ct  f              df 
                                      0                                     
                                                     0                      

is the index over the endogenous number of home and foreign varieties of the differentiated
manufacturing good, ct(h) and ct(f), and


                                                   4
                                                                                    
                                                 1 1                     1          
                                                                                  1  1

                                      C N ,t      C H,t  1  
                                                                             C F ,t 
                                                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    

is the index over goods differentiated only by country of origin, CH ,t and CF ,t with   0,1

accounting for the weight on domestic goods. The corresponding welfare-based
consumption price index is
                                                               1
                                                        PD ,t P
                                                 t 
                                                               N ,t
(1)                                             P                            ,
                                                        1   
                                                                  1



where


                                                                                       
                                                                                      1

                                                        n  pt  f  TD,t 
                                                                                   1 1
                                PD,t  nt pt  h
                                                  1          *
(2)                                                          t


is the index over the prices of all varieties of home and foreign manufacturing goods, pt(h)
and pt(f), and

                                                                                       
                                                                                     1

                                                       1    PF ,tTN ,t 
                                                  1                               1 1
(3)                               PN ,t   PH ,t

is the index over the prices of home and foreign non-differentiated goods. In these indexes,
TD ,t represents the quantity of 1 plus the ad valorem tariff rate imposed by the home country

on imports of foreign differentiated goods, and TN ,t represents the quantity of 1 plus the ad-

valorem tariff rate imposed by the home country on imports of foreign non-differentiated
goods.
         The relative demand functions for domestic residents implied from our specification
of preferences are listed below:
(4,5)    C D , t   Pt C t / PD , t                        CN ,t  1    PC
                                                                       t t /PN ,t



         ct (h)   pt  h / PD,t  CD,t                      ct ( f )   pt  f  TD,t / PD,t  CD,t
                                                                                          
(6,7)

         CH ,t    PH ,t / PN ,t  CN ,t                    CF ,t  1    PF ,tTN ,t / PN ,t  CN ,t
                                                                                             
(8,9)


2.2      Home households' problem
         The representative home household derives utility from consumption (Ct), and from
holding real money balances (Mt/Pt); it suffers disutility from labor (lt). The household
budget consists of labor income from working at the nominal wage rate Wt; profits rebated
                                                         5
from home firms denoted with  t  in real terms and defined below, as well as interest

income on bonds in home currency (it-1BH,t-1) and foreign currency (it-1*BF,t-1), where et is
the nominal exchange rate in units of home currency per foreign. Income is net of lump-
sum taxes (Tt ), used for monetary transfers and to rebate tariff payments on imports. It is
assumed that consumers do not internalize the effects of their consumption decisions on
government tariff rebates.
          Household optimization for the home country may be written:
                                              
                                                           M 
                                     max E0   tU  Ct , lt , t 
                                            t 0            Pt 

where utility is defined by
                                      1   1   M     1 1
                               Ut       Ct  ln t      lt ,
                                     1        Pt  1 
subject to the budget constraint:

   t t   Mt  Mt 1    BHt  BHt 1   et  BFt  BFt 1   Wl
                                                    t t  t  it 1BHt 1  it 1 BFt 1  PACBt  T
                                                                        *
  PC                                                                                t      t .


In the utility function, the parameter  denotes risk aversion and  is the inverse of the Frisch
elasticity. The constraint includes a small cost to holding foreign bonds

                                                 B  et BFt 
                                                           2

                                        ACBt                   ,
                                                 2Pt pHt yHt

scaled by  B , which is a common device to assure long run stationarity in the net foreign asset
position, and resolve indeterminacy in the composition of the home bond portfolio. The bond
adjustment cost is a composite of goods that mirrors the consumption index, with analogous
demand conditions to equation (4)-(9).

       Defining t  PC 
                    t t , household optimization implies an intertemporal Euler equation:

                                                    1 
(10)
                                      1
                                      t
                                              
                                          1  it Et  
                                                    t1 
a labor supply condition:
(11)                                      W t  lt  t

a money demand condition:
                                                1  it 
(12)                                     Mt  t        ,
                                                it 

                                                6
and a home interest rate parity condition:
                             e                   et B ft                  
(13)                   E t  t t+1 1+i *
                                      t   1+  B             =E t  t 1+i t  .
                             e                   p y 
                            t+1 t                Ht Ht             t+1    

          The problem and first order conditions for the foreign household are analogous.


2.3 Home firm problem and entry condition in the differentiated goods sector
          In the manufacturing sector, the production of each differentiated variety follows
                                                                   1
                                    yt  h   D ,t Gt (h)  lt  h  
                                                         
(14)                                                                   ,

where D,t is a productivity shock specific to the production of differentiated goods but

common to all firms within that sector, lt(h) is the labor employed by firm h, and Gt (h) is a
composite of differentiated goods used by firm h as an intermediate input. Gt (h) is specified
as an index of home and foreign differentiated varieties that mirrors the consumption index
specific to differentiated goods ( CD,t ). If we sum across firms, Gt  nt Gt ( h) represents

economy-wide demand for differentiated goods as intermediate inputs, and given that the
index is the same as for consumption, this implies demands for differentiated goods
varieties analogous to equations (6)­(7).

             dG,t (h)   pt  h / PD,t  Gt              dG,t ( f )   pt  f  TD,t / PD,t  Gt
                                                                                    
(15,16)

          Differentiated goods firms set prices pt  h  subject to an adjustment cost:

                                            P  pt  h      pt  h  yt  h 
                                                             2

(17)                          ACP ,t  h                1                ,
                                          2  pt 1
                                                   h     
                                                                Pt


where  P is a calibrated parameter governing the degree of price stickiness. For the sake
of tractability, we follow Bilbiie et al. (2008) in assuming that new entrants inherit from
the price history of incumbents the same price adjustment cost, and so make the same
price setting decision.3
          There is free entry in the sector, but, once active, firms are subject to an exogenous
death shock. Since all differentiated goods producers operating at any given time face the


3
  The price index for adjustment cost is identical to the overall consumption price index, implying demands
analogous to those for consumption in equations (4)-(9). See the supplementary online appendix for the full
list of equations.

                                                    7
same exogenous probability of exit  , a fraction  of them exogenously stop operating
each period. The number of firms active in the differentiated sector, nt, at the beginning of
each period evolves according to:
(18)                                         nt 1  1    nt  net  ,

where net denotes new entrants.
        To set up a firm, managers incur a one-time sunk cost, Kt, and production starts
with a one-period lag. This cost is not constant but varies reflecting an entry congestion
externality, represented as an adjustment cost that is a function of the number of new firms:
                                                                  
                                                       ne 
(19)                                              Kt   t  K ,
                                                       net 1 
where K indicates the steady state level of entry cost, and the parameter  indicates how
much the entry cost rises with an increase in entry activity. The congestion externality
plays a similar role as the adjustment cost for capital standard in business cycle models,
which moderates the response of investment to match dynamics in data. In a similar vein,
we calibrate the adjustment cost parameter,  , to match data on the dynamics of new firm
entry.4 Entry costs are specified either in units of labor (if K =1) or in units of the
differentiated good (if K =0). If entry costs are in units of differentiated goods, the
investment-driven demand is distributed analogously to demands for consumption of
differentiated goods:

                                     dK ,t (h)   pt  h / PD,t  net 1K  Kt
                                                                
(20)

                                 dK ,t ( f )   pt  f  TD,t / PD,t  net 1K  Kt .
                                                                   
(21)

        We now can specify total demand facing a domestic differentiated goods firm:
(22)              d t  h   c t ( h )  d G ,t ( h )  d K ,t ( h )  d A C , P ,t ( h )  d A C , B ,t ( h )

which includes the demand for consumption ( ct (h) ) by households, and the demand by
firms for intermediate inputs ( d G ,t (h) ), investment (the sunk entry costs) ( d K ,t (h) ), and

goods absorbed as adjustment costs for prices ( d AC , P,t (h) ) and bonds holding costs



4
 The value of steady state entry cost K has no effect on the dynamics of the model, and so will be
normalized to unity.

                                                            8
( d AC , B ,t (h) ). There is an analogous demand from abroad d t*  h  . We assume iceberg trade

costs  D for exports, so that market clearing for a firm's variety is:

(23)                               yt  h   d t  h   1   D  d t*  h  ,

Firm profits are computed as:
(24)              t  h   pt  h  d t  h   et pt*  h  d t*  h   mct y t  h   Pt AC p ,t  h  .

where mct    1   
                          1
                              PD ,t  Wt 1 /  D ,t is marginal cost.

        Thus the value function of firms that enter the market in period t may be
represented as the discounted sum of profits of domestic sales and export sales:
                                                   s               
                               vt  h   Et     1     t  s  t  s  h   ,
                                           s 0       t             
where we assume firms use the discount factor of the representative household, who owns
the firm, to value future profits. With free entry, new producers will invest until the point
that a firm's value equals the entry sunk cost:

(25)                                vt  h  KWt  1K  PD,t  Kt ,


recalling  K =1 is the case of entry costs in labor units, and  K =0 the case of goods units.
By solving for cost minimization we can express the relative demand for labor and
intermediates as a function of their relative costs:
                                        PD , t G t ( h )           
(26)                                                                   .
                                         W t lt ( h )              1
         Managers optimally set prices by maximizing the firm value subject to all the
constraints specified above. The price setting equation:

                                 P  pt  h             1  pt  h       p h
                                                     2
                                        
                                                                                              2
                     
           pt  h      mct              1 p t  h    P               1 t
                    1      2  pt 1  h                  1  pt 1  h   pt 1  h 
(27)
                    p  h   pt 1  h                          2
                                                                
            P Et   t 1  t 1      1                              
            1        t  p t  h     pt  h                        
expresses the optimal pricing as a function of the stochastically discounted demand faced
by producers of domestic differentiated goods,




                                                        9
         p  h   
    t   t         C D ,t  G t  n et 1   K  K t  A C P , D ,t  A C B , D ,t 
          PD ,t 
                                                                                                                             .
                                      
        1   D  T     *
                            pt  h                                                                                      
       
                    D ,t
                                         1   D   C * D ,t  G t*  n et* 1   K  K * t  A C * P , D ,t    A C * B , D ,t    t
                                                                                                                       
                   *
            et P                   
                     D ,t
                                                                                                                       

This sums the demand arising from consumption, use as intermediate inputs, sunk entry
cost, price adjustment costs, and bond holding costs.
        Under the assumption that firms preset prices in own currency, i.e., assuming producer
currency pricing, the good price in foreign currency moves one-to-one with the exchange rate,
net of trade costs:
(28)                                            pt*  h   1   D  pt  h  / et ,

where recall the nominal exchange rate, e, measures home currency units per foreign.
        Note that, since households own firms, they receive firm profits but also finance the
creation of new firms. In the household budget, the net income from firms may be written:
                                                       t  ntt  h   net vt  h  .

In reporting our quantitative results, we will refer to the overall home gross production of
differentiated goods defined as: y D , t  n t y t  h  .


2.4 Home firm problem in the undifferentiated goods sector
        In the second sector firms are assumed to be perfectly competitive in producing a
good differentiated only by country of origin. The production function for the home non-
differentiated good is linear in labor:
(29)                                                   yH ,t   N ,t lH ,t ,

where N ,t is stochastic productivity specific to this country and sector. It follows that the

price of the homogeneous goods in the home market is equal to marginal costs:
(30)                                                  pH ,t  Wt /  N ,t .

An iceberg trade cost specific to the non-differentiated sector implies prices of the home
good abroad are

                                                     ,t  pH ,t 1   N  / et .
                                                   *
(31)                                              pH

Analogous conditions apply to the foreign non-differentiated sector.


                                                              10
2.5 Monetary policy
         To compute the Ramsey allocation, we posit that the monetary authority maximizes
aggregate welfare of both countries:
                       
                         1 1          1 1                           1  1 *1    1 *1                       
              max E0   t       Ct1      lt                               Ct      lt                       
                     t 0  2  1      1                               2 1      1                            
under the constraints of the economy defined above. As common in the literature, we write
the Ramsey problem by introducing additional co-state variables, which track the value of
the planner committing to a policy plan.
         We also study a "no-policy" case with a constant money growth rule:
                                                        Mt
(32)                                                           .
                                                        M t 1

as well as a Taylor rule of the form
                                                                                               1  i
                                                                pt h  
                                                                             p
                                                                                  Yt 
                                                                                        Y   
(33)                        1  i t  1  i t 1 
                                                 i
                                                      1 i
                                                     
                                                                p h  
                                                                                  
                                                                                 Y          
                                                                                                      ,
                                                                t 1                         

where terms with overbars are steady state values. In this rule, inflation is defined in terms
of differentiated goods producer prices, while Yt is a measure of GDP defined net of
intermediates as:5
                                              nt
                                                                                             
(34)              Yt   (1  n t ) (  1/ (1 ) )  p t  h  y t  h  d h  PD ,t G t  p H ,t y H ,t  / Pt .
                                                                                             
                                              0                                              

         Across these different specifications of monetary policy, we will abstract from
public consumption expenditure, so that the government uses seigniorage revenues and
taxes to finance transfers, assumed to be lump sum. Government transfers are also used to
rebate to consumers the tariff duties paid to the government by consumers and firms on
imported goods. The government budget constraint thus is specified:
(35)        Tt   M t 1  M      t     TD ,t  1 nt*1d t ( f )  TN ,t  1 C F ,t  A C P , F ,t  A C B , F ,t  .


2.6 Market clearing


5
  For computational simplicity, the Taylor rule is specified in terms of deviations of GDP from its steady
state value, which is distinct from the output gap.

                                                            11
       The market clearing condition for the manufacturing goods market is given in equation
(22) above. Market clearing for the non-differentiated goods market requires:

(36)              yH ,t  CH ,t  ACP, H ,t  ACB, H ,t  1   N   CH
                                                               *
                                                                 ,t  ACP , H ,t  ACB , H ,t 
                                                                       *           *




(37)              yF ,t  1   N
                             *
                                 CF ,t  ACP,F ,t  ACB,F ,t   CF
                                                              *
                                                                ,t  ACP , F ,t  ACB , F ,t .
                                                                      *           *



Labor market clearing requires:
                                            nt

(38)                                         l  h dh  l
                                            0
                                                 t           H ,t    K net Kt  lt .

Bond market clearing requires:
(39)                                                     BHt  BHt
                                                               *
                                                                  0

(40)                                                     B Ft  B Ft
                                                                 *
                                                                     0.

Balance of payments requires:
        nt                        n*t

         p  h   d  h  dh   p  f   d  f  df  P  C                                    ACP , H ,t  ACB , H ,t 
              *      *                                                 *    *         *           *
             t        t                 t            t                 Ht   H ,t
(41)    0                         0

        PF ,t  CF ,t  ACP , F ,t  ACB , F ,t   it 1 BH ,t 1  et i t 1 BF ,t 1   BH ,t  BH ,t 1   et  BF ,t  BF ,t 1  .
                                                     *           *               *      *




2.7 Shocks process and equilibrium definition
       Shocks are assumed to follow joint log normal distributions. In the case of
productivity, for instance, we can write:
                            logD,t  logD        logD,t 1  logD 
                                             A                    At
                           log N ,t  log N 
                                               logN ,t 1  logN 
                                                               

with autoregressive coefficient matrix A , and the covariance matrix E  At At 
                                                                           '
                                                                               . Foreign
productivity follows an analogous process. In the case of tariffs, we can write
                             log TD ,t       log TD                  log TD ,t 1  log TD 
                                                                                          
                             log TD
                                  *
                                             log TD
                                                  *
                                                                     log TD
                                                                          *
                                                                            ,t 1  log TD
                                                                                        *

                                                      T                                     Tt
                                    ,t
                                                                    
                            log TN ,t        log TN                 log TN ,t 1  log TN 
                                                  *                                     *
                            log TN ,t
                            
                                  *
                                             log TN                 log TN ,t 1  log TN 
                                                                    
                                                                          *
                                                                                          

with autoregressive coefficient matrix T , and the covariance matrix E TtTt 
                                                                         '
                                                                            .
       A competitive equilibrium in our world economy is defined along the usual lines,


                                                               12
as a set of processes for quantities and prices in the home and foreign country satisfying:
(i) the household and firms optimality conditions; (ii) the market clearing conditions for
each good and asset, including money; (iii) the resource constraints--whose specification
can be easily derived from the above and is omitted to save space.


2.8 Model calibration
         Where possible, parameter values are taken from standard values in the literature.
Risk aversion is set at   2 ; labor supply elasticity is set at 1/  1.9 following Hall
(2009). Parameter values are chosen to be consistent with an annual frequency--the
frequency at which sectoral productivity data are available. Accordingly, time preference
is set at   0.96 .
         To choose parameters for the differentiated and non-differentiated sectors we draw
on Rauch (1999). We choose  so that differentiated goods represent 55 percent of U.S.
trade in value. We assume the two countries are of equal size with no exogenous home
bias,   0.5 , but allow trade costs to determine home bias ratios. To set the elasticities of
substitution for the differentiated and non-differentiated goods we draw on the estimates by
Broda and Weinstein (2006), classified by sectors based on Rauch (1999). The Broda and
Weinstein (2006) estimate of the elasticity of substitution between differentiated goods
varieties is  =5.2 (the sample period is 1972-1988). The corresponding elasticity of
substitution for non-differentiated commodities is  = 15.3.
         The price stickiness parameter is set at  p =40, a value implies in simulations of a

productivity shock that approximately half the firms resetting price during the first year.
The firm death rate is set at   0.1 , which is four times the standard rate of 0.025 to reflect
the annual frequency. The mean sunk cost of entry is normalized to the value K =1. The
share of intermediates in differentiated goods production is set to a modest value of 
=1/3.6




6
 There is a wide range of views regarding the appropriate calibration for this parameter. Jones (2007)
suggests a value of 0.43 for the share of intermediates, and it is common in the related literature to use a
value at 1/2. We will consider a range of values for this parameter in sensitivity analysis, but we use a
modest value of this parameter for our benchmark model.

                                                      13
         To set trade costs, we calibrate  D so that exports represent 26% of GDP, as is the
average in World Bank national accounts data for OECD countries from 2000-2017.7 This
requires a value of  D =0.33.8 This is similar to the value of trade costs typically assumed by
macro research, such as 0.25 in Obstfeld and Rogoff, 2001. But it is small compared to some
trade estimates, such as 1.7 suggested by Anderson and van Wincoop 2004, and adopted by
Epifani and Gancia (2017). As shown later on, sensitivity analysis to a wide range of values for
the trade cost suggests that our results are robust to calibrations implying trade shares both
much higher and much lower than in our benchmark calibration. We begin with the standard
assumption of trade models that the homogeneous good is traded frictionlessly (  N ), but we
will consider a range of values for this parameter also in sensitivity analysis.
         The benchmark simulation model specifies entry costs in units of goods (  K =0) but
we will also report results for entry costs in labor units in our sensitivity analysis (see the
discussion in Cavallari, 2013). The adjustment cost parameter for new firm entry,  , is
taken from Bergin and Corsetti (2019), chosen to match the standard deviation of new firm
entry in the benchmark simulation to that in data.
         Currently all tariff variables are calibrated with a mean value of 1.05 (5 percentage
point mean tariff rate). A shock raises the tariff rate 2 percentage points, with an
autoregressive parameter of 0.9.


3. Optimal policy in the one-sector version of the model
         We begin our analysis focusing on the one-sector version of our model, as this is
close to the standard specification in the macroeconomic literature on tariff shocks. We
assume that both countries produce differentiated goods, and shut down the non-
differentiated goods sector by setting   1 . We will report simulations for two types of
shocks: first, we study a symmetric rise in tariff in both countries---the case of a trade war
with full retaliation; second, we study a unilateral foreign tariff on home exports, in order
to gain insight on the response of the exchange rate and trade balance.9 In all cases we

7
  See https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NE.EXP.GNFS.ZS?locations=OE.
8
  To coincide with standard accounting definitions, differentiated goods used as intermediates are included
in the measure of exports, and excluded in the measure of GDP, as is appropriate.
9
  The case of a symmetric global shock is modeled by drawing a single shock and feeding it directly into
the tariff processes for both home and foreign differentiated goods. This is equivalent to setting the four
elements in the upper left quadrant of the covariance matrix for the joint shock process equal to a common

                                                    14
consider a rise in tariffs by 2 percentage points above their 5% steady state level, with an
autoregressive coefficient of 0.9.


3.1 Optimal stabilization in a tariff war with full retaliation
         In figure 1, we report impulse responses to an unexpected rise in tariffs in both
countries, contrasting the cases of "no-policy" (dashed), "flexible prices" (dotted), and
"optimal policy" (solid), where the "no policy" case is obtained by imposing a constant
money growth rule. The first two cases allow us to set the stage for our main contribution,
characterizing economic dynamics under efficient stabilization of the shock.


3.1.1 The transmission of symmetric tariff shocks
         Under a suboptimal money growth rule ("no policy"), a symmetric tariff shock
raises inflation and causes a recession---a standard result in the recent literature. The price
index rises both because of the direct effect of tariffs paid on imported consumption goods,
and because the indirect effect of tariffs on imported inputs used by firms---as higher
marginal costs of production are passed on by firms to consumption prices.
         GDP falls by more than a full percentage point. Higher tariffs depress output via
several channels. Perhaps the clearest channel is the rise in the price of imported goods
used in the round-about production structure. Higher marginal costs of production drive up
prices and reduce demand for firms' output. A different channel operates via the rise in
entry costs, also reflecting higher prices of imported inputs. Higher entry costs are
responsible for the sharp fall in firm entry (a fall in investment demand), and the
progressive reduction in the number of firms, apparent from Figure 1. Indirectly, a lower
number of firms and product varieties also contributes to raising inflation, measured with
the welfare-relevant price index. Observe that the drop in the number of firms is quite
persistent, and this conveys a high degree of persistence to the fall in GDP.
         Consumption demand also falls sharply and persistently. In part, consumption falls
with the loss of real income due to higher prices (real wages tank on impact). In part,
household smooth spending intertemporally, acting on expectations that tariffs will abate in


variance, with all other elements zero. The autroregressive matrix is diagonal. The case of a unilateral
shock is specified by setting just the second diagonal element of the covariance matrix as nonzero.

                                                     15
the future, bringing down consumption prices. Intertemporal substitution thus lowers
current consumption on top and above current income effects (see Erceg et al., 2018 for a
detailed discussion of this channel.)
       Nominal rigidities do amplify the effect of tariff shocks. Focus on impulse
responses under flexible prices, marked with dotted lines in Figure 1. Relative to the no-
policy scenario, the fall in GDP and the number of firms is about a third lower. This
difference mainly stems from the fact that, in the presence of nominal rigidities, firms do
not pass through lower wage costs on prices, counteracting the direct effect of the tariff.
Note that, on impact, inflation is initially higher under sticky prices than under flexible
prices (inflation rises by 0.39 versus 0.34 percentage points)---as the tariff is added directly
to the price charged to consumers.


3.1.2 Economic dynamics under optimal monetary expansion
       We now come to the main contribution of this paper, characterizing the optimal
monetary policy response to the tariff-induced macroeconomic slowdown cum inflation. As
shown by the solid lines in Figure 1, the cooperative optimal monetary policy response is
expansionary: the nominal interest rate falls markedly in both countries. This policy
response mitigates by half the fall in GDP compared to the no-policy case, while it
exacerbates slightly the rise in inflation in the initial period (from 0.39% to 0.41%). The
overall expansionary monetary stance may seem surprising, in light of the fact that tariff
shocks are typically portrayed as supply shocks (see e.g. Barattieri et al., 2018, for a
detailed discussion). After all, the impact of the tariff under no-policy, where a fall in
output corresponds to a rise in prices, would seem consistent with such an interpretation.
But the optimal monetary policy prescription in the presence of an inflationary supply
shock involves monetary contraction, not an expansion. Perhaps this argument has
motivated the specification of Taylor rules with a large coefficient on inflation relative to
GDP in related literature (Erceg et al. (2018) and Barattieri et al. (2018)). As a result,
recent papers tend to ascribe to the monetary policy response a role in amplifying the
effects of tariff shocks on macro aggregates.
       A monetary contraction is appropriate when the supply shock that drives up
inflation is a fall in productivity. In this case, monetary tightening serves to eliminate the

                                              16
sticky price distortion, by bringing demand down to the level of GDP that would prevail
under flexible prices and wages, at the new, lower, level of productivity. In other words, a
fall in demand and output is efficient when total factor productivity falls for exogenous
reasons. However, the same logic does not apply to a tariff shock. Note that, in Figure 1,
there is a wide gap in impulse responses in the optimal policy and the flexible price
allocations. The optimal policy most definitely is not aiming to replicate the flexible price
allocation. To the contrary, policy aims to reduce the effects of the tariff on macro
aggregates far more than required to compensate for nominal rigidities. Rather than
eliminating sticky-price distortion, monetary policy takes advantages of nominal rigidities
in order to increase macro aggregates over the short run, and so improve social welfare.
          When the tariff shock is symmetric across countries, it should not come as a
surprise that the optimal cooperative monetary response does not eliminate the relative
price distortion of the tariff on the relative price of exports and imports---nor aim to
manipulate the exchange rate. Rather, the policy focuses on stimulating domestic demand
in each country, as to replace the exports lost because of higher trade costs.
          Essential to understanding the motivation for the monetary policy expansion is the
fact that the tariff distortion shifts expenditure away from imported goods toward domestic
goods, thus sacrificing efficient gains from trade. The shortfall in production arises largely
because of the price rise forced on producers, not warranted in terms of fundamental
productivity or shipping technology---the tariff moves the equilibrium away from an
efficient allocation. Although tariff duties are rebated back to a country's residents,
consumers and firms respond to the rise in the relative price of imports. The demand for
imported goods is inefficiently low. In the case of a symmetric tariff war, monetary policy
cannot directly redress the relative price distortion. However, it can indirectly offset the
distortion by pushing demand and overall production up, closer to their efficient, higher
levels.
          The optimality of a monetary expansion is a robust result. In Figure 2, we redo our
analysis using alternative versions of our model, shutting down, respectively, roundabout
production and firm entry. Regardless of whether domestic production requires imported
inputs, and whether there are firm dynamics, the optimal policy prescribes a similar degree
of interest rate cuts in response to the tariff shock. Dynamic adjustment is understandably

                                              17
different across these exercises. Note that without firm entry the persistence of the shock is
visibly lower. The policy rate, in this case, dynamically rises after the initial fall, reflecting
a stronger concern with the inflationary impact of the optimal response to the tariff. Besides
the case shown in Figure 2, under no calibration using the one-sector version of our model
did we find a case in which the optimal monetary policy is contractionary. We will return
to this point later, when we use our complete model.


3.2 Responding to a unilateral tariff shock
        We now consider the case when the tariff shock is unilateral, i.e. the foreign country
imposes a tariff on home exports, but home does not retaliate. Clearly, an asymmetric
shock and possibly asymmetric policy responses are bound to affect variables such as the
exchange rate and trade balance, which did not come into play in response to symmetric
shocks across countries. But would the home monetary response switch from expansionary
to contractionary, redressing inflation rather than the output gap in the short run?
        The economic dynamics under the no-policy scenario (dashed line) in Figure 3
show that the foreign tariff results in a foreign trade surplus (home trade deficit). The effect
on home GDP is distinctly contractionary: the fall in home export demand (to a large extent
driven by expenditure switching effects of higher post-tariff prices) impacts on
consumption and firm entry investment demand. Note that the response of foreign GDP is
an order of magnitude smaller than the response of home GDP---and the sign of the
response is quite sensitive to calibration. As discussed by Erceg et al. (2018), foreign GDP
may rise or fall, depending upon whether the fall in consumption demand due to
intertemporal incentives is dominated by the rise in foreign export demand due to the
expenditure switching effect of relative prices. In our benchmark calibration, foreign GDP
actually rises, as the expenditure switching effect dominates. We should note in this respect
that in our calibration the trade elasticity is somewhat higher than typical, since it is pinned
down by the elasticity of substitution between any two varieties, be they home or foreign
varieties. The experiments reported in Figure 4 (dashed line) indicate that if we reduce this
elasticity of substitution slightly, from 5.2 to 4, the expenditure switching effect abates
enough that the response of the foreign GDP to the tariff is negative.



                                               18
       In response to a unilateral tariff on home exports, the home exchange rate
depreciates, as shown in Figure 3. But the rate of depreciation in our environment is not
large enough to offset the impact of the tariff on the relative price of home exports to home
imports, as predicted by the well-known "Lerner symmetry result." In a recent discussion
of this result, Linde and Pescatori (2019) point out that, in its stronger form, the Lerner
symmetry fails to be complete in many macroeconomic contexts, due to factors such as
nominal rigidities and asset market spillovers. Our impulse responses indicate that
endogenous exchange rate movements offset about half of the effect of the tariff on the
terms of trade. In the no-policy scenario, the currency depreciation is not driven by
movements in the short run policy rates, but by the equilibrium response in nominal and
real rates across countries, reflecting the change in consumption and thus in stochastic
discount factors.
       Optimal monetary policy is sharply different in the unilateral tariff case relative to
the symmetric case studied earlier, highlighting new channels and mechanisms. In Figure 3,
economic dynamics under the optimal policy is depicted with a solid line. In response to
the tariff, the optimal cooperative policy prescribes substantial monetary expansion at
home (lower home interest rates) but a rise in the foreign interest rate, although by an order
of magnitude smaller than the change in the home interest rate. The reason for this
asymmetric monetary stance is to engineer enough home currency depreciation, to offset
optimally the impact of the tariff on the terms of trade. Note that, in Figure 3, the home
terms of trade remain virtually unaffected on impact. If only temporarily, the optimal
policy restores the Lerner symmetry result for the exchange rate!
       As in the previous subsection, the optimal policy response moves opposite to strict
inflation targeting or to a Taylor rule with a large weight on inflation: as it engineers a large
depreciation, it actually exacerbates home inflation. In pursuing the optimal trade-offs
among objectives, the optimal policy clearly does not aim to replicate the flexible price
allocation. On the contrary, it brings most macro aggregates to overshoot their flex-price
levels (dotted lines in the figure) substantially. By way of instance, the optimal monetary
policy is not limited by the need to keep home GDP in line with the contraction the home
country would experience under the "natural rate": on impact, it almost fully reverses the
negative effect of the tariff on activity. Similarly, the rise in foreign GDP under the no-

                                              19
policy scenario is completely reversed. Foreign GDP falls well below the flexible price
level. Note that, in either country, despite moving economic activity in opposite directions,
the optimal policy nearly eliminates the large drops in firm entry experienced in the no-
policy case. As already noted, rather than trying to replicate the flexible price allocation, it
is efficient for monetary authorities to take advantage of sticky prices to manipulate relative
prices and offset the distinct distortion created by the foreign tariff.
        It may be worth noting that monetary policy cannot (and would not) replicate the
pre-tariff allocation, i.e. undo the trade distortion, via currency depreciation. On one hand,
the optimal rate of exchange rate depreciation is not sufficient to fully restore home GDP to
the pre-tariff level, especially over time (more so, if the persistence of the tariff shock
exceeds that of price stickiness). On the other hand, the required cut in home interest rate
tends to over-stimulate home consumption---and cause a significant aggravation of overall
inflation in the home country.
        All these results are qualitatively robust to various alternative specifications of our
model---a sample of which is shown in Figure 5. Note that, barring firm entry (dotted line),
the need for foreign monetary contraction at an optimum becomes much smaller.


3.3 Discussion
In all the cases reviewed in this section, in response to tariffs that result in higher prices and
lower economic activity, the optimal monetary policy trades off higher inflation for higher
output. For the home country, this is so whether or not the country retaliates to the foreign
tariff, or whether or not we allow for firm entry. While the tariff shock has both demand
and supply effects, these effects are distinct from those of a productivity disturbance---
which would call for strict inflation targeting. A tariff shock is also different from a markup
shock, which would also move output and inflation in opposite directions, but would
typically be stabilized by containing its inflationary consequences.
        We derive our results assuming cooperation across borders---consistent, if only on
logical grounds, with modelling tariffs as exogenous shocks. In a non-cooperative
equilibrium, monetary policy fails to internalize spillovers and will generally act differently
from the above. Yet, because of the trade cost externality analyzed in our previous paper
(see Bergin and Corsetti, 2019), policymakers will have a strong incentive to keep the

                                              20
production of a large number of varieties within their borders. If anything, the monetary
expansionary response to a tariff will be stronger


4. Dealing with tariffs in a two-sector environment
         Most of the work studying the effects of tariffs in the trade literature emphasizes
reallocation between sectors producing tradables as a source of inefficiency and welfare
losses. In the macroeconomic literature, sector reallocation is typically envisioned as a
production shift between tradables and nontradables. In recent work (Bergin and Corsetti
2019) we have proposed a macro model with two tradable sectors, one producing
differentiated, the other non-differentiated goods, to bring the study of optimal monetary
policy to bear on comparative advantage. In this section, we build on this early work, and
reconsider the transmission of foreign tariffs imposed on home exports, assuming that these
fall on the differentiated goods only.10
         Relative to our previous result, our new model allows us to track the shift in
comparative advantage following tariff shocks---which, as depicted in Figure 6, are large.
The production of differentiated goods in the home country falls by 2.5 percentage points,
which is twice the size of the fall in output observed in earlier scenarios. This is matched
by a rise in home production of non-differentiated goods of a similar magnitude. In the
foreign country, sectoral productions also move, in opposing direction. This result
highlights that foreign tariffs targeted to home differentiated goods can have significant
consequences on comparative advantage. At the margin, the foreign country specializes in
the production of non-differentiated goods, reflecting the "home market effect" widely
discussed in the trade literature. In this literature such shifts in comparative advantage have
been associated with an "optimal tariff argument," by which there are distinct welfare gains
from specializing in the differentiated goods sector (see Corsetti et al., 2007 and Bergin and
Corsetti, 2019, for a discussion).


10
  The trade literature tends to distinguish among tradable sectors varying their exposure to trade. We
elaborate on this distinction, by assuming that sectors differ in terms of their exposure to the effects of
monetary policy: Firms in the non-differentiated good sector are perfectly competitive and operate under
flexible prices. Firms in the other sector operate as specified in section 2 and 3 of the paper. As typical in the
trade literature, we continue to specify the tariff as imposed on the differentiated goods sector. Results for
tariffs imposed on the non-differentiated sector are available from the authors upon request.


                                                       21
         The shift in comparative advantage coincides with a significant redistribution of
differentiated goods firms between countries. The percentage fall in the number of home
firms is an order of magnitude larger than in the one-sector scenario, and there is a
correspondingly large rise in the number of foreign firms. We should stress that, compared
to our results for the one-sector version of the model, the rise in foreign investment demand
for creating firms fully reverses the implications of the tariff for the trade balance. The
foreign country now runs a trade deficit and borrows from the foreign country in order to
facilitate its investment in the differentiated goods sector.
         The optimal monetary policy for this scenario is qualitatively similar to that in the
one-sector model. However, the optimal monetary expansion and currency depreciation are
smaller in magnitude. As a result, under the optimal policy the effects of the tariff on
macroeconomic aggregates is more pronounced---especially in later periods when price
stickiness wanes. The large swing in the number of active firms confers a high degree of
persistence to the effects of the tariff on production allocation, and monetary policy is
progressively less effective beyond the range of price stickiness. It also appears that a
parallel objective of monetary policy to promote international risk sharing may be
competing with the goal of compensating for the relative price distortion of the tariff. As
shown in Figure 5, the optimal policy serves in this case to raise home consumption
relative to the no-policy case, while at the same time lowering foreign consumption. The
improvement in home terms of trade helps shift consumption from foreign to home. While
a home currency depreciation lowering the price of home exports helps reduce the tariff
relative price distortion, it works against the home gains arising from the terms of trade.
         As already mentioned, the literature that emphasizes inter-sectoral reallocation
assumes that the second sector produces goods that are not internationally traded---a recent
instance is Caliendo et al. (2017) specifically studying the effect of a tariff. For
comparison, we can consider this case using our model, by assuming that our non-
differentiated sector produces non-tradables (  1 ). Simulation results in Figure 7 indicate
that shifts in comparative advantage are qualitatively similar to those in Figure 6, but about
half the magnitude. Further, the dynamics in firm entry are much smaller than the two-
traded sector model, and instead are more similar in magnitude to those of the one sector
model.

                                              22
5. Conclusion
       In the wake of Brexit and the Trump tariff war, central banks have questioned
what role monetary policy should play in managing economic slowdowns induced by
tariff shocks. Given that tariff shocks combine elements of both demand and supply
shocks, it is unclear whether monetary policy should focus on stabilizing the changes in
prices induced by a tariff, or stabilizing the output gap implications. This paper studies
optimal monetary policy responses to tariff shocks in a New Keynesian model that
includes elements from the trade literature, including global value chains in production,
and comparative advantage between two traded sectors. Simulations indicate that the
optimal (cooperative) policy response to a symmetric tariff-war tends to be expansionary,
stabilizing the output gap at the expense of further aggravating inflation, contrary to the
standard Taylor rule imposed in most of the related literature. In the case of a unilateral
tariff shock imposed by a trading partner, optimal policy prescribes a currency
deprecation to offset the effects of tariffs on relative prices, though it only imperfectly
offsets effects of the tariff on a broader set of macroeconomic aggregates.




                                              23
6. References

Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop, 2004. "Trade Costs," Journal of Economic
   Literature 42, 691-751.
Barattieri, Alessandro, Matteo Cacciatore, and Fabio Ghironi, 2018. "Protectionism and the
   Business Cycle," NBER working paper # 24353.
Bergin, Paul R. and Giancarlo Corsetti, 2019. "Beyond Competitive Devaluations: The
   Monetary Dimensions of Comparative Advantage," forthcoming in American Economic
   Journal: Macroeconomics.
Bilbiie, Florin O., Fabio Ghironi, and Marc J. Melitz, 2008. "Monetary Policy and Business
    Cycles with Endogenous Entry and Product Variety," in Acemoglu, D., K. S. Rogoff, and
    M. Woodford, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2007, Univ. of Chicago Press,
    Chicago, 299-353.
Bloom, Nicholas, Philip Bunn, Scarlet Chen, Paul Mizen, Pawel Smietanka, and Gregory
   Thwaites, 2019. "The Impact of Brexit on UK Firms," NBER Working Papers 26218,
   National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Born, B., G. J. Müller, M. Schularick, P. Sedlácek, 2019. "The Costs of Economic
   Nationalism: Evidence from the Brexit Experiment," The Economic Journal 129: 2722-
   2744.
Breinlich, H., E. Leromain, D. Novy, and T. Sampson, 2017. "The Consequences of the
   Brexit Vote for UK Inflation and Living Standards: First Evidence", LSE mimeo.
Broda, Christian and David E. Weinstein, 2006. "Globalization and the Gains from Variety,"
   The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 541-585.
Caldara, Dario, Matteo Iacoviello, Patrick Molligo, Andrea Prestipino and Andrea Raffo,
   2020. "The Economic Effects of Trade Policy Uncertainty," Journal of Monetary
   Economics 109, 38-59.
Caliendo, Lorenzo, Robert C. Feenstra, John Romalis, and Alan M. Taylor, 2017. "Tariff
    Reductions, Entry, and Welfare: Theory and Evidence for the Last Two Decades,"
    working paper.
Cavallari, Lilia, 2013. "Firms' Entry, Monetary Policy and the International Business Cycle,"
   Journal of International Economics 91, 263-274.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Philippe Martin and Paolo Pesenti, 2007. "Productivity, Terms of Trade
   and the `Home Market Effect'," Journal of International Economics 73(1), 99-127.
Davies, R. B. and Z. Studnicka, 2018. "The Heterogeneous Impact of Brexit: Early
   Indications from the FTSE." European Economic Review, Vol. 110, pp. 1-17
Dhingra, S., H. Huang, G. Ottaviano, J. P. Pessoa, T. Sampson, and J. Van Reenen, 2017.
   "The consequences of Brexit for UK trade and living standards," Economic Policy
   32(92), 651-705.
Erceg, Christopher, Andrea Prestipino, and Andrea Raffo, 2018. "The Macroeconomic
   Effects of Trade Policy," Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
   International Finance Discussion Papers, Number 1242.


                                             24
Epifani, Paolo and Gancia, Gino, 2017. "Global Imbalances Revisited: The Transfer Problem
    and Transport Costs in Monopolistic Competition," Journal of International Economics
    108, 99-116.
Hall, Robert E., 2009. "By How Much Does GDP Rise If the Government Buys More
   Output?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 183­231.
Jones, Charles I., 2007. "Input-Output Multipliers, General Purpose Technologies, and
   Economic Development." Unpublished manuscript, http://www-
   leland.stanford.edu/~chadj/io026.pdf.
Lindé, Jesper and Andrea Pescatori, 2019. "The Macroeconomic Effects of Trade Tariffs:
   Revisiting the Lerner Symmetry Result," Journal of International Money and
   Finance 95(C), 52-69.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Rogoff, Kenneth, 2001. "The Six Major Puzzles in International
   Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause?" in: NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000,
   Volume 15, pages 339-412 National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Rauch, James E., 1999. "Networks Versus Markets in International Trade," Journal of
   International Economics 48, 7­35.
Sampson, T., 2017. "Brexit: The Economics of International Disintegration," Journal of
   Economic Perspectives, 31(4), 163-184.
Steinberg, J. B., 2019. "Brexit and the Macroeconomic Impact of Trade Policy Uncertainty."
    Journal of International Economics 117, 175-195.
World Bank, 2017. "World Bank National Accounts Data: Exports of Goods and Services
  (% of GDP)." https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NE.EXP.GNFS.ZS?locations=OE
  (accessed September 16, 2019).
Van Reenen, J., 2016. "Brexit's Long-Run Effects on the UK Economy," Brookings Papers
   on Economic Activity 47(2), 367-383.




                                            25
                         Table 1. Benchmark Parameter Values

Preferences
   Risk aversion                           2
   Time preference                         =0.96
   Labor supply elasticity                1/  1.9
   Differentiated goods share               1, 0.61
   Non-differentiated goods home bias       0.5
   Differentiated goods elasticity         = 5.2
   Non-differentiated goods elasticity      15.3

Technology
   Firm death rate                         0.1
   Price stickiness                       P  40
   Intermediate input share                1/ 3
   Differentiated goods trade cost        D =0.33
   Non-differentiated goods trade cost    N =0
   Mean sunk entry cost                   K=1
   Firm entry adjustment cost               0.10
   Bond holding cost                       B =1xe-6
   Tariff means                           TD  TN  1.05




                                         26
     Figure 1. Impulse responses to a rise in tariff in both countries, one-sector model


                      home GDP                               foreign GDP                         10-3
                                                                                                    home inflation
         0                                       0                                      6

                                                                                        4
     -0.005                                  -0.005
                                                                                        2
      -0.01                                   -0.01
                                                                                        0

     -0.015                                  -0.015                                     -2
              0        5       10       15            0        5       10       15           0        5       10          15

                    -3                                       -4
                  10foreign inflation                      home
                                                          10    interest rate                    10-4
                                                                                                 foreign interest rate
         6                                       5                                      5

         4                                       0                                      0

         2                                       -5                                     -5

         0                                     -10                                    -10

         -2                                    -15                                    -15
              0        5       10       15            0        5       10       15           0        5       10          15

                  10-3 home firms                         10-3foreign firms                         home exports
         0                                       0                                      0
                                                                                                             optimal
         -2                                      -2                                                          no policy
                                                                                                             flex price
         -4                                      -4                                  -0.05

         -6                                      -6

         -8                                      -8                                   -0.1
              0        5       10       15            0        5       10       15           0        5       10          15




Vertical axis is percent deviation (0.01=1%) from steady state levels. Horizontal axis is
time (in years).




                                                                27
                                                Figure 1 continued


                    foreign exports                     10-3 home wage                          10-3foreign wage
         0                                     0                                       0

                                               -2                                      -2

      -0.05                                    -4                                      -4

                                               -6                                      -6

       -0.1                                    -8                                      -8
              0        5      10       15           0        5        10       15           0        5      10          15

                   home export price                    foreign export price                       -3
                                                                                                home  consumption
                                                                                                10
      0.02                                   0.02                                      0

     0.015                                  0.015
                                                                                       -1
      0.01                                   0.01
                                                                                       -2
     0.005                                  0.005

         0                                     0                                       -3
              0        5      10       15           0        5        10       15           0        5      10          15

                   10-3
                  foreign consumption               home entry investment               foreign entry investment
         0                                   0.02                                   0.02
                                                                                                           optimal
                                               0                                       0                   no policy
         -1
                                                                                                           flex price
                                            -0.02                                   -0.02
         -2
                                            -0.04                                   -0.04

         -3                                 -0.06                                   -0.06
              0        5      10       15           0        5        10       15           0        5      10          15




Vertical axis is percent deviation (0.01=1%) from steady state levels. Horizontal axis is
time (in years).




                                                                 28
Figure 2. Impulse responses to a rise in tariff in both countries, one-sector model, optimal
                        policy for various model specifications



                 10-3 home GDP                        10-3 foreign GDP                       10-3
                                                                                                home inflation
        0                                    0                                      6

        -2                                   -2                                     4

        -4                                   -4                                     2

        -6                                   -6                                     0

        -8                                   -8                                     -2
             0        5       10       15         0        5        10      15           0        5        10         15

                   -3                                    -4
                 10foreign inflation                   home
                                                      10    interest rate                    10-4
                                                                                             foreign interest rate
        6                                    5                                      5

        4                                    0                                      0

        2                                    -5                                     -5

        0                                   -10                                   -10

        -2                                  -15                                   -15
             0        5       10       15         0        5        10      15           0        5        10         15

                 10-3 home firms                      10-3foreign firms                         home exports
        2                                    0                                      0
                                                                                                optimal - benchmark
        0                                                                                       no roundabout prod.
                                             -2
                                                                                                no firm entry
        -2                                                                       -0.05
                                             -4
        -4

        -6                                   -6                                   -0.1
             0        5       10       15         0        5        10      15           0        5        10         15




   Vertical axis is percent deviation (0.01=1%) from steady state levels. Horizontal axis is
   time (in years).




                                                               29
Figure 3. Impulse responses to a rise in foreign tariff on home exports, one-sector model




  Vertical axis is percent deviation (0.01=1%) from steady state levels. Horizontal axis is
  time (in years).




                                           30
                                    Figure 3 continued




Vertical axis is percent deviation (0.01=1%) from steady state levels. Horizontal axis is
time (in years).




                                            31
Figure 4. Impulse responses to a rise in foreign tariff on home exports, one-sector model,
                              various model specifications




   Vertical axis is percent deviation (0.01=1%) from steady state levels. Horizontal axis is
   time (in years).




                                           32
Figure 5. Impulse responses to a rise in foreign tariff on home exports, one-sector model,
                     optimal policy for various model specifications




   Vertical axis is percent deviation (0.01=1%) from steady state levels. Horizontal axis is
   time (in years).




                                           33
Figure 6. Impulse responses to a rise in foreign tariff, two-sector model




                                   34
                                    Figure 6 continued




Vertical axis is percent deviation (0.01=1%) from steady state levels. Horizontal axis is
time (in years).




                                            35
 Figure 7. Impulse responses to a rise in foreign tariff, two-sector model, one nontraded




Vertical axis is percent deviation (0.01=1%) from steady state levels. Horizontal axis is
time (in years).
Vertical axis is percent deviation (0.01=1%) from steady state levels. Horizontal axis is
time (in years).




                                            36
