                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              ENERGY MARKETS AND GLOBAL ECONOMIC CONDITIONS

                                     Christiane Baumeister
                                      Dimitris Korobilis
                                        Thomas K. Lee

                                      Working Paper 27001
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27001


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




We thank Nida Çakir Melek, Todd Clark, Ferre De Graeve, and James Hamilton for many
insightful discussions and useful suggestions, and Scott Brave, Pierre Guérin, Francesco
Ravazzolo, James Stock, and participants at the EIA 2019 Annual Workshop on Financial and
Physical Energy Market Linkages for additional helpful comments. Special thanks to James Ng
and Mark Robison at the Hesburgh Library for their valuable assistance with obtaining access to
the shipping data. Part of this research was conducted while Christiane Baumeister was visiting
KU Leuven and Bocconi University whose hospitality is gratefully acknowledged. Aram
Derdzyan and Qian Li provided excellent research assistance. The work of Christiane Baumeister
was supported by grant DE-EI0003240 from the U.S. Energy Information Administration. The
views expressed in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be
interpreted as reflecting the views of the U.S. Energy Information Administration or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Christiane Baumeister, Dimitris Korobilis, and Thomas K. Lee. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Energy Markets and Global Economic Conditions
Christiane Baumeister, Dimitris Korobilis, and Thomas K. Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 27001
April 2020
JEL No. C11,C32,C52,Q41,Q47

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper evaluates alternative indicators of global economic activity and other market
fundamentals in terms of their usefulness for forecasting real oil prices and global petroleum
consumption. We find that world industrial production is one of the most useful indicators that
has been proposed in the literature. However, by combining measures from a number of different
sources we can do even better. Our analysis results in a new index of global economic conditions
and new measures for assessing future tightness of energy demand and expected oil price
pressures.

Christiane Baumeister                           Thomas K. Lee
Department of Economics                         U.S. Energy Information Administration
University of Notre Dame                        1000 Independence Ave., SW
3028 Jenkins Nanovic Hall                       Washington, DC 20585
Notre Dame, IN 46556                            Thomas.Lee@eia.gov
and NBER
cbaumeis@nd.edu

Dimitris Korobilis
University of Glasgow
Gilbert Scott Building
G12 8QQ, Glasgow
United Kingdom
Dimitris.Korobilis@glasgow.ac.uk
1       Introduction

What are the key drivers of world energy markets? This question is of vital interest not just to
academic researchers but also to business and government planners around the globe. Financial
analysts, energy companies, budget agencies, central banks, and organizations like the International
Monetary Fund, the International Energy Agency, and the U.S. Energy Information Administration
devote a considerable amount of resources in an e¤ort to assess the current and future outlook for
production, consumption, and prices of major sources of energy.
    A large academic literature has sought to contribute to these e¤orts by developing models of
energy market dynamics that generate usable forecasts of energy prices. Prominent contributions
include Alquist, Kilian, and Vigfusson (2013), Alquist, Bhattarai, and Coibion (2019), Baumeister
and Kilian (2014a, 2015), Baumeister, Kilian, and Lee (2017), Bernard, Khalaf, Kichian, and
Yelou (2018), Ferrari, Ravazzolo, and Vespignani (2019), and Manescu and van Robays (2016).
This literature has concluded that although a random walk is hard to beat in out-of-sample oil-
price forecasting exercises, careful attention to the economic fundamentals that are driving energy
markets can lead to practical improvements in forecasts.
    A key step in this e¤ort is to ...nd a useful summary of the global economic conditions that
in uence energy demand.1 One of the promising early proposals for this purpose was a measure
of dry-cargo shipping rates developed by Kilian (2009). This measure is available monthly in real
time, is forward looking, and was found by Alquist, Kilian, and Vigfusson (2013) and Baumeister
and Kilian (2012) to produce promising forecasts of the re...ner acquisition cost (RAC) of crude oil
imports. However, since these studies were published, there has been tremendous turbulence in the
shipping index that does not seem to re    ect changes in world economic activity. Although Kilian
and Zhou (2018) have tried to defend continuing the use of shipping costs in modeling commodity
price dynamics, they do not provide any statistical evidence or formal criteria in support of that
conclusion. A growing number of researchers are suggesting alternative measures based on world
industrial production (Baumeister and Hamilton, 2019; Hamilton, 2019), commodity prices more
broadly (Alquist, Bhattarai, and Coibion, 2019; Delle Chiaie, Ferrara, and Giannone, 2017; West
and Wong, 2014), or global steel production (Ravazzolo and Vespignani, 2019).
    One of the objectives of our paper is to revisit this evidence using updated data and to compare
the measures that have been proposed by other researchers with those developed from a broad
set of observations on global variables that we assembled for the purpose of this study. We begin
by reproducing the success of early models at forecasting real RAC over the period 1992-2010,
but document how these break down badly for subsequent data. We note that they perform even
more poorly for forecasting alternative measures of oil prices such as Brent. We ...nd that models
based on alternative measures of global economic conditions such as world industrial production
    1
    Studies stressing the importance of the measure of global economic conditions used include Alquist, Bhattarai, and
Coibion (2019), Baumeister and Kilian (2014a), Delle Chiaie, Ferrara, and Giannone (2017), Funk (2018), Manescu
and van Robays (2016), and Ravazzolo and Vespignani (2019).



                                                          2
or a common factor extracted from a panel of real commodity prices lead to substantially better
forecasts, even for forecasting RAC over the original sample period.
   We also examine the usefulness of Bayesian shrinkage priors, allowing for time-varying volatility,
and pooling multiple sources of information. We ...nd that Bayesian shrinkage is bene...cial in every
speci...cation, and introducing stochastic volatility improves long-horizon forecasts substantially.
Although many researchers have reported that pooling leads to superior forecasts in a number of
di¤erent settings, we do not ...nd evidence of that here.
    One of the features that distinguishes our e¤ort from earlier studies is that we investigate po-
tential measures of energy market fundamentals not only in terms of their ability to predict prices
but also to predict changes in world oil consumption. We ...nd that none of our baseline speci...ca-
tions perform very well for forecasting global petroleum consumption. We investigate alternative
measures that add additional determinants of energy demand including measures of geopolitical
risk, developments in transportation, oil price uncertainty, and weather-related indicators. We ...nd
that constructing an indicator of global economic conditions that includes these variables along
with world industrial production helps improve the forecast accuracy for petroleum consumption
considerably.
    Our analysis results in some new measures for characterizing energy demand and quantifying
oil price risks. We use real-time joint forecasts obtained from our model of oil prices and petroleum
consumption to construct an energy demand indicator that signals market tightness and anticipated
future demand pressures. We complement this analysis with measures that signal the likelihood of
a build-up of upward or downward oil price pressures relative to the recent past and forecast the
probabilities that the oil price will remain within the range of values experienced recently, rise above
or fall below this range over a two-year horizon. Our analysis suggests that these measures may be
very helpful for the private and public analysts who are constantly trying to assess the implications
of current developments in energy markets for purposes of making their own budgeting and planning
decisions.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides a systematic comparison
of the usefulness of alternative indicators of global economic activity based on their forecasting
performance for the real price of oil. This evaluation takes place within existing models of the
global oil market as well as a new set of forecasting models that focus more on the demand side
of the market and allow for time variation in volatilities. Section 3 extends the analysis to global
petroleum consumption to gain a more complete understanding of future developments in energy
markets. Section 4 proposes a new indicator of global economic conditions that covers a diverse
range of variables tied to future energy demand. Section 5 illustrates how price and consumption
forecasts can be used to gauge the current and expected state of energy markets by introducing
some new real-time monitoring tools. Speci...cally, we develop measures that provide policymakers
and markets with a quantitative assessment of future energy demand conditions and expected oil
price pressures. Section 6 o¤ers some concluding remarks.



                                                   3
2       Forecasting Oil Prices

2.1     Forecasting with Vector Autoregressive Models

A widely followed approach to forecasting oil prices is the dynamic model of the global oil market
proposed by Alquist, Kilian, and Vigfusson (2013) and Baumeister and Kilian (2012). Their analysis
is based on the following reduced-form vector autoregression (VAR) that contains the fundamental
drivers of the real price of oil,

                                   yt = c +     1 yt 1   +   +    p yt p   + "t ;                              (1)

where yt is a 4 1 vector of monthly data, c is a 4 1 vector of intercepts, i ; i = 1; :::p; are
4 4 coe¢ cient matrices with p indicating the number of lags, and "t are white-noise innovations.
The four variables included in their VAR are the percent change in global crude oil production,
an estimate of the change in global crude oil inventories, the log of the real price of crude oil as
measured by the U.S. re...ner acquisition cost of imported crude oil (RAC) de     ated by the U.S.
consumer price index, and an index of global real economic activity (REA) developed by Kilian
(2009).2 This measure of real economic activity is based on single-voyage dry-cargo freight rates.
The idea behind the Kilian index is that changes in real shipping costs expressed in deviations
from a linear time trend capture the cyclical component of demand for industrial commodities.
Given that shipping of raw industrial materials is linked to future production of manufacturing
goods, Kilian (2009) and subsequent researchers have treated this index as a proxy for the state of
the global business cycle. Baumeister and Kilian (2012) found this model did an excellent job of
predicting oil prices over the period 1992.1 to 2010.6.


2.1.1     Evaluating Forecasts Based on the Kilian Index

Our ...rst step is to reproduce the results in Alquist, Kilian, and Vigfusson (2013) and Baumeister
and Kilian (2012). In doing so, we use the global real activity measure now recommended by Kilian
(2019) which corrects a coding error in the calculation of his original index noted by Hamilton
(2019).3 We set the lag length p = 12; which has been shown to deliver the most accurate out-
of-sample forecasts for the real RAC (see Baumeister and Kilian, 2012, 2015). We estimate the
    2
      All oil-related data were obtained from the U.S. Energy Information Administration' s Monthly Energy Review
and International Energy Portal. Monthly world oil production data measured in thousands of barrels of oil per day
and monthly U.S. crude oil stocks measured in millions of barrels (which include the Strategic Petroleum Reserve)
are available from January 1973 onward. We obtain a proxy for global oil stocks by multiplying the U.S. crude oil
inventories by the ratio of OECD inventories of crude oil and petroleum products to U.S. inventories of crude oil
and petroleum products. Given that data on OECD petroleum inventories are only recorded since January 1988, we
assume that the ratio before January 1988 is the same as in January 1988. The monthly U.S. re...ner acquistion cost
of imported crude oil only goes back until January 1974. We follow Baumeister and Kilian (2012) to extrapolate it
back to 1973.1. The U.S. consumer price index for all urban consumers was taken from the FRED database.
    3
      In order to linearly detrend the de   ated index only using data available to the forecaster at the time the
forecast is made, we use the series of the log nominal shipping index provided on Jim Hamilton'         s webpage
(http://econweb.ucsd.edu/~jhamilto/shipping_costs.xlsx).


                                                         4
VAR parameters recursively and evaluate the mean-squared prediction error (MSPE) of the oil
price forecasts in levels for horizons h = 1; 3; 6; 9; 12; 18; 24 months ahead. We ...rst estimate the
parameters using data from 1973.2 to 1991.12 to forecast the log of the oil price for 1992.1 for h = 1;
1992.3 for h = 3; and so on, and then exponentiate to get a forecast of the level of the real oil price.
We then re-estimate parameters using data through 1992.1 to forecast 1992.2 for h = 1; 1992.4 for
h = 3; and so on. Following Alquist et al. (2013), we use the random walk without drift as the
benchmark for evaluating the forecasting ability of alternative models (which essentially amounts
to postulating that the real oil price is unpredictable). All MSPE results are normalized relative to
the no-change forecast. A ratio below 1 indicates that the model does better than a random walk,
while a value above 1 indicates that it does worse. To gauge the statistical signi...cance of di¤erences
in forecasting performance, we follow Carriero, Clark, and Marcellino (2015) who suggest using the
Diebold and Mariano (1995) test for equal mean-squared forecast error, compared against standard
normal critical values, even for nested models. They base their recommendation on Monte Carlo
evidence provided in Clark and McCracken (2015) that shows that, in the case of nested models,
the Diebold-Mariano (DM) test based on normal critical values can be considered a conservative
choice in ...nite samples.
   Table 1, panel (a) presents the recursive MSPE ratios for the same evaluation period as in
Baumeister and Kilian (2012) which runs from 1992.1 to 2010.6. Column 1 reproduces Baumeister
and Kilian's conclusion that the VAR o¤ers better forecasts at near horizons of the real RAC than
does a random walk, with MSPE reductions of 32% at the 1-month horizon and 22% at the 3-month
horizon.4
    However, since 2010 the Kilian index has exhibited some erratic behavior that is di¢ cult to
attribute to the overall level of global economic activity. Figure 1 shows that in early 2016 the
index reached an all-time record low of 159% below trend, suggesting a far weaker global economy
than at the trough of the ...nancial crisis in 2009, when the real shipping index was only 75% below
the linear trend (marked with a vertical line in the ...gure). After a recovery back to trend the
index again dropped sharply to 88% below trend in February 2019. As discussed by Hamilton
(2019), these sharp contractions in the Kilian index in the post-...nancial crisis period are at odds
with common understanding and other available measures of recent        uctuations in global economic
activity. The excessive swings and increased volatility of this index have raised concerns about
its reliability as an indicator of world economic activity and its usefulness for forecasting. For
example, Hamilton (2019) provides in-sample evidence that the Kilian index has little predictive
power for a range of real commodity prices and no statistically signi...cant correlation with annual
world real GDP growth rates, casting doubts on its ability to identify shifts in demand in industrial
commodity markets. Our focus here is on out-of-sample forecasts of real RAC.
   In panel (b) of Table 1 we update the analysis using data through 2018.8. The ...rst column
shows that the model does not do quite as well when the evaluation period is extended to include
   4
    Interestingly, Kilian's original REA index produced slightly better forecasts at longer horizons than does the new
index that corrects for the coding error.


                                                          5
more recent data, which may re  ect the fact that oil prices were harder to forecast over 2011-2018
as well as problems with using the detrended shipping cost index as a measure of real economic
activity (see Hamilton, 2019). Notwithstanding, the VAR continues to beat the random walk for
near-term forecasts of real RAC but with much smaller reductions in MSPE. The improvements
one and three months ahead are only 13% and 4%, respectively.
    For many oil-market participants, predicting other oil prices like Brent may be a higher priority
than predicting RAC. In fact, the Brent price has evolved into the global benchmark for oil and oil
products with about two-thirds of oil purchases worldwide using it as a reference price according
to the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE).5 It is also closely followed by policymakers and frequently
referred to in the media. For these reasons, we evaluate the usefulness of the framework for
forecasting Brent, replacing the RAC with the Brent price as a more relevant measure for the
global price of crude oil. Since the monthly Brent spot price is available only from 1987.5 onward,
we extend it back to 1973.1 using the growth rate of RAC. Table 1, panel (c), shows that if our
goal is to forecast the real price of Brent rather than RAC, the VAR is completely unsuccessful.
The VAR forecast does not beat the random walk at any horizon.


2.1.2    Alternative Indicators of Global Real Economic Activity

We next explore alternative monthly measures of global real economic activity that have been
proposed in the literature. Details on the di¤erent measures we investigate are summarized in
Table 2.
    Real shipping cost factor. One possibility is that composite measures of shipping costs other
than that proposed by Kilian (2009) may provide better forecasts. Hamilton (2019) argues that
removing a deterministic linear time trend is a poor way to isolate the cyclical component in real
shipping costs and is not supported by the data. A natural alternative is to use the unbalanced
panel of disaggregated data underlying the Kilian index and extract a common factor from the
cross-section of real shipping costs in growth rates.6 The dataset consists of a cross-section of 61
freight rates for individual shipping routes for a set of industrial commodities such as coal, iron
ore, and fertilizer which we manually digitized from Drewry'  s Shipping Insight up to August 2018.7
Changes in shipping routes and in the composition of freight lead to missing observations which
we ...ll by recursively applying the expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm of Stock and Watson
(2002).8 The resulting real shipping cost factor for the period 1973.2 to 2018.8 is shown in the top
panel of Figure 2. Visually this series appears to be a far more plausible proxy for global economic
   5
     See https://www.theice.com/article/brent-crude/the-worlds-leading-crude-oil-benchmark.
   6
     Before conducting the principal component analysis, each growth rate is standardized by subtracting the mean
and dividing by its standard deviation.
   7
     Table 1A in the online appendix provides detailed information on the shipping routes and the commodity shipped.
   8
     The algorithm is initialized by replacing missing values with the unconditional mean of the observations available
for each series before extracting the ...rst K principal components where K is determined by the Bai and Ng (2002)
information criterion. We use the estimated factors to impute the missing observations and repeat the factor analysis
with the updated values until the estimates do not change.


                                                          6
activity than the corrected Kilian index in Figure 1. The measure in the top panel of Figure 2
also addresses some of the weaknesses of Kilian' s real economic activity index as summarized by
Kilian and Zhou (2018). For example, they document that freight rates are increasingly subject to
idiosyncratic shocks in the markets for commodities shipped as dry bulk cargo. A case in point is
the large supply shock in iron ore in late 2015 which contributed to the substantial deterioration
in the Kilian index in early 2016 as discussed by Kilian and Zhou (2018). By contrast, the factor
approach ...lters out commodity-speci...c noise and may provide a better characterization of the
cyclical component of world economic activity.
    Column 2 of Table 1 shows that the real shipping cost factor does not perform quite as well
as the Kilian index for RAC at short horizons over the original sample. But it does better over
longer horizons in the original sample period (panel a) and substantially better for forecasting
RAC over any horizon when using the extended evaluation period (panel b). It is also substantially
better for purposes of forecasting Brent at all horizons (panel c). Thus this alternative approach
to summarizing shipping costs not only gives a more plausible proxy for global economic activity
since 2010 but also o¤ers a signi...cant improvement for purposes of forecasting oil prices.
    World industrial production. Column 3 of Table 1 repeats the analysis replacing the Kilian index
with the index of world industrial production developed by Baumeister and Hamilton (2019). Their
measure remains closer to the traditional concept of economic activity as measured by the physical
volume of output generated in the industrial sector. They constructed an updated version of a
monthly index of industrial production covering OECD countries and six major emerging markets
(Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, the Russian Federation and South Africa) that was originally
reported in the OECD Main Economic Indicator (MEI) database from 1958.1 to 2011.10 by applying
the same methodology used by the OECD.9 The index is plotted in growth rates in the second panel
of Figure 2. The VAR using world industrial production does considerably better at predicting the
real price of both RAC and Brent over every evaluation period compared to either of the shipping-
based indicators (see column 3 of Table 1). Using world industrial production leads to notable
improvements in forecast accuracy relative to the no-change forecast for the real Brent price at the
shortest and longest horizons. In particular, it reduces the MSPE by about 5% at horizons 1 and
3, and by 6% at horizon 24.
    Real commodity price factor. Alquist, Bhattarai, and Coibion (2019), Delle Chiaie, Ferrara,
and Giannone (2017), and West and Wong (2014) extract a global factor related to business cycle
  uctuations from a large cross-section of growth rates of monthly real commodity prices. The
idea is that the source of common variation in commodity prices stems from demand-induced
changes in economic activity which tend to move all prices in the same direction, while supply-side
developments in speci...c commodity markets show up as idiosyncratic shocks that are unlikely to
have pervasive e¤ects. Our commodity price dataset consists of 23 basic industrial and agricultural
commodities listed in Table 2 whose markets are sensitive to changes in global economic conditions.
The selection of the set of commodity prices is guided by the same criteria as in Alquist et al.
  9
      This series is regularly updated and can be downloaded at https://sites.google.com/site/cjsbaumeister/research.


                                                          7
(2019). The primary purpose of commodities included in the construction of the global factor
should relate to aggregate output in the form of inputs in the production of ...nal goods. This rules
out commodities that behave more like ...nancial assets such as gold and other precious metals.
The commodities should be freely traded on liquid spot markets. There should be no periods of
infrequent price adjustments due to long-term contractual agreements. The commodities should
also not be vertically integrated to avoid idiosyncratic shocks to be propagated along the supply
chain. Following Alquist et al. (2019), we do not include any energy commodities. The third panel
of Figure 2 shows the real commodity price factor constructed from the ...rst principal component
of the balanced panel of percent changes of real commodity prices. Column 4 of Table 1 reports the
results when this measure is used as the global economic activity indicator. The real commodity
price factor does almost as well as world industrial production for short horizons and somewhat
better at longer horizons. For example, it improves the forecast accuracy of the real Brent price by
3% at horizon 18 and by 8% at horizon 24 relative to the no-change forecast.
    Global steel production factor. Ravazzolo and Vespignani (2019) suggest using monthly world
steel production as an indicator of global real economic activity. They argue that steel is an
important input for many industries including construction, transportation, and manufacturing,
and that it is a relatively homogenous commodity that is traded freely worldwide. The World Steel
Association provides an aggregate measure of the level of steel production reported by member
countries. One important drawback is that a consistent series is only available since 1994 at
monthly frequency due to changes in the number of reporting countries. Given that this measure is
an aggregate of the physical amount of steel produced, an increase in the number of steel-producing
countries leads to discrete jumps, as pointed out by Kilian and Zhou (2018). We propose an
alternative way to construct a measure of global steel production that enables us to extend the
series all the way back to 1973 without encountering the problem of structural breaks due to
aggregation, while preserving the broadest possible coverage. In its Steel Statistical Yearbook, the
World Steel Association publishes monthly data on crude steel production for individual countries
and groups of countries. The earliest available issue dates back to 1978, then released by the
International Iron and Steel Institute, and contains data for 29 reporting countries for the period
1968-1977. In the early years, the data are grouped into four blocks: European Community (EC),
United States, Japan, and other reporting countries.10 To maintain consistency across time, it is
necessary to consolidate EC and other reporting countries since some of the countries included in
the latter group later join the European Union. Over time the breakdown gets more detailed and
monthly data for individual countries are reported. We manually digitize the disaggregated data
and expand coverage to China, Eastern Europe, and the Middle East in 1990.1 and to Russia and
Ukraine in 1992.1 resulting in an unbalanced panel of seven time series for monthly production of
crude steel measured in thousands of tons (see Table 2). We extract the common component using
  10
    European Community refers to the following 8 countries: Belgium, Denmark, Federal Republic of Germany,
France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom. Other reporting countries include Austria,
Finland, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, Yugoslavia, Canada, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Venezuela,
Australia, India, Republic of Korea, South Africa, and Taiwan.


                                                        8
the EM algorithm to obtain a global steel production factor which is plotted in the bottom panel of
Figure 2. Aggregating information in this way not only circumvents discontinuities but also deals
with the concern of Kilian and Zhou (2018) that world steel production is prone to idiosyncratic
supply shocks in steel-producing countries. It also takes care of other potential sources of noise
such as measurement error and small data revisions. The last column of Table 1 shows that at
short horizons the steel index does not perform quite as well as world industrial production and
the commodity price factor for the extended evaluation period for either real RAC or Brent, but
it performs much better than the Kilian index. At longer horizons its forecasting performance is
comparable to that of world industrial production with MSPE reductions of up to 6%.
    Summary. Taking stock, any of the three alternative measures for global real economic activity
do signi...cantly better than the Kilian index for forecasting either real RAC or Brent. While the
forecasts obtained with the alternative indicators achieve gains in average forecast accuracy of up to
23% in the near term and up to 8% in the long term relative to the no-change forecast for the longer
evaluation period, none of these models beats the random walk at the intermediate horizons of 9
and 12 months ahead. Overall, forecasting oil prices with VAR models has become more di¢ cult
since 2010 and forecasting the real price of Brent poses additional challenges.
    To get a better sense of where the di¤erences across evaluation periods come from, we take a
look at the recursive mean-squared prediction errors for the real RAC. For illustrative purposes,
we focus on the three-month forecast horizon and compare the VAR forecasts produced with the
Kilian (REA) index to those produced with world industrial production (WIP).11 Figure 3 shows
that prior to the ...nancial crisis both VAR forecasts are essentially tied with the no-change forecast
and among each other. The top panel highlights that the model with the Kilian index gets a lot of
mileage out of the volatile 2009-2011 period with most of the MSPE reductions happening during
this time. These gains in accuracy vanish during the 2012-2014 period when oil prices were relatively
stable. The sharp drop in oil prices in mid-2014 puts the model again at a slight advantage relative
to the random walk. The middle panel indicates that the VAR forecast with WIP has outperformed
the no-change forecast since the ...nancial crisis consistently generating smaller forecast errors. This
implies that world industrial production is a reliable indicator of global economic activity and a
useful predictor of oil prices both during crisis times when oil prices move a lot and during normal
times when oil prices are relatively calm. The bottom panel directly compares the recursive MSPEs
of the two VAR forecasts and shows that while initially the relative ranking alternates, since 2011
the model with WIP clearly dominates. It is noteworthy that the deterioration of the forecast
accuracy of the model with the Kilian index coincides with the unusual post-crisis behavior of this
index as documented above.
 11
      The same pattern as for WIP is found for the real commodity price factor and the global steel production factor.




                                                           9
2.2    The Role of Bayesian Shrinkage

All VAR models in Table 1 have been estimated by unrestricted least squares. It is widely known
that the proliferation of parameters in VARs tends to hurt the out-of-sample forecasting perfor-
mance of these models. One remedy is to apply Bayesian shrinkage which has been shown to lead
to more precise forecasts across a wide range of applications in macroeconomics and ...nance (see,
e.g., Carriero, Clark, and Marcellino, 2015; Giannone et al., 2014; Litterman, 1986). We examine
whether Bayesian methods help reduce the MSPE of our VAR forecasts by using informative priors
that shrink our highly-parameterized unconstrained models toward a parsimonious benchmark, and
thus reduce estimation uncertainty. As in Baumeister and Kilian (2012), we rely on the data-based
procedure proposed in Giannone, Lenza, and Primiceri (2015) for selecting the optimal degree of
shrinkage in our recursively estimated Bayesian VARs (BVARs) based on the marginal data density.
    Panel (a) of Table 3 compares VAR and BVAR forecasts for the real price of Brent obtained
with the same ...ve models that we considered before.12 We ...nd that Bayesian shrinkage leads to
substantial improvements for every speci...cation with additional MSPE reductions of up to 7% at
short and long horizons relative to the unrestricted VAR.13 Among the set of alternative activity
indicators, column 6 shows that the BVAR forecast based on world industrial production is the
only one that outperforms the no-change forecast at every horizon. Using the commodity price
factor results in similar forecasts as world industrial production, a little better at longer horizons
and a little worse at short horizons, as can be seen in column 8. In particular, both models greatly
improve on the accuracy of medium-term forecasts of 6- to 12-months ahead with gains of up to
3% relative to the random walk. A comparison of columns 2 and 4 reveals that the BVAR with the
real shipping cost factor does much better than the one with the Kilian index which is dominated
by the random walk except at the 1-month horizon. Bayesian shrinkage also helps the performance
of the steel factor, though it is still dominated by world industrial production and the commodity
price factor.
   While it is customary to model the global oil market from a supply-side perspective, given
our interest in developing an energy demand indicator, our goal is to develop a forecasting model
that emphasizes the ...nal demand for petroleum products. For this purpose we replace global oil
production with a measure of petroleum consumption. The broadest available measure at the
global level is monthly total world consumption of liquid fuels provided in the Short-Term Energy
Outlook database of the U.S. Energy Information Administration. Since this time series is only
available from 1990.1 onward, we extend it back to 1982.1 using the growth rate of OECD petroleum
consumption and further back until 1973.1 at the rate of change of global crude oil production.14
  12
     Given that our main focus for the remainder of the paper is on forecasting the real price of Brent, we only discuss
the ...ndings for Brent. Results on the forecast accuracy of BVAR models for real RAC can be found in Table 2A,
panel (a), in the online appendix.
  13
     The only exception is the model with the Kilian index where the ranking of the forecast performance between
VAR and BVAR alternates across horizons.
  14
     Alternatively we could have used U.S. petroleum consumption which is available all the way back to 1973 but
given that global supply and demand have to balance eventually world oil production seems more relevant for global


                                                          10
With the shift in focus from oil production to petroleum consumption, the pertinent measure for
inventories are OECD petroleum stocks which, as before, are backcast before 1988 with the growth
rate of U.S. petroleum stocks. The most important factor determining prices of petroleum products
are crude oil prices since they account for the largest share of the production costs.15 Thus, the
real Brent price remains the relevant price measure given that it serves as a global reference for
pricing petroleum products. This consumption-based VAR model is new to the oil price forecasting
literature and adds to the suite of models that are derived based on economic grounds. The notion
is that  uctuations in the demand for re...ned products will translate into changes in the demand
for crude oil and thus have predictive power for the future path of the real price of crude oil.
We evaluate the forecasting performance of this new model using all ...ve indicators of global real
economic activity.
    Table 3, panel (b), reports the MSPE results for the consumption-based models estimated by
unrestricted least squares and Bayesian shrinkage methods. Using oil consumption instead of oil
production leads to better forecasts of oil prices for most indicators and most horizons. Comparing
di¤erent indicators and estimation methods, the overall pattern is similar to the production-based
models. The BVAR forecasts dominate the VAR forecasts across almost all models and horizons,
and world industrial production is a very useful indicator of world economic activity for purposes
of any forecast, with signi...cant gains in forecast accuracy of 12% at the 1-month horizon, 6% at
the 6-month horizon, and 8% at the 24-month horizon. Forecasts using the commodity price factor
are almost as good as industrial production for short horizons and a little better for long horizons.
Using oil consumption instead of oil production generally leads to additional MSPE reductions
of up to 4% for 6-months-ahead forecasts. The improvement from using consumption instead of
production is more modest at longer horizons, with less than a 1% improvement for Bayesian 1- to
2-year-ahead forecasts. Three out of ...ve BVAR models consistently beat the random walk at all
forecast horizons (see columns 4, 6, and 10).
   We conclude that Bayesian shrinkage can help improve forecasts in this setting and that using
petroleum consumption in place of oil production is promising. World industrial production and
the real commodity price factor are the most useful indicators of global economic activity.


2.3     The Role of Time Variation in Volatilities

Another important consideration is that energy markets have undergone substantial transforma-
tions over time that can a¤ect the forecasting ability of our models. Examples include shifts in the
energy intensity of production and consumption, changes in the energy mix, technological progress,
capacity constraints in petroleum inventory holdings, and market turmoil that induces bouts of
consumption. Moreover, U.S. fuel consumption was experiencing strong         uctuations during the 1970s which are not
necessarily representative of the rest of the world.
  15
     For example, in 2013 crude oil accounted for 68% of the average retail price of gasoline, while taxes (12%), re...ning
(11%), and distribution and marketing (9%) accounted for the rest (see U.S. Energy Information Administration,
Gasoline and Diesel Fuel Update, February 2014).


                                                            11
volatility which are all likely to have an inuence on the models'predictive accuracy. In addition,
Baumeister and Peersman (2013) document that heteroskedasticity is a pervasive feature in oil
market data.
    The importance of modeling time variation in the volatilities for the forecasting performance
of macroeconomic variables is well established in other data sets (see, e.g., Carriero, Clark, and
Marcellino, 2019; Clark and Ravazzolo, 2015; D'      Agostino, Gambetti, and Giannone, 2013). Clark
and Ravazzolo (2015) provide extensive empirical evidence that models with stochastic volatility
increase the accuracy of point forecasts relative to models assuming homoskedasticity. Earlier evi-
dence for forecasting energy prices is more mixed. Baumeister and Kilian (2014a) ...nd that adding
time-varying parameters and stochastic volatility to the four-variable VAR model in column 1 of
Table 1 did not lead to better forecasts of quarterly RAC compared to the (monthly) no-change
forecast. On the other hand, Baumeister, Kilian, and Lee (2017) ...nd that the unobserved com-
ponent stochastic volatility model, originally proposed by Stock and Watson (2007) for forecasting
in  ation, does great for forecasting retail gasoline prices, especially at longer horizons. The question
is thus whether a more accurate modeling of time-varying uncertainty, while not explicitly mod-
eling changes in the reduced-form coe¢ cients, leads to improvements in out-of-sample forecasting
of oil prices. As pointed out by Primiceri (2005), stochastic volatility is meant to capture possible
heteroskedasticity of the shocks and potential nonlinearities in the dynamic relationships of the
model variables, which are related to low-frequency changes in volatility.
     To allow for time variation in the variance of the VAR residuals, we postulate that the error
term "t in equation (1) is normally distributed with mean zero and time-varying covariance matrix
                                         1       1 0              1 is a lower triangular matrix with ones
  t . We factor the latter as   t = A       t (A ) where A
on the main diagonal and t is a diagonal matrix that contains the stochastic volatilities such that
"t = A 1 ut with ut      N (0; t ). Carriero, Clark, and Marcellino (2019) show these assumptions
allow the VAR to be written as a system of n univariate equations with the ith equation taking the
form:
                                X p             i 1
                                                X
                     yit = ci +      i;j yt p +      ai;` u`t + uit ;   uit N (0; 2  it )              (2)
                                j =1            `=1

where i;j is the ith row of the matrix j , ai;1 ; :::; ai;(i 1) denotes the parameters in the ith row of
the triangular matrix A 1 for i = 2; :::; n, u`t are the residuals from the previous i 1 equations, and
  2 are equation-speci...c time-varying variances. The bene...t of this reparametrization is that we
  it
can estimate the model equation by equation which is convenient for modeling stochastic volatility
and allows to specify independent priors for the reduced-form coe¢ cients across equations. The
law of motion for the stochastic volatilities is ln it = ln it 1 + it with the vector of innovations
  t   N (0; ) where is a full covariance matrix as in Primiceri (2005). Speci...cation of the prior
distributions for the VAR parameters follows the Minnesota prior tradition (Doan, Litterman, and
Sims, 1984) that shrinks coe¢ cients on persistent endogenous variables toward a univariate random
walk and those on variables in growth rates toward independent white noise, and at the same time
penalizes more distant lags of all endogenous variables. For details on the choices of priors and


                                                      12
hyperparameters that control the amount of shrinkage, see Appendix A; for the Gibbs sampling
algorithm, the reader is referred to Carriero et al. (2019).
    Table 4 compares the forecasting performance of speci...cations that allow for stochastic volatility
(SV-BVAR) with the homoskedastic BVAR from Section 2.2.16 Allowing for stochastic volatility
substantially improves the forecasting performance of the models based on shipping costs, but only
the one using the shipping cost factor is competitive with any of the other three indicators of global
economic activity. The most striking result is that stochastic volatility achieves impressive gains
in forecast accuracy at longer horizons for the four competitive models. Carriero et al. (2019)
make the case that time-varying volatilities should improve the point forecasts especially at longer
horizons. The reason is that the heteroskedastic model will provide more e¢ cient estimates given
that the predictive means will gradually deviate from their homoskedastic counterparts as the
predictive densities cumulate nonlinearly with the forecast horizon. This is consistent with what
we ...nd. The reductions in MSPE range between 10-14% at the one-year horizon and 23-29% at the
two-year horizon compared to only 2-3% and 6-10% in models without stochastic volatility. These
large MSPE reductions for long-run forecasts come at the expense of a small loss of at most 3%
in predictive accuracy at near horizons for the models using world industrial production and the
commodity price factor relative to forecasts with constant variance.17 In contrast, the forecasts
based on the global steel production factor bene...t at all horizons from adding stochastic volatility.
We also see from Table 4 that consumption-based models still generally outperform production-
based speci...cations for purposes of forecasting oil prices. We conclude that stochastic volatility is
an important ingredient for long-horizon forecasts of the real Brent price.18


2.4    Pooling Forecasts and Information

Another approach to guard against forecast failures due to structural change and other model
misspeci...cations is to pool forecasts. It has long been known that combining forecasts not only
can lead to superior forecasting performance but also hedges against varying accuracy of individual
forecasting models over time (see, e.g., Timmermann, 2006). There is ample evidence that forecast
combinations work well for oil price forecasting and help improve forecast accuarcy especially at
longer horizons (see, e.g., Baumeister and Kilian, 2014a, 2015; Baumeister et al., 2014; Funk, 2018;
Garrett et al., 2019; Manescu and van Robays, 2016). This section explores the bene...ts of pooling
in our setting in three ways.
  16
      Point forecasts for the SV-BVAR are based on the mean of the predictive density generated from a sample of
4; 000 draws from the posterior distribution of the VAR parameters; for the stochastic volatility component, we use
the univariate volatility estimates of the latest in-sample period as an estimate of the out-of-sample variances.
   17
      A similar pattern arises if forecasts are generated with the homoskedastic counterpart of the SV-BVAR model,
i.e., using the exact same Minnesota-style prior instead of data-driven shrinkage; see Table 3A in the online appendix
for a direct comparison. This is in line with Carriero et al. (2015) who note that on average changes in forecast
accuracy from optimally selecting the shrinkage parameters tend to be rather small.
   18
      For completeness we report the results for real RAC for the production-based models with stochastic volatility
in Table 2A, panel (b), in the online appendix.



                                                         13
    First, we consider an equal-weighted average of the forecasts from the ...ve consumption-based
BVARs with stochastic volatility whose individual results were reported in Table 4(b).19 The MSPE
for this combination of forecasts is reported in the ...rst column of Table 5. For short horizons,
these pooled forecasts are always dominated by the individual BVAR forecasts coming from either
world industrial production or the commodity price factor. For long horizons, the combination
forecasts are always dominated by the individual SV-BVAR forecasts coming from either industrial
production or commodity prices. We conclude that although simple averaging has often been found
to be a useful strategy, its success in the current setting is not convincing.
    Why does forecast pooling fail to improve on the forecast accuracy of individual models? One
possible explanation is that the models only di¤er in the measure of global economic activity, while
existing evidence on the superiority of forecast combinations is based on a more diverse set of
forecasting models. Pooling in this case amounts to treating shipping-based measures of world
economic activity as on a par with the other measures we have investigated. If the goal is to
forecast oil prices, they do not appear to be.
    This interpretation motivates a second way we might try to pool information, which is by
aggregating alternative proposed indicators of global economic activity directly before including
that measure in the VAR. To investigate this, we consider the cross-section of variables underlying
the di¤erent indicators in Table 2 and extract the ...rst principal component from this unbalanced
dataset containing a total of 93 variables using the EM algorithm. We then include this factor in
the SV-BVAR in place of the individual economic indicators. The forecasting result of combining
information sets is reported in column 2 of Table 5. This speci...cation again turns out typically to be
dominated by the BVAR or SV-BVAR based on industrial production alone. The interpretation may
again be that the world industrial production index is itself a broad aggregate with weights guided
by the importance of di¤erent sectors in di¤erent countries. Using those weights for aggregation
may be superior to simple principal components.
    Third, we explore a market-based approach to pooling information. Some might argue that
the futures market is already pooling in a rational, optimal way all the information that could be
relevant for forecasting the price of oil. We follow Baumeister and Kilian (2012, 2014a) and use the
following futures-spread model:

                                   Rt+hjt = Rt (1 + fth      st   Et (   t+h ))


where Rt denotes the current level of the real Brent price, fth denotes the log of the current Brent
futures price for a contract with maturity h, st denotes the log of the Brent spot price, and Et ( t+h )
denotes the expected in    ation rate over the next h periods.20 We approximate expected in       ation
  19
     We also allowed the weights for the forecast combinations to evolve over time based on each model'  s recent
forecasting performance. Using inverse MSPE weights based on recursive MSPEs of each model did not improve the
forecast accuracy relative to constant equal weights, however.
  20
     We use the monthly average of daily Brent futures prices obtained from Bloomberg and of the daily Brent spot
prices obtained from the U.S. EIA website for the period 1991.12 to 2018.8. Data for Brent futures contracts with
maturity h = 12 start in 1994.4 and for h = 18; 24 in 1998.2.


                                                       14
by the average in ation rate over the post-1986 period which is updated recursively. Our question
is how does Rt+hjt perform as a predictor of the real Brent price compared to the other methods
we have considered.
    The results are reported in column 3 of Table 5. The Brent futures spread actually does a
worse job at forecasting the real price for near horizons than one would get from a random walk.
The futures market does a reasonable job at longer horizons, but still is outperformed by the
information-combination approach. For example, at the 2-year horizon the futures-spread model
reduces the MSPE by 16% relative to the no-change forecast, while the SV-BVAR model with the
common factor from all existing activity measures improves the MSPE by 29%.
    This evidence suggests that some popular ideas about pooling information from di¤erent sources
using either a model-based or a market-based approach do not work particularly well in our context.
We will explore in Section 4 some alternative approaches to pooling that may hold more promise.
Before doing so, however, we ...rst evaluate our set of models in terms of an alternative dimension
that has received little attention in the literature, which is forecasting petroleum consumption.


3    Forecasting Global Petroleum Consumption

Up to this point in the paper we have been considering using models like the SV-BVAR for purposes
of forecasting a single variable, which is the real price of oil. However, price forecasts are only
one aspect of future developments in energy markets. Government agencies like the U.S. Energy
Information Administration (EIA), intergovernmental organization like the International Energy
Agency (IEA) and OPEC, and oil companies such as BP also regularly release short-term and long-
term projections for oil and liquid fuels consumption as a complement to their price outlook and key
component of their overall assessment of global energy demand. For example, the EIA publishes
monthly consumption forecasts in its Short-Term Energy Outlook but the length of the forecast
horizon varies each month from a maximum of 24-months-ahead to a minimum of 13-months-ahead.
However, it is not clear how these forecasts are generated. To the best of our knowledge, there are
currently no model-based forecasts for global petroleum consumption available. We use the set of
VAR models that have been shown to work well for forecasting the real Brent price to also produce
forecasts for global petroleum consumption. While it would seem natural to evaluate the accuracy
of our forecasts against those of the EIA, this is not possible since there are no publicly available
records of the EIA'  s historical forecasts of monthly global petroleum consumption for our entire
evaluation period that would enable such a comparison. Moreover, their maximum forecast horizon
that is consistently available each month from October 2007 onward is one year, while we focus
on a forecast horizon of two years. Absent an alternative forecast as benchmark, we follow the
macroeconomic forecasting literature and consider a univariate linear autoregressive (AR) model
which is the standard when evaluating forecasts of real economic variables (see, e.g., Chauvet and




                                                 15
Potter, 2013; Alquist et al., 2013).21 We set the lag length to p = 12 to be consistent with our VAR
models. While all models are estimated with petroleum consumption entering in growth rates, we
evaluate the forecasts in levels since both the EIA and the IEA report their consumption forecasts
in terms of million barrels per day.
    Table 6 presents the recursive MSPE ratios for forecasts of global petroleum consumption ob-
tained with the BVAR models with and without stochastic volatility using the same ...ve economic
activity indicators as before and the two model-based pooling methods. Panel (a) shows that none
of the BVAR models beats the AR(12) benchmark. All the MSPE ratios are above 1, and their
performance quickly deteriorates as the forecast horizon lengthens. Adding stochastic volatility
improves the forecast accuracy considerably but the models still only outperform the benchmark at
the one-month-ahead horizon with MSPE reductions between 3% and 7% as summarized in panel
(b). The only model showing any promise beyond the one-month horizon is the one that features the
world industrial production index which consistently produces the lowest MSPE ratios being essen-
tially tied with the benchmark model for horizons 3 months to a year. The WIP model is also more
accurate than either forecast combination or a speci...cation exploiting the large dataset of all dis-
aggregated data underlying the existing economic activity indicators (panel c). This disappointing
forecasting performance suggests that our vector autoregressions may be missing important predic-
tor variables that carry useful information for future global petroleum consumption, a possibility
that we explore in the next section.


4        Towards A New Indicator of Global Economic Conditions

So far the literature has focused on developing indicators that capture cyclical variation in global real
economic activity. These measures are rather limited in scope since they are all constructed based
on a single category of variables such as shipping freight rates, commodity prices, steel production
or industrial production. The question to which we now turn is whether global economic conditions
as they relate to energy markets can be represented by any narrow set of variables or combinations
thereof or whether there is value in diversifying the basket of variables to include new categories
that cover additional dimensions of the global economy. While the forecasting success for the real
price of Brent suggests that the information contained in existing activity measures is su¢ cient,
there is reason to believe that considering other types of data might help improve the forecast
accuracy for global petroleum consumption. Moreover, since the predictive content of di¤erent
variables can change over time, relying on a more diverse dataset reduces the risk of obtaining
results that are too heavily a¤ected by the idiosyncratic behavior of individual measures in speci...c
periods. Using a broader variety of predictor variables to form a global indicator also exonerates
    21
    This standard was suggested to us by James Stock. We also evaluated our model forecasts relative to a random-
walk benchmark, using which the superiority of our model becomes even more stark. Since some of that superiority
may come from seasonality and mean reversion that one sees in the consumption data, we use the AR(12) as a tougher
benchmark.



                                                       16
the forecaster from having to choose one speci...c measure of economic activity.
   The next section describes the set of variables that we investigate for whether they could capture
important information about the global economy as it relates to energy markets.


4.1      A Multi-Dimensional Approach

We compile the set of 16 indicators summarized in Table 7 that cover a broad spectrum of variables
tied to energy demand.22 The variable selection is guided by four principles. First, the set of vari-
ables should represent di¤erent categories of data in order to span multiple dimensions of the global
economy. We broadly de...ne eight categories: real economic activity, commodity prices, ...nancial
indicators, transportation, uncertainty, expectations, weather, and energy-related measures. Sec-
ond, each individual variable should matter for energy demand on economic grounds. Third, it
should have the broadest possible coverage geographically, conceptually and in time. Fourth, the
number of variables should be kept at a manageable size to ensure that the dataset can be easily
updated in a real-time setting. In fact, many energy market analysts, ...nancial traders, investment
banks, and government institutions tend to track a relatively small number of indicators to as-
sess the current and future state of economic conditions related to energy markets. For example,
the EIA' s December 2019 Short-Term Energy Outlook considers developments of U.S. real GDP,
China' s Purchasing Managers'Index, the S&P500 equity index, and the copper-to-gold ratio as a
measure of market sentiment on global economic growth as important factors in their assessment of
energy markets. Investment banks like Morgan Stanley and Merrill Lynch often base their outlook
on global manufacturing indicators, measures of business con...dence, sales of commercial vehicles,
and U.S. leading economic indicators, among others.
    Real economic activity. As discussed above, current and future economic activity are a key
determinant of global economic conditions and energy demand. We include the world industrial
production index as the broadest measure of real output in the industrial sector at a global scale.
The world industrial production index is also important to include because it includes production
measures from manufacturing, mining, and utilities, sectors that are closely tied to energy in
that they use oil and re...ned petroleum products in the production process. We also include the
Conference Board Leading Economic Index. This is a closely watched leading indicator with a
proven track record of signaling peaks and troughs in the business cycle. While it is U.S.-speci...c, it
consists of a range of measures that are key for capturing future economic trends. A third measure
we use is the OECD consumer con...dence index, which is the broadest available measure to gauge
future outlook for households' consumption spending and savings. This survey-based indicator
summarizes whether the attitude of consumers is optimistic or pessimistic by asking households
about their expected ...nancial situation, their sentiment about the general economic situation,
unemployment and capability of savings.
 22
      Please refer to Table 7 for the start date of each series, the data transformation, and the data source.




                                                           17
    Commodity prices. Among commodity prices, copper stands out in its importance in manu-
facturing, construction, and infrastructure. Copper prices have been used in a number of studies
as a representative commodity price and barometer of future global growth (see, for example, Hu
and Xiong, 2013; Hamilton, 2015; Bernanke, 2016). The nominal price of copper is de  ated by the
U.S. consumer price index.
    Financial indicators. Our two main ...nancial indicators are foreign exchange and stock returns.
Exchange rate    uctuations re  ect trade and ...nancial ows and changes in economic activity. They
also are tightly linked to energy demand (see, for example, De Schryder and Peersman, 2015). We
select the broad real trade-weighted U.S. dollar index not only because this series extends furthest
back in time, but also because oil prices are quoted in dollars and changes in the exchange rate
often translate into changes in petroleum consumption in oil-importing countries. Our measure for
stock returns is based on the MSCI world index which contains stocks from companies throughout
the world and represents a broad cross-section of global markets. We also use a third ...nancial
indicator that is more speci...c to energy demand, which is the excess return earned on the Fama-
French (FF) portfolio for the transportation sector. The transportation sector is obviously the most
energy-intensive sector, so excess returns in this sector should provide forward-looking information
for energy consumption.
    Transportation. We also use two real indicators of transportation demand. Registrations of
vehicles are indicative of the future demand for gasoline and diesel. The longest available series
with the broadest coverage is for passenger cars in OECD countries which covers the number
of newly registered private cars and commercial vehicles. Given that the automobile industry is a
large sector in many major economies, car sales which precede registration also matter for aggregate
  uctuations. To complement this stock variable, we also include a    ow measure of tra¢ c volume
represented by U.S. total vehicle miles traveled.
    Uncertainty measures. Crude oil production and prices are often driven by geopolitical events.
These events can matter not just for the oil market but can also in     uence the global economy
more broadly. We use the geopolitical risk index developed by Caldara and Iacoviello (2018).
This should re   ect increasing supply disruption risks and translate into rising concerns about
the future availability of oil which will in uence energy demand behavior worldwide. Long-run
oil price uncertainty is another important determinant of energy-related spending by consumers
and businesses (see, e.g., Bernanke, 1983; Pindyck, 1991; Jo, 2014). Here it is de...ned as realized
volatility computed based on daily returns for WTI futures contracts with a maturity of 12 months.
   Expectations measures. Our set of variables also includes the index of consumer expectations
from the University of Michigan Consumer Survey which aggregates households'assessment of the
short-term and long-term outlook of the general economy. We also construct a measure of oil price
expectations based on the di¤erence between WTI futures prices with 3 and 12 months to maturity.
This market-based measure should signal the direction of expected price changes which will likely
in uence spending on energy-dependent goods and services.
   Weather indicators. A key global weather-related variable is El Niño. We use the Oceanic

                                                18
Niño Index (ONI) which is available from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration'    s
(NOAA) National Climatic Data Center.23 Cashin, Mohaddes, and Raissi (2017) discuss the im-
portance of this complex weather phenomenon for global macroeconomic performance. It also has
direct implications for energy demand as higher temperatures associated with El Niño episodes lead
to more fuel demand for power generation. Another weather-related indicator provided by NOAA
is the Residential Energy Demand Temperature Index (REDTI) which is based on population-
weighted heating and cooling degree days in the United States, and as such, is a valuable tool for
measuring    uctuations in energy demand for residential heating and cooling.
    Energy-related indicators. The broadest energy-speci...c measure is energy production and elec-
tricity distribution for the EU28. This is not only directly tied to energy demand but is also an
indicator for the overall intensity of economic activity since the production of most goods and
services requires electricity (see Arora and Lieskovsky, 2014).
    We extract the ...rst principal component from this unbalanced panel of 16 variables by applying
the EM algorithm recursively and use this estimated factor to replace the economic activity measure
in our four-variable consumption-based BVAR(12) model with stochastic volatility. Row 1 of Table
8 shows that this factor-augmented model produces forecasts of the real Brent price that are
marginally less accurate than forecasts from the set of models with existing measures of global
real activity. At horizons up to 9 months MSPEs are at most 3% higher compared to the best-
performing individual model in Table 4(b). This di¤erence shrinks to at most 1% for longer horizons
with the factor-augmented VAR being the most accurate 24 months ahead. This small loss in
forecasting performance for oil prices is more than made up for by the dramatic improvement in
forecasts of global petroleum consumption. Row 6 of Table 8 shows that the factor-augmented model
outperforms the AR(12) benchmark at all horizons with impressive MSPE reductions between 6%
and 13% some of which are statistically signi...cant.
    We conclude that while the forecasting performance for the real Brent price is comparable across
indicators, the forecasting success for global petroleum consumption con...rms our earlier conjecture
that existing global economic activity measures miss information that is relevant for determining
energy demand. The obvious next question is whether including additional variables from each
data category can improve the joint forecast accuracy further.


4.2    Is More Information Better?

To address this question, we collect an additional 150 variables listed in Table 9 to form a very large
dataset, which substantially expands the coverage of each of the 8 broad categories in Table 7.24
We also add all the disaggregated data from the existing real economic activity indices, bringing
  23
     The term El Niño refers to the large-scale ocean-atmosphere climate interaction linked to a periodic warming
in sea surface temperatures across the central and east-central Equatorial Paci...c. The ONI is NOAA'    s primary
indicator for monitoring El Niño and La Niña, which are opposite phases of this climate pattern and it is based on
the average sea surface temperature in the Niño region.
  24
     Note that the cross-section of commodity prices is already included in Table 2.


                                                       19
the total up to 256 variables. Row 2 of Table 8 shows that substantially increasing the size of the
panel does not improve the usefulness of the ...rst principal component for forecasting the real Brent
price, and row 7 shows that it leads to a deterioration of the forecast performance for petroleum
consumption for all but the one-month-ahead forecast. At the one to two-year horizons relying on
a factor extracted from the larger dataset results in an increase in the MSPE of 6%.
    It is conceivable that for such a large cross-section of variables one factor is simply not su¢ cient
to capture the features in    uencing oil prices and consumption. We therefore extract additional
factors and include them in our forecasting model. As can be seen from rows 3 and 4 of Table
8, adding more factors worsens the forecast accuracy for the real Brent price considerably. In
particular, the model with three factors implies a loss of 10-15% in MSPE reductions beyond the
one-year horizon. Rows 8 and 9 show that for global petroleum consumption the forecasting gains
vanish from horizon 6 onward with all MSPE ratios above 1. One potential issue with using more
factors to construct the forecasts is that the informational advantage of incorporating additional
factors can be outweighed by the increased parameter uncertainty which penalizes out-of-sample
forecasting accuracy. Overall these ...ndings are in line with Boivin and Ng (2006) who show that
factors extracted from a larger panel do not necessarily improve forecasting performance and can
actually lead to inferior forecasting performance. The reason why it is not always optimal to use all
available data to extract factors is that as more series from the same data category are added, the
possibility of cross correlation in the idiosyncratic errors increases which leads to a loss in forecast
e¢ ciency. We conclude that what matters most for the joint forecasting success is the composition
not the size of the dataset.
      The 16 variables in Table 7 were chosen based on their economic relevance and broadness of
coverage to be representative of di¤erent aspects of the global economy. Our larger 256-variable
dataset o¤ers an alternative possibility for selecting the most relevant variables using statistical
criteria. Speci...cally, we use the 16 variables with the highest loadings in absolute value on the
...rst principal component. To mimic the choice a forecaster would have made at the beginning of
the evaluation period, the dataset from which the factor is extracted ends in 1991.12.25 Row 5
of Table 8 shows that the statistical variable selection leads to additional gains for the real Brent
price forecasts yielding further MSPE reductions of up to 3% at long horizons. However, these
gains come at the expense of the forecast accuracy for petroleum consumption (row 10). This
model has much higher MSPE at all horizons and from horizon 12 onward it no longer beats the
AR(12) benchmark.
       Based on this analysis, we conclude that our smaller, economically-motivated set of 16 variables
  25
     This reduces the number of series to 191. The variables selected are the following in the order of the magnitude
of loadings: long-run oil price uncertainty, spread of oil price expectations, real freight rates for fertilizer (potash)
from Germany to India, short-run gasoline price uncertainty, Conference Board Leading Economic Index, FF indus-
try portfolio: utilities, MSCI world index, FF industry portfolio: chemicals, FF industry portfolio: oil, FF industry
portfolio: transportation, FF industry portfolio: cars, Composite Leading Indicator for Japan, OECD business con-
...dence index, real freight rates for fertilizer (phosrock) from West Africa to India, Australian unemployment rate,
and Chinese consumer con...dence index.


                                                           20
gives the most reliable signal and results in the best overall forecasts.


4.3      A Global Economic Conditions Indicator

Panel A of Figure 4 displays the ...rst principal component of the 16 variables in Table 7 over the
period 1973.2 to 2019.8. We will refer to this series as our global economic conditions indicator
(GECON).26 The series is normalized so that it has a mean of zero and a standard deviation of
one which facilitates the interpretation. Thus a value of zero corresponds to economic conditions
characterized by normal trend growth. Given that the underlying monthly data series are some-
what volatile we report the 6-month moving average to get a better summary of the persistent
movements in the global economy. The indicator tracks known episodes of worldwide contractions
and expansions well. The downturn related to the 2008-2009 ...nancial crisis is the most severe
with the indicator being ...ve standard deviations below its long-run average followed by the world-
wide recession of 1974-75. The second half of the eighties and the mid-2000s are periods of strong
economic conditions. The indicator signals an improvement in global economic conditions in 2013
followed by a period of sluggish growth in 2015-17.
    It is useful to take a closer look at the contributions of di¤erent data categories to the movements
in the global indicator to appreciate the value of a diverse dataset. This decomposition can be found
in panel B of Figure 4 which shows the contributions of the four most important categories over
time. As can be seen, the relative importance of di¤erent categories varies over time. For example,
most of the boom in the mid-80s is captured by the ...nancial indicators. Real activity accounts for
the largest share of the downturns in 1974-75 and the early 1980s as well as in the Great Recession,
while ...nancial indicators also help identify the early 2000s slowdown. Uncertainty is a major factor
in the early 1990s slump. Financial indicators and uncertainty are the most important measures of
the most recent      uctuations. Transportation contributes a small share overall and matters more in
the early part of the sample than in more recent times.


4.4      The Role of Real-Time Data Constraints

Up to this point in the paper our forecasts have been generated using a pseudo real-time setting
which relies on the most recent vintage of data and assumes that all data are available up to the
point in time when the forecasts are produced. In practice, forecasters often face real-time data
constraints in the form of data becoming available only with a lag and preliminary data being
revised for some time after the ...rst release. One concern is that not accounting for delays and
revisions in data releases may result in overly optimistic assessments of the ability to forecast oil
prices (see Alquist et al., 2013).
   How severe are real-time data constraints for oil price forecasting? Baumeister and Kilian (2012)
address this question by developing a real-time dataset for the oil market and investigating for which
 26
      This series is available at https://sites.google.com/site/cjsbaumeister/research.



                                                           21
variables the real-time data aspects matter most. They provide evidence that having more accurate
and timely data for the re...ner acquisition cost of imported oil has the highest payo¤ in terms of out-
of-sample forecasting performance, while both data revisions and lags in data availability for global
oil production and OECD crude oil inventories play a negligible role. They con...rm this ...nding by
replacing the RAC with the West Texas Intermediate (WTI) spot price which is available in ...nal
form in real time and conclude that abstracting from real-time data constraints has little e¤ect on
the measures of forecast accuracy for the real WTI. Since we are using the Brent price, which is
also available in real time and not subject to revisions, we would not expect di¤erences in forecast
accuracy to be driven by the energy market variables.
    This leaves us with the series underlying the global economic conditions indicator which are
released with varying degrees of delay. Six out of the 16 series are available in real time and based
on data that are not subsequently revised.27 The broad real trade-weighted U.S. dollar index is
also released without delay but is subject to some minor revisions due to the in    ation component.
The update of the Fama-French industry portfolio is lagging by two months, but data for this series
are ...nal. The remaining eight series become available with a delay and are subsequently revised.28
Baumeister and Kilian (2012) show that lags in data availability are a much bigger concern than
revisions to preliminary data. This is reassuring since we can assess the relevance of publication
delays, while it is not feasible to construct a true real-time version of our dataset that tracks data
revisions over time. Moreover, it is likely that for the variables underlying the global economic
conditions indicator data revisions would be picked up as idiosyncratic noise that is ...ltered out by
extracting a principal component.
    We investigate the role of lags in data releases by assuming that the most recent value for variable
i for month t (yit ) is the value observed for yi;t mi where mi is the delay parameter associated with
that variable indicated in Table 7. This parameter was determined based on the number of missing
observations for each series at the end of April 2019 when this dataset was originally assembled.
To ...ll in gaps at the end of the sample, we follow Baumeister and Kilian (2012, 2014a) who show
that simple nowcasting techniques based on the time series properties of the data perform best.29
    Table 10 compares the recursive MSPE ratios for forecasts of the real Brent price and global
petroleum consumption using observed and nowcasted values at the end of the sample for all
forecast horizons from 1 to 24 months. As can be seen, taking data delays into account makes little
di¤erence overall. The forecast accuracy for the real Brent price su¤ers slightly for horizons up to
  27
     These include the MSCI world index, copper prices, long-run oil price uncertainty, the index of consumer expec-
tations, the spread between short-run and long-run oil price expectations, and the geopolitical risk indicator.
  28
     For details on the delays in data availability for each variable, see Table 7.
  29
     Please refer to Table 7 for a summary of the nowcasting rules for each variable entering the GECON index.
Alternatively, we could make use of the EM algorithm to ...ll in the missing data. While the results turn out to be
very similar for the price forecasts, the simple rules work slightly better for consumption forecasts. For petroleum
consumption which becomes available with a delay of 2 months and for OECD petroleum stocks which are lagging
3 months, we extrapolate the missing values based on their average growth rates. While the nominal Brent price is
available in real time, the release of the U.S. CPI is delayed by 1 month. To de    ate the Brent price, we nowcast the
CPI based on past average in     ation.


                                                          22
9 months when nowcasted data are used registering an average loss of 2% in MSPE reductions,
but is basically una¤ected at longer horizons. Interestingly, the real-time nature of the data has
a positive e¤ect on global petroleum consumption forecasts leading to gains in MSPE ratios of up
to 3% for short horizons. In contrast to the pseudo real-time setting, these MSPE reductions are
highly statistically signi...cant. The likely reason for this ...nding is that in the case of petroleum
consumption, the gaps in data availability not only a¤ect the SV-BVAR model forecast but also
the AR benchmark so that it is not clear a priori which way the MSPE ratios go. From the
results it is clear that the nowcasted data for consumption are putting the benchmark model at a
slight disadvantage in the short run. In the medium term, this ranking is reversed and the pseudo
real-time model performs slightly better.


5     Assessing Energy-Market Conditions

Based on our preferred forecasting model that takes real-time data constraints into account, we
propose a set of monitoring tools to summarize expected future conditions in energy markets.
First we introduce an energy demand indicator based on our preferred model'   s forecast of global
petroleum consumption. Next we quantify oil price risks by forming an oil price pressure index.


5.1   A Barometer for Future Energy Demand

An important concern for energy market participants, industry analysts, policymakers, government
agencies like the EIA, and international organizations like the IEA and the IMF is how demand for
energy will evolve in the near term. How can we gauge what demand conditions are expected to
prevail in the future? We propose to look at the di¤erence between the 13-month-ahead forecast of
the level of consumption and the 1-month-ahead forecast of the level of consumption. This measure
summarizes the slope of the forecasts as a function of horizon. An increase in this forecast measure
can be viewed as signaling rising demand pressures over the next year. Figure 5 shows the 6-month
moving average of our energy demand indicator over the period 1992.1 to 2019.8. Each point in
the graph tells us whether demand conditions are expected to be tight or loose relative to the past.
The ...gure shows strong anticipated growth in demand after the East Asian crisis in 1997. A sharp
tightening in demand conditions is also evident before the Great Recession. Demand pressures ease
with the recession but growth in energy demand is predicted to pick up again afterwards. Demand
conditions are anticipated to loosen as a result of the European double-dip recession. Expected
demand pressures have been mounting again since 2012 with steep predicted growth in demand
in mid-2014 when oil prices fell dramatically. Recently there is an indication that energy demand
growth in the world is expected to slow down amid weakening economic conditions.




                                                  23
5.2     Measuring Oil Price Risks

Policymakers and other users of oil price forecasts are typically not only interested in the expected
future path of the real oil price but would also like to assess the likelihood that prices exceed a
certain upper threshold or fall below a certain lower threshold. This matters because a predicted
increase in the probability of higher or lower prices relative to the recent past can a¤ect ...rms'
and consumers'spending plans with the potential to in      uence macroeconomic performance in the
short run (see, e.g., Hamilton, 1996, 2003). Our Bayesian forecasting model delivers an entire
distribution of forecasts for each horizon based on which we compute the probability that the
forecast will fall outside a speci...c price range. While oil companies, households, and ...rms may
di¤er in the thresholds they care about, we calculate probabilities that the oil price will end up
outside the upper and lower bounds of recent experience.30


5.2.1    The Construction of Oil Price Pressure Measures

We propose a new measure that signals the likelihood of a build-up of upward and downard oil price
pressures relative to the recent past. Speci...cally, we compute the probabilities that the expected
price will remain within the range of values experienced recently, rise above or fall below this
range. For this purpose, we estimate the predictive density and allow for dynamically-changing
cuto¤ points based on the minimum and maximum values of oil price levels over the past year. The
resulting measures will indicate the risk of unusually high or low prices.
  Our model implies a probability based on information It observed in month t that oil prices h
months from now will exceed the highest value seen over the last year:

                              Pr([poil        oil oil     oil         oil
                                   t+h > maxfpt ; pt 1 ; pt 2 ; :::; pt 11 g]jIt ]:

Following Jackson, Kliesen, and Owyang (2015), we can calculate an average value of this proba-
bility over the coming year,
                                        P
                                        12
                 P P Mtoil;+ = (1=12)         Pr([poil        oil oil     oil         oil
                                                   t+h > maxfpt ; pt 1 ; pt 2 ; :::; pt 11 g]jIt ]:
                                        h=1

This measure is plotted in the middle panel of Figure 6. Similarly we can calculate a probability
that prices on average over the next year will fall below the lowest value seen over the last 12
months:
                                   P
                                   12
               P P Mtoil; = (1=12)    Pr([poil          oil oil   oil         oil
                                           t+h < minfpt ; pt 1 ; pt 2 ; :::; pt 11 g]jIt ]:
                                        h=1
This measure is plotted in the last panel of Figure 6. The probability of staying within the recent
range is
                          P P Mtoil;neutral = 1 P P Mtoil;+ P P Mtoil; ;
  30
    Baumeister and Kilian (2014b) also conduct an analysis of the risks embodied in oil price forecasts, but they
propose a di¤erent set of risk measures based on a structural model of the global oil market. In particular, they
focus on risks associated with hypothetical events about future oil supply and demand conditions summarized in
probability-weighted predictive densities.


                                                         24
plotted in the top panel of Figure 6.
     A number of well-known historical episodes stand out in Figure 6. In the aftermath of the Asian
...nancial crisis, the probability that oil prices would fall below the lowest price over the past 12
months remained consistently high at 40% over a period of two years before plummeting to zero
in early 2000. After oil prices reached a record low in December 1998, the likelihood of upward
price pressures spiked resulting in a 55% probability that the Brent price will on average surpass
its highest value during the past year over a 12-month horizon. At the onset of the Great Recession
the average probability that the Brent price would exceed the previous year'   s price maximum over
the next 12 months dropped from around 40% to essentially zero, while chances of prices falling
below the lower threshold jumped up to 50% followed by an all-time high of staying within the
new lower price range of close to 80% in mid-2009. From 2012 onward, the odds that the Brent
price would drop below its most recent lower bound gradually increased reaching a peak of 70%
in early 2015. Starting in 2016 it becomes more and more likely that oil prices will top the price
ceiling in place during the preceding 12 months in the coming year. As of August 2019, the price
pressure measures indicate on average a 20% probability of the Brent price exceeding the recent
upper threshold of $81 and a 30% probability of falling below the recent lower threshold of $57 in
the period up to August 2020.


5.2.2   A Historical Perspective on Expected Oil Price Pressures

So far we have focused on the average probability that oil prices will rise above or drop below a
recent price band over the next 12 months. It is also useful to look at the risk assessment implied
by the model over a two-year horizon at a given point in time. Figure 7 displays the probabilities
based on the forecast distributions for the real Brent price up to 24 months ahead for three selected
historical episodes. `Status quo'refers to the probability of the future oil price  uctuating within
last year's price range, `upward price pressure'indicates the probability of exceeding the maximum
price of last year, and `  downward price pressure' measures the probability of falling below the
minimum price of last year. While the forecasts are produced for the real price, in what follows we
discuss historical episodes in terms of dollar prices since they are more easily remembered.
    Panel A shows the expected price pressures as of May 2004, just before the oil price started its
gradual ascent to new highs. Between June 2003 and May 2004 the Brent price           uctuated between
$27 and $38. The predictive probabilities signal elevated risks that the oil price will surpass the
upper bound remaining consistently above 50% throughout the forecasting horizon. While the odds
of oil prices staying within the previous price range increase slightly during the ...rst three months,
this tendency is reversed and probabilities decrease from a high of 40% to about 20%. The model
assigns a fairly low chance of oil prices dropping below the lower bound of $27. In May 2006 the
Brent price was $70.
   Another interesting point in time is June 2014. In the year before the onset of the oil price
slump, Brent prices were pretty stable and   uctuated narrowly between $107 and $112. Panel


                                                  25
B indicates a rapid build-up of downward price pressures which surpasses 50% after the ...rst six
months and reaches a probability as high as 75% at the end of the two-year forecasting horizon.
The probability for oil prices continuing their calm ride subsides quickly falling from 60% at the
one-month horizon to below 10% in the long run. The odds for upward price pressures remain
fairly constant at around 20%. The observed price for Brent crude in June 2016 turned out to be
$48.
    After bottoming out in early 2016, the Brent price showed strong signs of recovery which in
June 2016 led to the question of how likely it was that oil prices would continue to climb, hold
steady around that new level, or begin another slide. In the year preceding this third episode, the
Brent price ranged from $31 to $57. As can be seen in Panel C, our model attaches a very high
probability to the status quo in the short run which declines gradually over the next two years to
a low of 40%. Instead, the chances for upward oil price pressures increase steadily reaching about
40% after one year. Risks for oil prices falling below $31 are predicted to be minimal for the ...rst
couple of months but rise to a robust 20% in the medium to long run. In June 2018 the Brent price
reached $74.
    This analysis illustrates that the model can be used to derive accurate and timely measures
of risks related to future price developments and of the expected tightness of energy demand
conditions. These measures should help guide policymakers, market analysts, ...rms, and consumers
in their assessment of the likely future state of energy markets.


6    Conclusions

Global economic conditions are a key driver of energy markets. In this paper we evaluated the
usefulness of several existing measures of global real economic activity that have been proposed in
the literature in terms of their out-of-sample forecasting performance for the real price of oil and
global petroleum consumption. We also compared them to alternative measures derived from a
diverse set of observations on global variables that in   uence energy demand collected speci...cally
for this study. Our results imply the following main takeaways. First, for short-horizon oil price
forecasts consumption-based models using world industrial production perform best. Second, for
long-horizon oil price forecasts allowing for stochastic volatility leads to considerable improvements
in forecast accuracy across all indicators. Third, for forecasting the real price of Brent and global
petroleum consumption jointly, the most accurate model uses our newly-developed global economic
conditions indicator based on a set of 16 variables that cover multiple dimensions of the global econ-
omy. We show how the real-time forecasts for price and consumption generated by this model can
be used to derive measures that provide policymakers and markets with a quantitative assessment
of expected oil price pressures and future energy demand conditions.




                                                 26
A     Prior Speci...cations

To estimate the model in equation (2), we need to form priors for the unobserved volatility states it
and the set of coe¢ cients     = fB; A; g where Bi = [ci ; i;1 ; :::; i;p ]0 for i = 1; :::n contains the
VAR coe¢ cients, Ai = [ai;1 ; :::; ai;(i 1) ]0 for i = 2; :::; n contains the covariances of the reduced-form
residuals, and is the full covariance matrix of the vector of innovations t to the law of motion of
the volatilities. Following Carriero, Clark, and Marcellino (2019), we postulate the following prior
distributions: Bi N (mB ; VB ), Ai N (mA ; VA ), and                     IW ( S; ).
   The prior mean mB and prior variance VB for the VAR coe¢ cients Bi in equation i are set
according to the Minnesota prior beliefs:
                                       8
      (                                >
                                       >
                                             1
                                                   for own lags
             for ...rst own lag        <  j 3
                                                 2
                                               s
mB =                            ; VB =      1 2 i
                                           j 3 s2
                                                   for all other lagged predictor variables (k 6= i)            ,
         0 otherwise                   >
                                       >        k
                                       : 2
                                           si 4 for intercept

where k = 1; :::; n are the number of endogenous variables (n = 4), j = 1; :::; p indicates the lag
length (p = 12), and si and sk denote the estimated standard deviations of the residuals from a
univariate autoregression ...t to variables i and k (see, for example, Litterman, 1986; Sims and Zha,
1998). The ratio s2      2
                     i =sk accounts for the possibility that variables yi and yk may have di¤erent
scales. We set the prior mean for the real price of oil to = 0:99 given its persistence and for
all other endogenous variables to = 0 given that they enter either in growth rates or changes.
The hyperparameter 1 controls the overall tightness of the prior and 2 1 allows for additional
shrinkage on the coe¢ cients of lagged endogenous variable k in VAR equation i for k 6= i (cross
shrinkage). We set 1 = 0:05 and 2 = 0:5 as recommended by Carriero et al. (2019). The
shrinkage parameter 1 is scaled by j 3 such that it gets smaller with increasing lag length which
incorporates the belief that coe¢ cients on more distant observations are more likely to be zero.
The hyperparameter 3 governs the rate of the lag decay. For i = 2; :::; n, we postulate a quadratic
decay by setting 3 = 2; and for i = 1, we set 3 = 1 for own lags which amounts to a linear decay,
and 3 = 6 for variables other than the dependent variable. 4 determines the tightness of the
prior for the constant term and is set to 10 which is pretty uninformative.
    The prior mean mA for the covariances of the error terms is set to 0 and and the prior variance
VA is a diagonal matrix with entries on the diagonal set to 106 which implies an uninformative
prior on the coe¢ cients in Ai .
    The prior for the covariance matrix is inverse Wishart with scale matrix S and degrees of
freedom. We set the degrees of freedom equal to = n + 3 and S = 0:15In where In is an (n n)
identity matrix.
    As in Carriero et al. (2019), the model is closed by forming a prior for the initial value of the
state variables which is set to independent Gaussian: 2 i   N (0; 100):




                                                     27
                                          References

   Alquist, Ron, Saroj Bhattarai, and Olivier Coibion (2019). "Commodity-Price Comovement
and Global Economic Activity," Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
   Alquist, Ron, Lutz Kilian, and Robert Vigfusson (2013). "Forecasting the Price of Oil," in:
Graham Elliott and Allan Timmermann (eds.), Handbook of Economic Forecasting, Volume 2A,
Amsterdam: North-Holland, 427-507.
   Arora, Vipin, and Jozef Lieskovsky (2014). "Electricity Use as an Indicator of U.S. Economic
Activity," EIA Working Paper.
    Baker, Scott, Nicholas Bloom, and Steve Davis (2016). "Measuring Economic Policy Uncer-
tainty," Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(4): 1593-1636.
   Baumeister, Christiane, and James D. Hamilton (2019). "Structural Interpretation of Vector
Autoregressions with Incomplete Identi...cation: Revisiting the Role of Oil Supply and Demand
Shocks," American Economic Review 109(5): 1873-1910.
   Baumeister, Christiane, and Lutz Kilian (2012). "Real-Time Forecasts of the Real Price of Oil,"
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 30(2): 326-336.
   Baumeister, Christiane, and Lutz Kilian (2014a). "What Central Bankers Need to Know About
Forecasting Oil Prices," International Economic Review 55(3): 869-889.
   Baumeister, Christiane, and Lutz Kilian (2014b). "Real-Time Analysis of Oil Price Risks Using
Forecast Scenarios," IMF Economic Review 62(1): 119-145.
    Baumeister, Christiane, and Lutz Kilian (2015). "Forecasting the Real Price of Oil in a Chang-
ing World: A Forecast Combination Approach," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 33(3):
338-351.
   Baumeister, Christiane, Lutz Kilian, and Thomas K. Lee (2014). "Are There Gains from
Pooling Real-Time Oil Price Forecasts?" Energy Economics 46: S33-S43.
   Baumeister, Christiane, Lutz Kilian, and Thomas K. Lee (2017). "Inside the Crystal Ball: New
Approaches to Predicting the Gasoline Price at the Pump," Journal of Applied Econometrics 32(2):
275-295.
   Baumeister, Christiane, and Gert Peersman (2013). "The Role of Time-Varying Elasticities
in Accounting for Volatility Changes in the Crude Oil Market," Journal of Applied Econometrics
28(7): 1087-1109.
   Bai, Jushan, and Serena Ng (2002). "Determining the Number of Factors in Approximate
Factor Models," Econometrica 70(1): 191-221.
   Bernanke, Ben S. (1983). "Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical Investment," Quarterly
Journal of Economics 98(1): 85-106.



                                               28
   Bernanke, Ben S. (2006). "Energy and the Economy," speech to the Economic Club of Chicago,
June 15.
    Bernanke, Ben S. (2016). "The Relationship between Stocks and Oil Prices," Brookings Institu-
tion, https://www.brookings.edu/blog/ben-bernanke/2016/02/19/the-relationship-between-stocks-
and-oil-prices/.
   Bernard, Jean-Thomas, Lynda Khalaf, Maral Kichian, and Clement Yelou (2018). "Oil Price
Forecasts for the Long Term: Expert Outlooks, Models, or Both?" Macroeconomic Dynamics 22(3):
581-599.
   Boivin, Jean, and Serena Ng (2006). "Are More Data Always Better for Factor Analysis?"
Journal of Econometrics 132(1): 169-194.
   Caldara, Dario, and Matteo Iacoviello (2018). "Measuring Geopolitical Risk," mimeo, Federal
Reserve Board of Governors.
      Carriero, Andrea, Todd E. Clark, and Massimiliano Marcellino (2015). "Bayesian VARs: Spec-
i...cation Choices and Forecast Accuracy," Journal of Applied Econometrics 30(1): 46-73.
    Carriero, Andrea, Todd E. Clark, and Massimiliano Marcellino (2019). "Large Vector Autore-
gressions with Stochastic Volatility and Non-Conjugate Priors," Journal of Econometrics, forth-
coming.
  Cashin, Paul, Kamiar Mohaddes, and Mehdi Raissi (2017). "Fair Weather or Foul? The
Macroeconomic E¤ects of El Niño," Journal of International Economics 106: 37-54.
   Chauvet, Marcelle, and Simon Potter (2013). "Forecasting Output," in: Graham Elliott and
Allan Timmermann (eds.), Handbook of Economic Forecasting, Volume 2A, Amsterdam: North-
Holland, 141-194.
  Clark, Todd E., and Michael W. McCracken (2015). "Nested Forecast Model Comparisons: A
New Approach to Testing Equal Accuracy," Journal of Econometrics 186(1): 160-177.
   Clark, Todd E., and Francesco Ravazzolo (2015). "Macroeconomic Forecasting Performance
Under Alternative Speci...cations of Time-Varying Volatility," Journal of Applied Econometrics
30(4): 551-575.
    D'Agostino, Antonello, Luca Gambetti, and Domenico Giannone (2013). "Macroeconomic Fore-
casting and Structural Change," Journal of Applied Econometrics 28(1): 82-101.
  Delle Chiaie, Simona, Laurent Ferrara, and Domenico Giannone (2017). "Common Factors of
Commodity Prices," mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
  De Schryder, Selien, and Gert Peersman (2015). "The U.S. Dollar Exchange Rate and the
Demand for Oil," Energy Journal 36(3): 263-285.
    Diebold, Francis X., and Roberto S. Mariano (1995). "Comparing Predictive Accuracy," Journal
of Business and Economic Statistics 13(3): 253-263.



                                               29
    Doan, Thomas, Robert B. Litterman, and Christopher A. Sims (1984). "Forecasting and Con-
ditional Projection Using Realistic Prior Distributions," Econometric Reviews 3(1): 1-100.
   Ferrari, Davide, Francesco Ravazzolo, and Joaquin Vespignani (2019). "Forecasting Energy
Commodity Prices: A Large Global Dataset Sparse Approach," CAMP Working Paper Series No
11/2019.
  Funk, Christoph (2018). "Forecasting the Real Price of Oil ­ Time-Variation and Forecast
Combination," Energy Economics 76: 288-302.
    Garratt, Anthony, Shaun P. Vahey, and Yunyi Zhang (2019). "Real-Time Forecast Combina-
tions for the Oil Price," Journal of Applied Econometrics 34(3): 456-462.
   Giannone, Domenico, Michele Lenza, Daphne Momferatou, and Luca Onorante (2014). "Short-
term In  ation Projections: A Bayesian Vector Autoregressive Approach," International Journal of
Forecasting 30(3): 635-644.
   Giannone, Domenico, Michele Lenza, and Giorgio Primiceri (2015). "Prior Selection for Vector
Autoregressions," Review of Economics and Statistics 97(2): 436-451.
    Hamilton, James D. (1996). "This is What Happened to the Oil Price-Macroeconomy Rela-
tionship," Journal of Monetary Economics 38(2): 215-220.
   Hamilton, James D. (2003). "What is an Oil Shock?" Journal of Econometrics 113(2): 363-398.
   Hamilton, James D. (2015). "What' s Driving the Price of Oil Down?" https://econbrowser.com/
archives/2015/01/whats-driving-the-price-of-oil-down-2
   Hamilton, James D. (2019). "Measuring Global Economic Activity," Journal of Applied Econo-
metrics, forthcoming.
   Hu, Conghui, and Wei Xiong (2013). "Are Commodity Futures Prices Barometers of the Global
Economy?" in: Weyl, Glen E., Edward L. Glaeser, and Tano Santos (eds.), Apres le Deluge: Finance
and the Common Good after the Crisis.
   Jackson, Laura E., Kevin L. Kliesen, and Michael T. Owyang (2015). "A Measure of Price
Pressures," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, First Quarter, 25-52.
   Jo, Soojin (2014). "The E¤ects of Oil Price Uncertainty on Global Real Economic Activity,"
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 46(6): 1113-1135.
   Kilian, Lutz (2009). "Not All Oil Price Shocks Are Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply
Shocks in the Crude Oil Market," American Economic Review 99(3): 1053-1069.
   Kilian, Lutz (2019). "Measuring Global Economic Activity: Do Recent Critiques Hold Up to
Scrutiny?" Economics Letters 178: 106-110.
  Kilian, Lutz, and Xiaoqing Zhou (2018). "Modeling Fluctuations in the Global Demand for
Commodities," Journal of International Money and Finance 88: 54-78.
    Litterman, Robert B. (1986). "Forecasting with Bayesian Vector Autoregressions ­Five Years
of Experience," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 4(1): 25-38.

                                              30
   Manescu, Cristiana, and Ine van Robays (2016). "Forecasting the Brent Oil Price: Addressing
Time-Variation in Forecast Performance," mimeo, European Central Bank.
    Pindyck, Robert S. (1991). "Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Investment," Journal of Economic
Literature 29(3): 1110-1148.
   Plante, Michael D. (2019). "OPEC in the News," Energy Economics 80: 163-172.
   Primiceri, Giorgio E. (2005). "Time Varying Structural Vector Autoregressions and Monetary
Policy," Review of Economic Studies 72(3): 821-852.
   Ravazzolo, Francesco, and Joaquin Vespignani (2019). "World Steel Production: A New
Monthly Indicator of Global Real Economic Activity," Canadian Journal of Economics, forth-
coming.
  Sims, Christopher A., and Tao Zha (1998). "Bayesian Methods for Dynamic Multivariate
Models," International Economic Review 39(4): 949-968.
   Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (2002). "Macroeconomic Forecasting Using Di¤usion
Indexes," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 20(2): 147-162.
    Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (2007). "Why Has Ination Become Harder to Fore-
cast?" Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 39(S1): 3-33.
   Timmermann, Allan (2006). "Forecast Combinations," in: Graham Elliott, Clive W.J. Granger,
and Allan Timmermann (eds.), Handbook of Economic Forecasting, Volume 1, Amsterdam: North-
Holland, 135-196.
   West, Kenneth D., and Ka-Fu Wong (2014). "A Factor Model for Co-movements of Commodity
Prices," Journal of International Money and Finance 42: 289-309.




                                               31
Figure 1: Kilian's corrected real economic activity index (REA), 1973.1-2019.8




NOTES: Linearly detrended real shipping cost index. The vertical line indicates the trough of the financial crisis.
Figure 2: Alternative monthly indicators of global real economic activity, 1973.2-2018.8




NOTES: The real shipping cost factor is extracted from an unbalanced panel of the monthly growth rates of freight
rates for different shipping routes deflated by the U.S. CPI. World industrial production is shown in month-on-month
growth rates. The real commodity price factor is extracted from a balanced panel of monthly growth rates of industrial
and agricultural commodity prices deflated by the U.S. CPI. The global steel production factor is extracted from a
cross-section of monthly growth rates of crude steel production data for individual and groups of countries with
different starting dates. See Table 2 for more details on the data underlying these global economic activity indicators.
   Figure 3. Recursive mean-squared prediction errors for 3-month-ahead forecast of the
                        real refiner acquisition cost, 1992.1-2018.8




NOTES: The VAR forecasts are generated with a VAR(12) model estimated recursively by least squares using
either the Kilian index (REA) or the world industrial production index (WIP) as indicator of global real
economic activity. 
Figure 4: Global Economic Conditions Indicator (panel A) and its main contributors (panel B),
1973.2-2019.8, 6-month moving average, expressed in standard deviations from long-run average
                                           Panel A




                                           Panel B
Figure 5: Energy demand indicator, 1992.1-2019.8




NOTES: This indicator of expected demand pressures is computed as the difference between the 13-month-ahead and
the 1-month-ahead forecast of global petroleum consumption. The plot shows the six-month moving average.
Figure 6: Price pressure measures, 1992.1-2019.8




NOTES: These price pressure indices measure the average probability that the expected price level for Brent crude oil
over the next 12 months stays within, exceeds or falls below the range of oil price fluctuations over the past year. The
plots show the six-month moving average.
Figure 7: Expected price pressures over the next 24 months for selected historical episodes

                                               Panel A: May 2004




                                                Panel B: June 2014




                                                Panel C: June 2016


 

 

 

 

 

 


NOTES: This figure is based on the real-time forecasts obtained with the SV-BVAR(12) model using the Global
Economic Conditions Indicator. Status quo refers to the probability of the oil price staying within the price range over
the past year, upward price pressure indicates the probability of exceeding the maximum price over the past year, and
downward price pressure indicates the probability of falling below the minimum price over the past year.
Table 1. Recursive MSPE Ratios Relative to No-Change Forecast of Real Oil Prices in VAR(12) Models with
         Alternative Monthly Indicators of Global Real Economic Activity
  Monthly          Kilian index           Real shipping cost          World IP index            Real commodity               Global steel
  horizon             (REA)                     factor                   (WIP)                    price factor            production factor
                         (1)                       (2)                        (3)                       (4)                        (5)
                                       (a) Real refiner acquisition cost of crude oil imports: 1992.1-2010.6
                               **
      1                0.679                      0.703**                   0.657**                    0.723**                   0.694**
      3                0.779                      0.806                     0.728                      0.780                     0.776
      6                0.989                      0.956                     0.867                      0.912                     0.925
      9                1.115                      1.025                     0.988                      1.048                     1.000
     12                1.099                      0.992                     0.975                      1.021                     0.940
     18                1.083                      0.962                     0.975                      0.956                     0.946
     24                1.122                      1.071                     1.095                      0.995                     1.054
                                       (b) Real refiner acquisition cost of crude oil imports: 1992.1-2018.8
      1                0.865                      0.804*                    0.765**                    0.781**                    0.795**
      3                0.955                      0.911                     0.852                      0.841                      0.911
      6                1.074                      1.008                     0.972                      0.933                      1.025
      9                1.154                      1.044                     1.061                      1.036                      1.067
     12                1.159                      1.031                     1.069                      1.038                      1.045
     18                1.087                      0.997                     0.979                      0.948                      0.967
     24                1.045                      1.000                     0.941                      0.925                      0.946
                                                   (c) Real Brent price of crude oil: 1992.1-2018.8
      1                1.075                      0.998                     0.946                      0.961                      0.997
      3                1.072                      1.027                     0.953                      0.970                      1.044
      6                1.172                      1.087                     1.060                      1.021                      1.105
      9                1.208                      1.065                     1.088                      1.069                      1.101
     12                1.215                      1.045                     1.070                      1.037                      1.052
     18                1.161                      1.031                     0.994                      0.965                      0.990
     24                1.095                      1.019                     0.938                      0.922                      0.944
NOTES: Boldface indicates improvements relative to no-change forecast. ** denotes significance at the 5% level and * at the 10% level based on the
Diebold-Mariano test. Red indicates the best model among the shipping-based indices and blue the best model among the three alternative indicators.
             Table 2. Monthly Indicators of Global Real Economic Activity and Underlying Disaggregated Data
Global Economic Activity                                                                                            Data   Start
                              Components                                 Transformation
Indicator                                                                                                           source date
Kilian index (REA)            Log of the nominal shipping cost           Deflated with U.S. CPI and linearly        JDH    1968.1
                              index calculated as described in           detrended (recursively)
                              Hamilton (2019)
Real shipping cost factor     Freight rates for 61 shipping routes       Nominal dollar prices deflated with U.S.   SI     1973.1
                              for different commodities (grain,          CPI, growth rates computed as first log
                              coal, fertilizer, iron ore, scrap metal,   differences, and missing observations
                              oilseeds) ­ see Table 1A for details       filled with EM algorithm
World industrial production   Industrial production of OECD,             First log difference                       BH     1958.1
index (WIP)                   Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, the
                              Russian Federation and South Africa
                              aggregated as described in
                              Baumeister and Hamilton (2019)
Real commodity price factor   Aluminum                                   Nominal dollar prices deflated with U.S.   WB     1972.5
                              Barley                                     CPI and growth rates computed as           WB     1960.1
                              Beef                                       first log differences                      WB     1960.1
                              Coffee, Arabica                                                                       WB     1973.1
                              Coffee, Robusta                                                                       WB     1973.1
                              Copper                                                                                WB     1964.1
                              Cotton, A Index                                                                       WB     1971.1
                              Lead                                                                                  WB     1960.1
                              Logs, Malaysian                                                                       WB     1971.5
                              Maize                                                                                 WB     1972.1
                              Nickel                                                                                WB     1973.1
                              Palm Oil                                                                              WB     1964.1
                              Rice, Thai 5%                                                                         WB     1960.1
                              Rubber, SGP/MYS                                                                       WB     1960.1
                              Sawnwood, Malaysian                                                                   WB     1971.5
                              Soybeans                                                                              WB     1973.1
                              Soybean Meal                                                                          WB     1973.1
                                       Soybean Oil                                                                                       WB         1971.1
                                       Sugar, US                                                                                         WB         1973.1
                                       Sugar, World                                                                                      WB         1973.1
                                       Tin                                                                                               WB         1960.1
                                       Wheat, US HRW                                                                                     WB         1973.1
                                       Zinc                                                                                              WB         1973.1
 Global steel production factor        Crude Steel Production, US           Growth rates computed as first log                           WSA        1968.1
                                       Crude Steel Production, Japan        differences and missing observations                         WSA        1968.1
                                       Crude Steel Production, EU and other filled with EM algorithm                                     WSA        1968.1
                                       reporting countries (29 in total)
                                       Crude Steel Production, China                                                                     WSA        1990.1
                                       Crude Steel Production, Eastern                                                                   WSA        1990.1
                                       Europe
                                       Crude Steel Production, Middle East                                                               WSA        1990.1
                                       Crude Steel Production, Russia and                                                                WSA        1992.1
                                       Ukraine
NOTES: The codes for the data sources are as follows: BH ­ Baumeister and Hamilton (2019) update of discontinued OECD series (https://sites.google.com/site/
cjsbaumeister/OECD_plus6_industrial_production.xlsx?attredirects=0&d=1), JDH ­ Hamilton (2019) (http://econweb.ucsd.edu/~jhamilto/shipping_costs.xlsx), SI
­ Drewry's Shipping Insight, WB ­ World Bank Commodity Price Data, The Pink Sheet (http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/561011486076393416/CMO-Historical-
Data-Monthly.xlsx), WSA ­ World Steel Association, Steel Statistical Yearbook (https://www.worldsteel.org/). The groupings for the crude steel production data
comprise the following countries: EU and other reporting countries include Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy,
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, the United Kingdom, former Yugoslavia (now consisting of Bosnia-Herzegovina,
Croatia, Macedonia, Serbia, and Slovenia), Canada, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Venezuela, Australia, India, Republic of Korea, South Africa, and Taiwan;
Eastern Europe includes the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, and the Slovak Republic; Middle East includes Egypt, Iran, and Saudi Arabia. The start date
indicates the earliest available observation; however, in estimation the common start date is 1973.1.
      Table 3. Recursive MSPE Ratios Relative to No-Change Forecast of Real Brent Price in VAR(12) and Bayesian VAR(12) Models
                                                  Evaluation Period: 1992.1-2018.8

 Monthly             Kilian index                Real shipping cost               World IP index             Real commodity price                 Global steel
 horizon                (REA)                          factor                        (WIP)                          factor                     production factor
                   (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)            (7)             (8)             (9)            (10)

                                                                           (a) Production-based models
                  VAR           BVAR             VAR            BVAR             VAR           BVAR             VAR            BVAR            VAR            BVAR
      1           1.075          0.983           0.998           0.930          0.946           0.893*          0.961          0.896*          0.997           0.934
      3           1.072          1.063           1.027           0.965          0.953           0.910           0.970          0.918           1.044           0.983
      6           1.172          1.158           1.087           1.003          1.060           0.972           1.021          0.967           1.105           1.032
      9           1.208          1.211           1.065           1.006          1.088           0.999           1.069          1.006           1.101           1.033
     12           1.215          1.237           1.045           0.974          1.070           0.971           1.037          0.968           1.052           0.983
     18           1.161          1.179           1.031           0.954          0.994           0.947           0.965          0.932           0.990           0.955
     24           1.095          1.092           1.019           0.927          0.938           0.922           0.922          0.898           0.944           0.927

                                                                          (b) Consumption-based models
                  VAR           BVAR             VAR            BVAR             VAR           BVAR             VAR            BVAR            VAR            BVAR
      1           1.078          0.964           0.986           0.918*         0.932           0.884**         0.943          0.888**         0.951           0.904*
      3           1.075          1.045           0.984           0.942          0.892           0.888           0.938          0.906           0.950           0.943
      6           1.164          1.138           1.019           0.966          0.962           0.932           0.978          0.938           0.984           0.978
      9           1.237          1.219           1.032           0.987          1.028           0.976           1.061          1.002           1.001           0.994
     12           1.287          1.267           1.041           0.979          1.033           0.979           1.061          0.985           0.980           0.977
     18           1.242          1.209           1.022           0.957          0.945           0.943           0.978          0.934           0.943           0.955
     24           1.152          1.114           1.018           0.938          0.911           0.919           0.934          0.903           0.928           0.932
NOTES: Boldface indicates improvements relative to no-change forecast. ** denotes significance at the 5% level and * at the 10% level based on the Diebold-Mariano test.
Red indicates the best model among the shipping-based indices and blue the best model among the three alternative indicators. Green indicates whether the VAR or the
Bayesian VAR (BVAR) performs better.
      Table 4. The Role of Stochastic Volatility for the Accuracy of Recursive Forecasts of the Real Brent Price in BVAR(12) Models
                                                       Evaluation Period: 1992.1-2018.8

 Monthly             Kilian index                Real shipping cost               World IP index             Real commodity price                 Global steel
 horizon                (REA)                          factor                        (WIP)                          factor                     production factor
                   (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)            (7)             (8)             (9)            (10)

                                                                            (a) Production-based models
                 BVAR         SV-BVAR           BVAR          SV-BVAR           BVAR         SV-BVAR           BVAR         SV-BVAR           BVAR          SV-BVAR
      1           0.983          0.911**         0.930          0.913**         0.893*          0.905**         0.896*         0.919**         0.934           0.924*
      3           1.063          0.972           0.965          0.942           0.910           0.942           0.918          0.954           0.983           0.952
      6           1.158          1.024           1.003          0.949*          0.972           0.966           0.967          0.963           1.032           0.972
      9           1.211          1.039           1.006          0.931*          0.999           0.939*          1.006          0.952           1.033           0.943
     12           1.237          1.046           0.974          0.899**         0.971           0.910*          0.968          0.913**         0.983           0.906*
     18           1.179          0.940           0.954          0.837**         0.947           0.839**         0.932          0.831**         0.955           0.844**
     24           1.092          0.827           0.927          0.765**         0.922           0.768**         0.898          0.767**         0.927           0.762**

                                                                           (b) Consumption-based models
                 BVAR         SV-BVAR           BVAR          SV-BVAR           BVAR         SV-BVAR           BVAR         SV-BVAR           BVAR          SV-BVAR
      1           0.964          0.920*          0.918*          0.907**        0.884**         0.905**         0.888**        0.911**         0.904*          0.912**
      3           1.045          0.958           0.942           0.909          0.888           0.918*          0.906          0.939*          0.943           0.929
      6           1.138          1.018           0.966           0.910**        0.932           0.926*          0.938          0.943*          0.978           0.925*
      9           1.219          1.063           0.987           0.897*         0.976           0.911*          1.002          0.937*          0.994           0.909*
     12           1.267          1.072           0.979           0.874**        0.979           0.869**         0.985          0.887**         0.977           0.864**
     18           1.209          0.951           0.957           0.789**        0.943           0.790**         0.934          0.783**         0.955           0.791**
     24           1.114          0.821           0.938           0.719**        0.919           0.710**         0.903          0.718**         0.932           0.710**
NOTES: Boldface indicates improvements relative to no-change forecast. ** denotes significance at the 5% level and * at the 10% level based on the Diebold-Mariano test.
Red indicates the best model among the shipping-based indices and blue the best model among the three alternative indicators. Green indicates whether the BVAR or the
BVAR with stochastic volatility (SV-BVAR) performs better.
        Table 5. The Role of Pooling for the Accuracy of Recursive Forecasts of the Real Brent Price
                                      Evaluation Period: 1992.1-2018.8

                                Model-Based Pooling: SV-BVAR(12)                                    Market-Based Pooling
  Monthly             Equal-weighted forecast              Factor from disaggregated
                                                                                                      Brent futures spread
  horizon             combination (5 models)               data of all existing indices
     1                        0.903**                                 0.919**                                  1.052
     3                        0.921                                   0.921*                                   1.064
     6                        0.943                                   0.923**                                  1.034
     9                        0.948                                   0.902*                                   0.973
    12                        0.925                                   0.870**                                  0.920*
    18                        0.878                                   0.782**                                  0.854**
    24                        0.833                                   0.710**                                  0.836*
NOTES: Boldface indicates improvements relative to no-change forecast. ** denotes significance at the 5% level and * at the 10% level
based on the Diebold-Mariano test. The evaluation period for Brent futures for h=12 starts in 1994.4 and for h=18, 24 in 1998.2 due to
data availability.
                      Table 6. Recursive MSPE Ratios Relative to AR(12) Forecast for Global Petroleum Consumption
                                                   Evaluation Period: 1992.1-2018.8
                                                                                                          Monthly horizon
                                                                        1             3              6          9                12            18             24
 (a) BVAR(12)
 Kilian index (REA)                                                  1.103          1.445         2.062          2.558         3.131         3.838          4.122
 Real shipping cost factor                                           1.046          1.134         1.310          1.421         1.521         1.781          2.055
 World IP index (WIP)                                                1.002          1.252         1.511          1.532         1.635         1.870          2.043
 Real commodity price factor                                         1.054          1.173         1.335          1.440         1.523         1.759          1.977
 Global steel production factor                                      1.255          1.609         1.794          1.834         2.007         2.437          2.553

 (b) SV-BVAR(12)
 Kilian index (REA)                                                  0.968          1.073         1.213          1.274         1.369         1.561          1.645
 Real shipping cost factor                                           0.962*         1.036         1.064          1.087         1.114         1.178          1.208
 World IP index (WIP)                                                0.933**        0.984         1.009          0.995         1.013         1.048          1.052
 Real commodity price factor                                         0.949**        1.017         1.070          1.108         1.154         1.245          1.304
 Global steel production factor                                      0.954**        1.026         1.059          1.065         1.095         1.130          1.141

 (c) Model-based pooling using SV-BVAR(12)
 Equal-weighted forecast combination (5 models)                      0.946**        1.016         1.066          1.086         1.128         1.213          1.258
 Factor from disaggregated data of all existing indices              0.955*         1.028         1.072          1.095         1.129         1.208          1.266
NOTES: Boldface indicates improvements relative to AR(12) forecast. ** denotes significance at the 5% level and * at the 10% level based on the Diebold-Mariano test.
                                                             Table 7. Key Indicators Affecting Energy Markets

                                                                    Geographic               Start                                                   Data       Nowcast          Data
 Data category         Variable                                                                             Tcode      Data source
                                                                    coverage                 date                                                    delay       rule          revisions
 Real economic         World Industrial Production                  OECD + 6 non-            1973.1            5       Baumeister-Hamilton             2          AG               Y
 activity              Index                                        member countries                                   (2019)
                       Conference Board Leading                     US                       1973.1            5       Datastream                       1          AG              Y
                       Economic Index
                       Consumer Confidence Index                    OECD                     1974.1            5       OECD MEI                         1          RW              Y
 Commodity             Copper Price                                 World                    1973.1            5       World Bank                       0                          N
 prices
 Financial             Real Trade-Weighted U.S. Dollar              World                    1973.1            5       FRED                             0                          Y
 indicators            Index: Broad
                       MSCI World Stock Price Index                 World                    1972.1            7       Global Financial Data            0                          N
                       Excess Returns on Fama-French                World                    1973.1            7       Ken French's website             2          RW              N
                       Portfolio: Transportation
 Transportation        Passenger Car Registrations                  OECD                     1973.1            5       OECD MEI                         8          AG              Y
                       Total Vehicle Miles Travelled                US                       1973.1            5       FRED                             2          AG              Y
 Uncertainty           Caldara-Iacoviello Geopolitical              World                    1973.1            5       Caldara-Iacoviello               0                          N
 measures              Risk Index                                                                                      (2018)
                       Long-Run Oil Price Uncertainty               World                    1989.4            1       Bloomberg                        0                          N
 Expectations          University of Michigan Index of              US                       1978.1            5       Michigan Survey                  0                          N
 measures              Consumer Expectations
                       Spread between Long-Run and                  World                    1988.11           1       Bloomberg                        0                          N
                       Short-Run Oil Price Expectations
 Weather               Oceanic Niño Index                           World                    1973.1            1       NOAA                             2          RC              Y
 indicators
                       Residential Energy Demand         US                                  1973.1            1       NOAA                             1          RW              Y
                       Temperature Index
 Energy-related        Energy Production and Electricity EU28                                1991.1            5       FRED                             3          AG              Y
 indicators            Distribution
NOTES: Tcode indicates the transformation of the variable where 1 indicates the variable is included in its original units, 5 refers to taking first log differences, 7 stands for annual
growth rates. The delay in data release is measured in months. Nowcasts are based on the average growth rate (AG), the most recent change (RC), and no change (RW).
Table 8. The Role of Different Information Sets for the Accuracy of Recursive Forecasts of the Real Brent Price and Global
         Petroleum Consumption in Bayesian VAR(12) Models with Stochastic Volatility Evaluated over 1992.1-2018.8
                                                                              Monthly horizon
                                                   1          3          6          9           12         18          24
                                                                                                      (a) Real Brent Price
 (1)     Global Economic Conditions Indicator                   0.918   **
                                                                                0.930           0.940      0.920       0.876*                0.795**        0.704**

         Large dataset
 (2)     1 factor                                               0.922**         0.939           0.947          0.932          0.886*          0.802*        0.715**
 (3)     2 factors                                              0.939*          0.947*          0.955          0.950          0.934           0.835**       0.756**
 (4)     3 factors                                              0.939*          0.967           0.982          0.987          0.976           0.930         0.857**

 (5)     Statistical variable selection                         0.915**         0.925          0.930*         0.906*          0.854*         0.766**        0.686**

                                                                                             (b) Global Petroleum Consumption
 (6)     Global Economic Conditions Indicator                   0.934  **
                                                                                0.945          0.926      0.880*    0.875     0.907                          0.884

         Large dataset
 (7)     1 factor                                               0.921**         0.973           1.005          0.965          0.936           0.968          0.949
 (8)     2 factors                                              0.926**         0.981           1.048          1.081          1.156           1.349          1.461
 (9)     3 factors                                              0.937**         0.985           1.076          1.104          1.180           1.378          1.530

 (10) Statistical variable selection                            0.946**         0.997           1.004          0.981          1.023           1.049          1.045
NOTES: Boldface indicates improvements relative to no-change forecast (panel a) or AR(12) forecast (panel b). ** denotes significance at the 5% level and * at
the 10% level based on the Diebold-Mariano test. The Global Economic Conditions Indicator is based on 16 variables covering different dimensions of the global
economy as they relate to energy markets (see Table 7). The large dataset contains 256 variables (see Tables 2, 7 and 9 for details). The statistical variable selection
uses the 16 variables with the highest loadings on the factor extracted from the large dataset. The variables selected are the following in the order of the magnitude
of loadings: long-run oil price uncertainty, spread of oil price expectations, real freight rates for fertilizer (potash) from Germany to India, short-run gasoline price
uncertainty, Conference Board Leading Economic Index, FF industry portfolio: utilities, MSCI world index, FF industry portfolio: chemicals, FF industry portfolio:
oil, FF industry portfolio: transportation, FF industry portfolio: cars, Composite Leading Indicator for Japan, OECD business confidence index, real freight rates
for commodity/route 2, Australian unemployment rate, and Chinese consumer confidence index (see Table 9 for more details on each variable).
Table 9. Extended Dataset
 No Variable description                                                      Units                              Tcode      Data source        Start date
REAL ECONOMIC ACTIVITY
 1   Leading Indicator: Business Situation, Canada                            Percent                               1       FRED                   1973.1
 2   Composite Leading Indicator, Japan                                       Index                                 5       CEIC                   1985.1
 3   Leading Indicator: Sales Expectations, Japan                             Percent                               1       FRED                   1985.1
 4   Leading Indicator, Korea                                                 Index                                 4       CEIC                   1973.1
 5   Leading Indicator: Business Situation, Korea                             Percent                               1       FRED                   1991.7
 6   Leading Indicator: Production, UK                                        Percent                               1       FRED                   1975.1
 7   Leading Indicator: Order Books, Brazil                                   Percent                               1       FRED                   1980.1
 8   Leading Indicator: Production, Brazil                                    Percent                               1       FRED                   1980.1
 9   Composite Leading Indicator, Mexico                                      Index                                 1       CEIC                   1980.1
 10  Composite Leading Indicator, Russia                                      Percent                               1       CEIC                   1997.9
 11  Composite Leading Indicator, South Africa                                Index                                 1       CEIC                   1973.1
 12  U.S. Recession Indicator a                                               Index                                 1       DS, UMS                1978.1
 13  Chicago Fed National Activity Indicator                                  Index                                 1       FRED                   1973.1
 14  U.S. Index of Consumer Sentiment                                         Index                                 5       UMS                    1978.1
 15  Eurocoin                                                                 Index                                 1       CEPR                   1999.1
 16  Euro Area Business Climate Indicator                                     Index                                 1       TE                     1985.1
 17  Euro Area Economic Sentiment Indicator                                   Index                                 1       EC                     1980.1
 18  ISM Manufacturing PMI, US                                                Index                                 5       B                      1973.1
 19  PMI Manufacturing, EA                                                    Index                                 5       B                      1997.6
 20  Developed Markets PMI: Manufacturing                                     Index                                 5       B                      1998.1
 21  Emerging Markets PMI: Manufacturing                                      Index                                 5       B                      2004.4
 22  ISM U.S. Manufacturing: New Export Orders                                Index                                 5       B                      1988.1
 23  Global PMI Manufacturing: New Export Orders                              Index                                 5       B                      1998.1
 24  Consumer Confidence, Brazil                                              Index                                 5       OECD                   1994.6
 25  Consumer Confidence, China                                               Index                                 5       OECD                   1990.1
 26  Consumer Confidence, Russia                                              Index                                 5       OECD                  1998.11
 27  Consumer Confidence, South Africa                                        Index                                 5       OECD                   1982.6

a
 This recession indicator is constructed as the difference between the index of consumer sentiment from the Michigan survey and the Conference Board consumer
confidence index. This composite indicator typically reaches a low prior to recessions.
28   Business Confidence, OECD                        Index                      5   OECD       1974.6
29   Business Confidence, Brazil                      Index                      5   OECD       1995.4
30   Business Confidence, China                       Index                      5   OECD       2000.2
31   Business Confidence, Russia                      Index                      5   OECD       1992.9
32   Business Confidence, South Africa                Index                      5   OECD       1974.6
33   Sales: Retail Trade, OECD                        Index                      5   OECD       1973.1
34   Sales: Retail Trade, Russia                      Index                      5   OECD      1994.12
35   Sales: Retail Trade, South Africa                Index                      5   OECD       1977.1
36   Unemployment Rate, Australia                     Percent                    1   OECD       1978.2
37   Unemployment Rate, EU18                          Percent                    1   EC         1998.4
38   Unemployment Rate, Japan                         Percent                    1   OECD       1973.1
39   Unemployment Rate, UK                            Percent                    1   FRED+EC    1973.1
40   Unemployment Rate, US                            Percent                    1   FRED       1973.1
41   Real Disposable Personal Income, US              Billions of chained 2012   5   FRED       1973.1
                                                      dollars
42   Real PCE: New Motor Vehicles, US                 Quantity index             5   BEA        1973.1
43   Real PCE: Motorcycles, US                        Quantity index             5   BEA        1973.1
44   Real PCE: Pleasure Boats, Aircraft and Other     Quantity index             5   BEA        1973.1
     Recreational Vehicles, US
45   Real PCE: Motor Vehicle Fuels, US                Quantity index             5   BEA        1973.1
46   Real PCE: Fuel Oil and Other Fuels, US           Quantity index             5   BEA        1973.1
47   Real PCE: Motor Vehicle Services, US             Quantity index             5   BEA        1973.1
48   Real PCE: Public Transportation, US              Quantity index             5   BEA        1973.1
49   Current Buying Conditions, Durables, US          Index                      5   UMS        1978.1
50   Current Buying Conditions, Vehicles, US          Index                      5   UMS        1978.1
51   IP: Consumer Energy Products, US                 Index                      5   FRB        1973.1
52   IP: Commercial Energy Products, US               Index                      5   FRB        1971.1
53   IP: Oil and Gas Well Drilling, US                Index                      5   FRB        1973.1
54   IP: Petroleum and Coal Products, US              Index                      5   FRB        1973.1
55   IP: Motor Vehicles and Parts, US                 Index                      5   FRB        1973.1
56   IP: Aerospace and Transportation Equipment, US   Index                      5   FRB        1973.1
57   IP: Mining, US                                   Index                      5   FRB        1973.1
58   IP: Autos (Consumer),US                          Index                      5   BEA        1973.1
    59     IP: Fuels (Consumer), US                                                 Index                                   5      FRB               1973.1
    60     IP: Converted Fuel (Materials), US                                       Index                                   5      FRB               1973.1
    61     IP: Primary Energy (Materials), US                                       Index                                   5      FRB               1973.1
    62     PPI: Motor Vehicles and Equipment, US                                    Index                                   5      BLS               1973.1
    63     PPI: Aircraft and Aircraft Equipment, US                                 Index                                   5      BLS               1973.1
    64     Real Manufacturing Inventories: Petroleum Products, US                   Millions of chained 2012                5      BEA               1973.1
                                                                                    dollars
    65     Real Manufacturing Inventories: Motor Vehicles, US                       Millions of chained 2012                5      BEA               1973.1
                                                                                    dollars
    66
     Real Value of Manufacturer's New Orders: Motor                                 Millions of chained 2012                5      FRED              1992.2
     Vehicles and Parts, US                                                         dollars
 67  Capacity Utilization: Petroleum and Coal Products, US                          Percent                                 5      FRB               1973.1
 68  Capacity Utilization: Mining, US                                               Percent                                 5      FRB               1973.1
 69  Capacity Utilization: Automobile and Light Duty                                Percent                                 5      FRB               1973.1
     Vehicle, US
FINANCIAL INDICATORS b
 70  S&P GSCI Energy Index                                                          Index                                   7      GFD               1983.1
 71  S&P 500 Utilities                                                              Index                                   7      GFD               1972.1
 72  S&P 500 Energy                                                                 Index                                   7      GFD               1972.1
 73  S&P 500 Air Freight and Logistics                                              Index                                   7      GFD               1972.1
 74  S&P 500 Airlines                                                               Index                                   7      GFD               1972.1
 75  S&P 500 Railroad                                                               Index                                   7      GFD               1972.1
 76  S&P 500 Automobiles                                                            Index                                   7      GFD               1972.1
 77  S&P 500 Oil, Gas and Consumable Fuels                                          Index                                   7      GFD               1972.1
 78  Dow Jones: Transportation                                                      Index                                   7      B                 1972.1
 79  Dow Jones: Utilities                                                           Index                                   7      B                 1972.1
 80  Dow Jones: Industrials                                                         Index                                   7      B                 1972.1
 81  FF: Oil                                                                        Index                                   7      FF                1972.1
 82  FF: Chemicals                                                                  Index                                   7      FF                1972.1
 83  FF: Cars                                                                       Index                                   7      FF                1972.1
 84  FF: Utilities                                                                  Index                                   7      FF                1972.1
 85  NYSE Arca Oil Index                                                            Index                                   7      GFD              1984.11
b
    All returns for sub-categories of S&P 500, DJ, and FF are calculated as excess returns relative to the respective overall market performance.
 86  Real Broad Effective Exchange Rate: Australia         Index      5   FRED    1994.1
 87  Real Broad Effective Exchange Rate: Canada            Index      5   FRED    1994.1
 88  Real Broad Effective Exchange Rate: Chile             Index      5   FRED    1994.1
 89  Real Broad Effective Exchange Rate: Norway            Index      5   FRED    1994.1
 90  Real Broad Effective Exchange Rate: South Africa      Index      5   FRED    1994.1
 91  Real Broad Effective Exchange Rate: New Zealand       Index      5   FRED    1994.1
 92  Real Broad Effective Exchange Rate: Euro Area         Index      5   FRED    1994.1
 93  Real Broad Effective Exchange Rate: China             Index      5   FRED    1994.1
 94  Real Broad Effective Exchange Rate: India             Index      5   FRED    1994.1
 95  Real Broad Effective Exchange Rate: UK                Index      5   FRED    1994.1
 96  Real Broad Effective Exchange Rate: Japan             Index      5   FRED    1994.1
 97  Chicago Fed Adjusted Financial Conditions             Index      1   FRED    1973.1
 98  10Y/1Y Treasury Yield Spread                          Percent    1   FRED    1973.1
 99  Moody's Baa/Aaa Corporate Bond Yield Spread           Percent    1   FRED    1973.1
 100 Real Rate: 1Y Treasury Constant Maturity Rate ­ CPI   Percent    1   FRED    1973.1
     Inflation Rate Over Preceding Year
TRANSPORTATION
 101 Passenger Car Registrations, EU28                     Index      5   OECD    1973.1
 102 Passenger Car Registrations, US                       Index      5   OECD    1973.1
 103 Passenger Car Registrations, Canada                   Index      5   OECD    1973.1
 104 Passenger Car Registrations, Japan                    Index      5   OECD    1974.1
 105 Passenger Car Registrations, Norway                   Index      5   OECD    1973.1
 106 Passenger Car Registrations, New Zealand              Index      5   OECD    1974.1
 107 Passenger Car Registrations, South Africa             Index      5   OECD    1973.1
 108 Passenger Car Registrations, India                    Index      5   OECD    2001.5
 109 Passenger Car Registrations, Korea                    Index      5   OECD    1993.1
 110 Passenger Car Registrations, Turkey                   Index      5   OECD    1989.1
 111 Vehicle Production, Brazil (de-trended)               Quantity   1   CEIC    1984.1
 112 Vehicle Production, China*                            Quantity   5   CEIC    1986.1
 113 Vehicle Production, Mexico*                           Quantity   5   CEIC    1983.1
 114 U.S. Real Transportation Costs                        Index      5   FRED    1973.1
 115 U.S. Truck Sales                                      Index      5   BEA     1973.1
 116 U.S. Electric Car Sales                               Number     5   EV     2010.12
 117 Rail Freight Intermodal Traffic, US                                          Ton miles                               5       FRED                    2000.1
 118 Rail Freight Carloads, US                                                    Carloads                                5       FRED                    2000.1
 119 Truck Tonnage, US                                                            Index                                   5       FRED                    2000.1
 120 Tonnage Carried on Internal U.S. Waterways                                   Millions of short tons                  5       FRED                    2000.1
UNCERTAINTY MEASURES
 121 Global Economic Policy Uncertainty Index                                     Index                                   5       BBD                     1997.1
 122 OPEC Newspaper Index                                                         Index                                   5       P                       1986.1
 123 CBOE S&P 500 Volatility Index                                                Index                                   5       GFD                     1986.1
 124 Short-Run Gasoline Price Uncertainty c                                                                               1       B                       1987.1
 125 Long-Run Natural Gas Price Uncertaintyc                                                                              1       B                       1990.6
EXPECTATIONS MEASURES
 126 Expected Change in Personal Financial Situation, US                          Index                                   5       UMS                    1978.1
 127 Expected Change in Real Family Income, US                                    Index                                   5       UMS                    1978.1
 128 Expected Change in Interest Rates, US                                        Index                                   5       UMS                    1978.1
 129 Expected Change in Unemployment, US                                          Index                                   5       UMS                    1978.1
 130 Expected Change in Business Conditions, US                                   Index                                   5       UMS                    1978.1
 131 Expected Average Increase in Gasoline Prices Over the                        Cents per gallon                        5       UMS                   1992.11
     Next 5 Years, US
 132 Spread between Long-Run and Short-Run Heating Oil                                                                    1       B                       1989.8
     Price Expectations d
 133 Spread between Long-Run and Short-Run Natural Gas                                                                    1       B                       1990.6
     Price Expectationsd
WEATHER INDICATORS
 134 Global Temperature Anomalies                                                 Degrees Celsius                        5      NOAA                      1973.1
 135 Heating Degree Days, US*                                                     Index                                  1      EIA MER                   1973.1
 136 Heating Degree Days, EU28*                                                   Index                                  1      EC                        1974.1


                                                                                                   252                    
c
    Price uncertainty is defined as realized volatility and is calculated as follows: 
                                                                                       = 100              (=1(
                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                               ) ) where  is the daily return for the oil
                                                                                                    
futures contract on day  in month  computed as the log difference between the futures price on day  and  - 1, and  is the number of trading days in a given
month. Long-run refers to futures with 12-month maturity and short-run to futures with 3-month maturity.
d
  Price expectations are proxied by log futures prices where short-run refers to contracts with 3 months to maturity and long-run refers to contracts with 12 months
to maturity.
 137 Cooling Degree Days, US*                                                     Index                                  1      EIA MER                   1973.1
 138 Cooling Degree Days, EU28*                                                   Index                                  1      EC                        1974.1
 139 Heating Degree Days, Deviation from Normal, US                               Index                                  1      HA                        1997.5
 140 Cooling Degree Days, Deviation from Normal, US                               Index                                  1      HA                        1998.7
 141 Temperature Fluctuations for 48 US States                                    Index                                  1      HA                        1973.1
ENERGY-RELATED INDICATORS
 142 Electricity Consumption, China*                                              Billion kWh                            5      CEIC                      1986.4
 143 Electricity Consumption, India*                                              Million kWh                            5      CEIC                      1987.9
 144 Electricity Consumption, Korea*                                              Million kWh                            5      CEIC                      1979.1
 145 Electricity Consumption, South Africa*                                       GWh                                    5      CEIC                      1985.1
 146 Electricity Consumption, UK*                                                 TWh                                    5      UKBEIS                    1995.1
 147 Electricity Consumption, US*                                                 Million kWh                            5      EIA MER                   1973.1
 148 Total Energy Carbon Dioxide Emissions*                                       Million metric tons                    5      EIA MER                   1973.1
 149 U.S. Motor Gasoline Stocks                                                   Million barrels                        5      EIA MER                   1973.1
 150 U.S. Total Petroleum Stocks                                                  Million barrels                        5      EIA MER                   1973.1
NOTES: The end of the sample for all data series is 2018.8. If data are available at a frequency higher than monthly, we obtain monthly data by averaging. Tcode
indicates the stationarity transformation code for each variable where Tcode = 1 indicates that the variable is included in its original units, Tcode = 4 stands for
log-levels, Tcode = 5 refers to taking first log differences, and Tcode = 7 stands for year-on-year growth rates. An asterisk indicates that the series has been
seasonally adjusted using the X13-ARIMA procedure. The codes for the data sources are as follows: B ­ Bloomberg, BBD ­ Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016)
(http://www.policyuncertainty.com/), BEA ­ Bureau of Economic Analysis, BLS ­ Bureau of Labor Statistics, CEIC (https://www.ceicdata.com), CEPR ­ Centre
for Economic Policy Research (https://cepr.org/data), DS ­ Datastream, EC ­ European Commission Eurostat, EIA MER ­ U.S. Energy Information Administration
Monthly Energy Review, EV ­ Monthly Plug-In Electric Vehicles Sales Scorecard (https://insideevs.com/monthly-plug-in-sales-scorecard/), FF ­ Fama-French 17
Industry Portfolios (average value-weighted returns) (https://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html), FRB ­ Federal Reserve Board
of Governors Database, FRED ­ Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Economic Database, GFD ­ Global Financial Database, HA ­ Haver Analytics, UMS ­ Survey
of Consumers, University of Michigan (http://www.sca.isr.umich.edu/), NOAA ­ U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Climatic Data
Center (https://www.noaa.gov/), OECD ­ OECD Main Economic Indicators Database, P ­ data generously updated and provided by Mike Plante from Plante
(2019), TE ­ Trading Economics, UKBEIS ­ U.K. Department of Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy.
Table 10. The Role of Real-Time Data Constraints for the SV-BVAR(12) with the Global Economic Conditions Indicator
                                         Evaluation Period: 1992.1-2018.8

                                        Real Brent Price                                   Global Petroleum Consumption
       Monthly
                           Pseudo real time             Real-time data                 Pseudo real time              Real-time data
       horizon
          1                      0.918**                     0.925*                           0.934**                     0.937**
          2                      0.921*                      0.937                            0.924**                     0.904**
          3                      0.930                       0.945                            0.945                       0.957*
          4                      0.941                       0.951                            0.927                       0.913**
          5                      0.940                       0.953                            0.936                       0.912**
          6                      0.940                       0.955                            0.926                       0.919*
          7                      0.940                       0.955                            0.912                       0.865**
          8                      0.929                       0.948                            0.891                       0.864**
          9                      0.920                       0.932                            0.880*                      0.905*
         10                      0.911                       0.926                            0.891                       0.890**
         11                      0.892*                      0.906                            0.904                       0.909*
         12                      0.876*                      0.881*                           0.875                       0.922
         13                      0.870*                      0.877*                           0.889                       0.901
         14                      0.850*                      0.856*                           0.883                       0.912
         15                      0.832*                      0.835*                           0.884                       0.910
         16                      0.817**                     0.822**                          0.896                       0.889
         17                      0.808**                     0.800**                          0.910                       0.932
         18                      0.795**                     0.792**                          0.907                       0.935
         19                      0.785**                     0.784**                          0.901                       0.906
         20                      0.771**                     0.764**                          0.913                       0.919
         21                      0.750**                     0.746**                          0.892*                      0.911
         22                      0.730**                     0.727**                          0.890                       0.908
         23                      0.721**                     0.713**                          0.877                       0.895
         24                      0.704**                     0.703**                          0.884                       0.899
      NOTES: Boldface indicates improvements relative to no-change forecast (left panel) or AR(12) forecast (right panel). ** denotes
      significance at the 5% level and * at the 10% level based on the Diebold-Mariano test.
                  NOT-FOR-PUBLICATION APPENDIX

Table 1A. Dry Cargo Single Voyage Rates
No    Commodity shipped       Shipping route                         First observation
1     Dry cargo index         n/a                                              1973.1
2     Dry cargo index         n/a                                             1975.12
3     Grain                   USG Japan (20-40)                               1979.12
4     Grain                   USG-Japan (50-60)                                1982.1
5     Grain                   USG-ARA (50-65)                                  1984.4
6     Grain                   USG-AH Range (65-85)                             1982.1
7     Grain                   USNP-Japan (45-55)                               1984.4
8     Grain                   USNP-Japan (50-55)                               1990.7
9     Grain                   USG-EC Mexico (20-25)                           1998.10
10    Grain                   USG-Venezuela (15-30)                            1993.4
11    Grain                   USG-Algeria (20-25)                              1993.4
12    Grain                   USG-Casablanca/Agadir (25-30)                    1993.4
13    Grain                   Australia-Taipei, Chinese (55)                   2015.2
14    Grain                   EU-North Africa (55)                             2015.2
15    Coal                    USG-Taiwan (50-60)                               1990.6
16    Coal                    Richards Bay-ARA (100-150)                       1990.6
17    Coal                    Richards Bay-ARA (150)                           2015.2
18    Coal                    East Australia-South Korea (120-160)             1995.6
19    Coal                    Hay Pt.-Japan (100-150)                         2010.12
20    Coal                    East Australia-ARA (100-150)                     1988.1
21    Coal                    Puerto Bolivar-ARA (100-150)                     1993.7
22    Coal                    HR-Japan (50-60)                                1979.12
23    Coal                    USAC-ARA (100-150)                               1998.7
24    Coal                    USNH-ARA (80-100)                                1990.6
25    Coal                    HR/RB-Japan (100-150)                            1984.4
26    Coal                    USAC-South Korea (120-160)                       1998.9
27    Coal                    East Australia-Japan (100-150)                   1990.8
28    Coal                    USNH-Cont. (60-80)                               1982.1
29    Coal                    Richards Bay-China (160)                         2015.2
30    Coal                    Queensland-Netherlands (150)                     2015.2
31    Coal                    Bolivar-China (150)                              2015.2
32    Coal                    USG-Rotterdam (65)                               2015.2
33    Coal                    Indonesia-India (70)                             2015.2
34    Coal                    Newcastle-Qingdao (74)                           2014.7
35    Coal                    East Australia-Japan (60-70)                     2007.1
36    Coal                    Richards Bay-Mediterranean (60-70)               2007.1
37    Iron ore                Narvik-ARA (100-150)                            1990.10
38    Iron ore                Brazil-ARA (100-150)                             1990.6
39    Iron ore                Brazil-China (100-150)                           1995.5
40    Iron ore                West Australia-China (120-160)                   1998.7
41    Iron ore                West Australia-ARA (120-160)                     1990.6
 42     Iron ore                        Saldanha Bay-China (100-150)                                   1993.5
 43     Iron ore                        Nouadhibou-ARA (80-120)                                        1990.6
 44     Iron ore                        East Canada-ARA (80-125)                                       1998.5
 45     Iron ore                        Monrovia-Cont. (60-90)                                         1982.1
 46     Iron ore                        Brazil-Cont. (60-80)                                          1979.12
 47     Iron ore                        Brazil-Cont. (125-175)                                         1982.1
 48     Iron ore                        Brazil-South Korea (100-140)                                   1984.4
 49     Iron ore                        Brazil-Japan (120-160)                                         1988.5
 50     Iron ore                        West Australia-Japan (100-150)                                 1990.7
 51     Iron ore                        West Australia-UK (100-140)                                    1984.4
 52     Oilseeds                        British Columbia-Japan (20-30)                                 1988.1
 53     Fertilizer (dap)                USG-India (15-25)                                              1984.4
 54     Fertilizer (potash)             Germany-India (15-25)                                          1984.4
 55     Fertilizer (phosrock)           Aqaba-India (10-15)                                            1984.4
 56     Fertilizer (dap)                USG-West Coast India (20-30)                                   1990.6
 57     Fertilizer (phosrock)           West Africa-India (15-25)                                      1990.6
 58     Fertilizer (dap)                RS/AG-India (10-15)                                            1995.5
 59     Scrap                           G-H Range-Turkey (25-35)                                       1995.5
 60     Scrap                           WCUS-South Korea (30-40)                                      1999.12
 61     Scrap                           USAC-South Korea (30-50)                                       1993.5
NOTES: The numbers in brackets indicate Deadweight Cargo Tons (DWCT) or the weight of cargo to be transported
under a charter party. The abbreviations for the shipping routes are as follows: ARA: Antwerp-Rotterdam-Amsterdam
range of ports; Cont.: Continent or Europe; G-H Range: Gibraltar-Hamburg range of ports; HR/RB: Hampton Roads
or Richards Bay; RS/AG: Red Sea or Arabian Gulf; USAC: United States Atlantic Coast; USG: United States Gulf of
Mexico; USNH: United States North of (Cape) Hatteras; USNP: United States North Pacific; USWC: United States
West Coast; WCUS: West Coast United States. The first two series are dry cargo indices compiled by Drewry's
Shipping Consultants.
Table 2A. Recursive MSPE Ratios Relative to No-Change Forecast of Real Refiner Acquisition Cost of Imported Crude Oil
                                          Evaluation Period: 1992.1-2018.8
    Monthly          Kilian index           Real shipping cost          World IP index            Real commodity               Global steel
    horizon             (REA)                     factor                   (WIP)                    price factor            production factor
                           (1)                       (2)                        (3)                       (4)                        (5)
                                                                           (a) BVAR(12)
                                 **                        **
        1                0.820                      0.781                     0.750**                    0.745**                   0.770**
        3                0.964                      0.892                     0.835                      0.835                     0.886
        6                1.080                      0.970                     0.939                      0.930                     0.986
        9                1.169                      1.002                     0.998                      0.998                     1.019
       12                1.174                      0.968                     0.972                      0.971                     0.979
       18                1.109                      0.936                     0.922                      0.923                     0.944
       24                1.048                      0.927                     0.918                      0.901                     0.927
                                                                        (b) BVAR(12)-SV
                                 **                        **
        1                0.784                      0.763                     0.788**                   0.787**                    0.800**
        3                0.906**                    0.867*                    0.885*                    0.895**                    0.900*
        6                0.981                      0.914*                    0.937*                    0.937**                    0.937*
        9                0.998                      0.904**                   0.923**                   0.930**                    0.923*
       12                1.001                      0.864**                   0.897**                   0.884**                    0.871**
       18                0.887                      0.802**                   0.815**                   0.801**                    0.808**
       24                0.759**                    0.699**                   0.702**                   0.698**                    0.705**
  NOTES: Boldface indicates improvements relative to no-change forecast. ** denotes significance at the 5% level and * at the 10% level based on the
  Diebold-Mariano test. Red indicates the best model among the shipping-based indices and blue the best model among the three alternative indicators.
Table 3A. The Role of Stochastic Volatility for the Accuracy of Recursive Forecasts of the Real Brent Price When the Same Prior is Used
                                                     Evaluation Period: 1992.1-2018.8

 Monthly             Kilian index                Real shipping cost               World IP index             Real commodity price                 Global steel
 horizon                (REA)                          factor                        (WIP)                          factor                     production factor
                   (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)            (7)             (8)             (9)            (10)

                                                                            (a) Production-based models
                 BVAR         SV-BVAR           BVAR          SV-BVAR           BVAR         SV-BVAR           BVAR         SV-BVAR           BVAR          SV-BVAR
      1           0.950          0.911**         0.878*         0.913**         0.886**         0.905**         0.885**        0.919**         0.905*          0.924*
      3           1.026          0.972           0.930          0.942           0.896           0.942           0.909          0.954           0.952           0.952
      6           1.102          1.024           0.972          0.949*          0.942           0.966           0.946          0.963           0.985           0.972
      9           1.163          1.039           0.975          0.931*          0.967           0.939*          0.986          0.952           0.985           0.943
     12           1.191          1.046           0.944          0.899**         0.950           0.910*          0.955          0.913**         0.948           0.906*
     18           1.135          0.940           0.933          0.837**         0.932           0.839**         0.917          0.831**         0.930           0.844**
     24           1.041          0.827           0.909          0.765**         0.908           0.768**         0.886          0.767**         0.902           0.762**

                                                                           (b) Consumption-based models
                 BVAR         SV-BVAR           BVAR          SV-BVAR           BVAR         SV-BVAR           BVAR         SV-BVAR           BVAR          SV-BVAR
      1           0.933          0.920*          0.856**         0.907**        0.868**         0.905**         0.870**        0.911**         0.881**         0.912**
      3           1.020          0.958           0.923           0.909          0.899           0.918*          0.900          0.939*          0.932           0.929
      6           1.109          1.018           0.949           0.910**        0.936           0.926*          0.927          0.943*          0.957           0.925*
      9           1.183          1.063           0.966           0.897*         0.960           0.911*          0.969          0.937*          0.969           0.909*
     12           1.225          1.072           0.944           0.874**        0.951           0.869**         0.956          0.887**         0.949           0.864**
     18           1.158          0.951           0.935           0.789**        0.928           0.790**         0.918          0.783**         0.928           0.791**
     24           1.045          0.821           0.910           0.719**        0.905           0.710**         0.892          0.718**         0.903           0.710**
NOTES: Boldface indicates improvements relative to no-change forecast. ** denotes significance at the 5% level and * at the 10% level based on the Diebold-Mariano test.
Red indicates the best model among the shipping-based indices and blue the best model among the three alternative indicators. Green indicates whether the BVAR or the
BVAR with stochastic volatility (SV-BVAR) both using the same Minnesota-style prior performs better.
