                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         OPTIMAL REGULATION OF E-CIGARETTES:
                                THEORY AND EVIDENCE

                                             Hunt Allcott
                                            Charlie Rafkin

                                        Working Paper 27000
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27000


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2020

We thank Alberto Abadie, David B. Abrams, Josh Angrist, Noel Brewer, Chad Cotti, Charles Courtemanche,
Thomas Eissenberg, Brigham Frandsen, Don Kenkel, Jessica Pepper, Mike Pesko, Kurt Ribisl, Frank
Schilbach, Andrew Seidenberg, Jann Spiess, Tevi Troy, and seminar participants at ITAM, Microsoft
Research, and MIT for helpful feedback. We thank Raj Bhargava, Ahmad Rahman, and Aakaash Rao
for exceptional research assistance. We are grateful to the Sloan Foundation for financial support.
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research
Fellowship under Grant No. 1122374. Replication files and survey instruments are available from
https://sites.google.com/site/allcott/research. Our surveys were approved by the NYU University Committee
on Activities Involving Human Subjects (protocol number FY2020-3753) and the MIT Committee
on the Use of Humans as Experimental Subjects (protocol number 2522). This paper represents the
researchers' own analyses calculated based in part on data from The Nielsen Company (US), LLC
and marketing databases provided through the Nielsen Datasets at the Kilts Center for Marketing Data
Center at The University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The conclusions drawn from the Nielsen
data are those of the researchers and do not reflect the views of Nielsen nor the National Bureau of
Economic Research. Nielsen is not responsible for, had no role in, and was not involved in analyzing
and preparing the results reported herein.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Hunt Allcott and Charlie Rafkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence
Hunt Allcott and Charlie Rafkin
NBER Working Paper No. 27000
April 2020, Revised in September 2020
JEL No. D12,D18,D61,H21,H23,I12,I18

                                         ABSTRACT

There is an active debate about how to regulate electronic cigarettes, due to uncertainty about
their health effects and whether they are primarily a quit aid or a gateway drug for combustible
cigarettes. We model optimal e-cigarette regulation and estimate key parameters. Using tax
changes and scanner data, we estimate relatively elastic demand and limited substitution between
e-cigarettes and combustible cigarettes. In sample surveys, historical smoking trends for high-
and low-vaping demographics were unchanged after e-cigarettes were introduced; this
demographic shift-share identification also suggests limited substitution. We field a new
quantitative survey of public health experts, who report that vaping is more harmful than
previously believed. In our model, the optimal e-cigarette tax is probably higher than the current
norm, but Monte Carlo simulations highlight substantial uncertainty.


Hunt Allcott
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
allcott@gmail.com

Charlie Rafkin
MIT Department of Economics
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
crafkin@mit.edu
    As of 2019, eight million American adults and four million American youth reported using
e-cigarettes, and many more youth now vape e-cigarettes than smoke traditional combustible
cigarettes. There is significant disagreement about whether regulators should encourage or dis-
courage this popular new product. Optimists point out that the widespread adoption suggests that
e-cigarettes generate substantial consumer surplus. Furthermore, e-cigarettes can be a useful smok-
ing cessation aid (Hajek et al. 2019), and vaping is less harmful than smoking cigarettes (National
Academy of Sciences 2018). On the other hand, pessimists point out that widespread adoption
of an addictive product is not necessarily good for well-being. Furthermore, vaping might be a
gateway to smoking for youth, and the exact health effects of vaping are uncertain, as underscored
by a recent spate of vaping-related illnesses and deaths (Gotts et al. 2019).
    This disagreement has played out in divergent and sometimes conflicting policies. Three-
quarters of Americans live in places with no e-cigarette taxes, while the states and local areas
that do tax e-cigarettes impose very different rates. Many regulators think of e-cigarettes as a
promising harm reduction tool for current smokers (Gottlieb 2018; Zeller 2019), but San Francisco
has effectively banned all e-cigarette sales while keeping combustible cigarettes legal.
    Is vaping in fact a substitute for smoking cigarettes, or a complement? Is this different for
youth versus adults? What is the state of expert knowledge about the relative harms of vaping
versus smoking? What is the socially optimal e-cigarette tax rate? Could it be optimal to ban
all e-cigarette sales? How certain can we be about any policy prescriptions? This paper lays out
a model of optimal e-cigarette regulation and derives equations for optimal taxes and welfare as
functions of several key parameters. We then estimate key statistics using an array of empirical
data and propose answers to the above questions.
    Our theoretical model extends the optimal sin tax literature (Gruber and Koszegi 2001, 2004;
O'Donoghue and Rabin 2006; Allcott and Taubinsky 2015; Allcott, Lockwood and Taubinsky 2019;
Farhi and Gabaix 2020; and others) in a dynamic setting appropriate for studying addictive goods.
We model heterogeneous consumers who consume a numeraire good plus two habit-forming goods
(cigarettes and e-cigarettes) that impose internalities and externalities. By "internalities," we mean
that the social planner believes that consumers' choices do not maximize their own long-run utility,
perhaps because of present focus, projection bias or related misperceptions of addiction, or biased
beliefs about health harms.1 The social planner can tax or ban either good.
    In this framework, the optimal e-cigarette tax depends on three key parameters: the marginal
uninternalized harms (externalities and internalities) from vaping, the marginal uninternalized
harms from smoking cigarettes, and the extent to which vaping and smoking are complements or
substitutes. The welfare effect of banning e-cigarettes compared to keeping taxes at current lev-
    1
    For more discussion and evidence on internalities related to smoking and vaping, see Viscusi (1990, 2016, Forth-
coming), Gruber and Koszegi (2001, 2004), Gruber and Mullainathan (2005), Chaloupka et al. (2015), Ashley,
Nardinelli and Lavaty (2015), Cutler et al. (2015, 2016), Jin et al. (2015), DeCicca et al. (2017), Kenkel et al. (2019),
Levy, Norton and Smith (2018), Chaloupka, Levy and White (2019), and DeCicca, Kenkel and Lovenheim (2020).


                                                           2
els depends on those same statistics plus the perceived consumer surplus loss as revealed by the
e-cigarette demand curve. Optimally set taxes are always preferred to a ban in our model, but a
ban may increase welfare relative to the status quo if tax rates are constrained by political issues,
tax evasion, or other factors. Furthermore, a type-specific ban (for example, a youth sales ban)
may be optimal given that uninternalized harms vary across types and type-specific taxes are hard
to implement.
   To estimate e-cigarette demand, we use Nielsen scanner data on e-cigarette sales at 27,000 stores
across the country from 2013­2017. To identify the price elasticity, we exploit changes in state and
local e-cigarette taxes. Before the tax changes, there is no trend in retail prices or quantities sold.
After the tax changes, tax-inclusive retail prices rise and persistently, and quantities sold drop. Our
primary estimate suggests an own-price elasticity of about -1.32. We also estimate the elasticity
of substitution between e-cigarettes and cigarettes using tax changes and sales for both goods. Our
primary estimates suggest statistically insignificant substitutability. However, aggregate scanner
data cannot identify heterogeneous substitution parameters: vaping and smoking could still be
substitutes for adults and complements for youth.
   We thus turn to a more novel strategy to identify substitution patterns, exploiting the fact
that different demographic groups have very different demand for e-cigarettes. Specifically, white
people, men, non-college graduates, lower-income people, and younger adults (but older youth) vape
more than non-whites, women, etc. Some of these demand differences may be related to broader
preferences for new technologies: we show that the demographics of e-cigarette early adopters--
in particular, their age profile--is similar to the demographics of internet and social media early
adopters. Between 2004 and 2012, i.e. before e-cigarettes became popular, the demographic groups
that would later have higher e-cigarette demand had steady linear declines in cigarette smoking
relative to demographics with lower latent demand. If that relative decline accelerated after e-
cigarettes became popular, this would suggest that vaping caused smoking to decrease, and thus
that e-cigarettes are substitutes for combustible cigarettes. On the other hand, if that relative
decline slowed, this would suggest that vaping caused more smoking, and thus that e-cigarettes are
a gateway to combustible cigarettes.
   This approach is a cousin of the "shift-share" identification strategy popularized by Bartik
(1991): we primarily exploit cross-sectional variation in demand across demographics with the
time-series growth in e-cigarette use. The identifying assumption is that any changes in relative
smoking trends for high- versus low-vaping demographics were caused by the introduction of e-
cigarettes. In support of this assumption, we find that smoking decreases were close to linear in
the years before e-cigarettes were introduced and that the estimates are consistent across different
demographics.
   We implement this demographic shift-share strategy using data from five large nationally rep-
resentative surveys comprising 7.4 million observations collected over 2004­2018: the Behavioral


                                                  3
Risk Factor Surveillance Survey, the National Health Interview Survey, the National Survey of
Drug Use and Health, Monitoring the Future, and the National Youth Tobacco Survey. Our esti-
mates are consistent with our earlier estimates identified from tax changes: on average, vaping is
not a significant complement or substitute for smoking. Our confidence intervals rule out that the
introduction of e-cigarettes affected the 2004­2018 smoking decrease by more than 5 to 11 percent
in either direction. To believe that e-cigarettes increased or decreased smoking by more than that,
one would have to think that high-vaping demographics (young adults, white people, men, etc.)
coincidentally all had unpredicted decreases or increases in cigarette demand over the past six years
that exactly offset the alleged effects of their vaping.2
    There is great uncertainty about the health harms from vaping, and the research is evolving
rapidly. To aggregate the state of knowledge about the harms from e-cigarettes, we surveyed public
health experts who contributed to National Academy of Sciences or Surgeon General reports, have
served on the FDA Tobacco Product Scientific Advisory Committee, have been honored as Fellows
of the Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco, and/or edit one of three leading journals, as
well as economists who have written on cigarettes or e-cigarettes. The average of the 137 experts
who responded believes that vaping is 37 percent as harmful as smoking cigarettes, where harms are
measured as effects on quality-adjusted life expectancy. There is substantial disagreement across
experts: the interquartile range of beliefs about relative harms is 10 to 60 percent. Individual
experts also perceive substantial uncertainty: the average expert reported a 90 percent confidence
interval spanning 32 percentage points.
    78 percent of experts reported (and explicitly confirmed) that they are more pessimistic than
prominent prior assessments that vaping is at least 95 percent safer than smoking cigarettes (Nutt
et al. 2014; McNeill et al. 2018). When asked why they disagreed with prior work, experts gave
three main explanations: they disagree with how researchers interpreted the evidence available
at the time, new research evidence is becoming available, and e-cigarette products have changed.
While such expert surveys are not without limitations, this new quantification of expert opinion
has significant policy implications.3
    Finally, we use our model to evaluate optimal e-cigarette regulation. The empirical results
described above have clear implications for optimal policy. Relatively elastic demand implies rel-
atively small perceived consumer surplus losses from an e-cigarette ban. Limited substitutability
with combustible cigarettes means that optimal e-cigarette policy depends little on the uninternal-
   2
       Our point estimates are different than in our September 2019 working paper because we added newly available
2018 data. Our new estimates are within the confidence intervals of the old estimates.
     3
       This August 2020 expert survey replaces an earlier expert survey that we carried out in January and reported in
our April 2020 working paper. The basic conclusion is the same: experts believe that vaping causes material harms
relative to smoking. However, our new survey is more credible for four reasons: (i) the sample of public health experts
is three times larger; (ii) the questions were more easily understandable to non-economists, in particular because we
elicited views about health harms instead of uninternalized externalities and internalities; (iii) we included a series
of comprehension checks to ensure that experts understood the questions and the implications of their answers; and
(iv) we explicitly confirmed whether experts disagreed with prior assessments and asked them to explain why.


                                                          4
ized distortions from smoking. Larger health harms from vaping increase the optimal tax rate and
increase the welfare gains from a ban.
   In our primary estimates, we calibrate vaping externalities and internalities by multiplying ex-
perts' beliefs about the relative health harms from vaping with prior estimates of smoking external-
ities from Sloan et al. (2004) and DeCicca, Kenkel and Lovenheim (2020) and smoking internalities
from Gruber and Kszegi (2001), Jin et al. (2015), and Chaloupka, Levy and White (2019). The
optimal e-cigarette tax to address these distortions is positive in 91 percent of Monte Carlo sim-
ulations, and it exceeds $0.89 per milliliter of e-liquid (the current norm in states and local areas
that tax e-cigarettes) in 60 percent of simulations. Even if vaping is only five percent as harmful
as smoking, which is consistent with Nutt et al. (2014) and McNeill et al. (2018) but much more
optimistic than our more recent expert survey, the optimal tax is 34 percent larger than the current
norm. Indeed, the optimal tax is high enough that a complete ban would be preferred to the current
norm in 46 percent of simulations.
   Our model is also well-suited to consider an alternative internality: consumers' mistaken beliefs
about the health harms from vaping. Viscusi (Forthcoming) finds that the average consumer
believes that vaping is 65 percent as harmful as smoking cigarettes, which is more pessimistic than
our average expert and much more pessimistic than Nutt et al. (2014) and McNeill et al. (2018).
Viscusi (2016), Elton-Marshall et al. (2020), McNeill et al. 2018 and others also present evidence
that consumers overestimate vaping health risks. If these biased beliefs cannot be addressed by
information provision, our model concludes that it is optimal to heavily subsidize e-cigarettes
instead of taxing them.
   There are several important caveats. First, the Nielsen scanner data cover only about 2.5 percent
of e-cigarette retail, and our price elasticity estimate could be biased if this is an unrepresentative
sample. Second, because we identify e-cigarette demand off of relatively limited price variation, we
must make strong functional form assumptions to estimate inframarginal demand and perceived
consumer surplus; this is a standard problem when analyzing the welfare effects of bans or new
products (e.g. Hausman 1996). Third, our substitution estimates are identified for a time horizon
of several years; we do not yet know if youth vapers will transition to combustible cigarettes later
in life or if adult smokers need more time to substitute to e-cigarettes. Fourth, the key parameters
may change in the future for any number of reasons, including the coronavirus pandemic and the
recent ban on flavored e-cigarettes.
   Our work builds on a growing literature on e-cigarettes. Our primary contribution is to provide
a framework for modeling optimal policy combined with new estimates of the key empirical pa-
rameters. A related paper by Kenkel et al. (2019) presents survey data suggesting that behavioral
biases reduce vaping and carries out simulations showing that such behavioral biases against vaping
imply that taxing or banning e-cigarettes reduces welfare.
   To our knowledge, our September 2019 working paper was the first estimate of the aggregate


                                                  5
price elasticity of e-cigarette demand using tax variation and scanner data (instead of survey data).
This distinction may be important: tax changes provide long-run and potentially exogenous vari-
ation, and most surveys have imperfect measures of the intensive margin of e-cigarette use. Cotti
et al. (2020) released an independent analysis in January 2020, and other papers study the ef-
fect of price changes in survey data4 or use scanner data to estimate different e-cigarette demand
parameters.5
    There is conflicting evidence on whether vaping and smoking are complements or substitutes.
A series of papers find that youth who vape are more likely to smoke in the future, even after
controlling for observable characteristics that predict both vaping and smoking.6 Although it is
possible that unobserved confounders could cause both smoking and vaping, some researchers have
taken this as evidence that vaping causes future smoking, and thus that regulating vaping would
improve public health.7 A series of other papers using quasi-experimental strategies have come to
the opposite conclusion, finding that vaping and smoking are substitutes. However, there is some
disagreement even between papers that use similar identification.8 Our demographic shift-share
approach is novel, and it may help to resolve the disagreement between existing papers.
    Our work speaks to four literatures outside of e-cigarettes. First, we extend the behavioral
public economics literature on optimal sin taxes cited above. Second, our demographic shift-share
design is related to Boxell, Gentzkow and Shapiro (2017), who identify the effects of the internet
on political polarization by exploiting age differences in internet adoption, and DeCicca et al.
(2017), who identify the effects of menthol cigarettes by exploiting racial differences in tastes for
   4
      Pesko and Warman (2017), Pesko et al. (2018), Saffer et al. (2018), and Cantrell et al. (2019) estimate the
association between price variation observed in Nielsen scanner data and survey measures of e-cigarette use. Pesko,
Courtemanche and Maclean (Forthcoming) estimate the effect of cigarette and e-cigarette tax changes on survey
measures of e-cigarette use.
    5
      Zheng et al. (2017) and Huang et al. (2018) estimate the short run residual demand elasticity faced by particular
types of stores, using data at the city-month-store type level. Stoklosa, Drope and Chaloupka (2016) estimate the
short-run demand elasticity in the EU using country-by-month data. For our research question, the parameter of
interest is the aggregate long-run demand elasticity. Short-run and long-run elasticity may differ due to stockpiling
and habit formation, and the residual demand function faced by a set of stores could naturally differ from aggregate
demand elasticity as consumers substitute across stores.
    6
      See Leventhal et al. (2015), Primack et al. (2015), Watkins, Glantz and Chaffee (2018), Berry et al. (2019), and
others, and see Chatterjee et al. (2016) and Soneji et al. (2017) for systematic reviews.
    7
      For example, an important review article by Soneji et al. (2017, page 788) concludes that "e-cigarette use was
associated with greater risk for subsequent cigarette smoking initiation and past 30-day cigarette smoking. Strong
e-cigarette regulation could potentially curb use among youth and possibly limit the future population-level burden of
cigarette smoking." Similarly, an earlier review article by Chatterjee et al. (2016, page 1) concludes that "[Electronic
cigarettes] are associated with higher incidence of combustible cigarette smoking. Policy makers need to recognize the
insidious nature of this campaign by the tobacco industry and design policies to regulate it." The National Academy
of Sciences (2018, page 555) study concludes, "the committee considered the overall body of evidence of a causal
effect of e-cigarette use on risk of transition from never to ever smoking to be substantial."
    8
      Friedman (2015), Pesko and Currie (2019), Pesko, Hughes and Faisal (2016), Cooper and Pesko (2017), Pesko
and Warman (2017), Saffer et al. (2018), Saffer et al. (2019), Abouk et al. (2019), Cantrell et al. (2019), Dave,
Feng and Pesko (2019), Pesko et al. (Forthcoming), and Cotti et al. (2020) find that e-cigarettes and cigarettes are
substitutes. Using similar identification (state-level tax variation and bans on e-cigarette sales to minors), however,
Abouk and Adams (2017) and Cotti, Nesson and Tefft (2018) find that they are complements.


                                                           6
menthol. Third, our work is broadly related to studies of the welfare effects of other new products
(Trajtenberg 1989; Hausman 1996; Petrin 2002; Nevo 2003; Goolsbee and Petrin 2004; Gentzkow
2007; Aguiar and Waldfogel 2018; and others). Fourth, our expert survey helps to advance the
methodological literature on expert elicitations (DellaVigna and Pope 2018, 2019; DellaVigna, Otis
and Vivalt 2020).
    Section 1 lays out the theoretical framework. Sections 2 and 3 present the data and smoking
and vaping trends. Sections 4 and 5 present estimates of price elasticity and substitution patterns.
Sections 6 and 7 present the expert survey and optimal policy analysis, and Section 8 concludes.


1     Theoretical Framework
E-cigarette regulation involves setting constant taxes on an addictive good, motivated by both
externalities and consumer bias. To match this application, we introduce a dynamic model of
consumers who impose externalities and do not necessarily maximize their utility. We then solve
for optimal constant tax rates and the welfare effects of banning e-cigarettes compared to keeping
taxes at some baseline level. Our model can be thought of as a less parameterized version of the
dynamic optimal tax model in Gruber and Koszegi (2001) or a simple dynamic extension of static
optimal corrective taxation models such as Diamond (1973), O'Donoghue and Rabin (2006), Allcott
and Taubinsky (2015), and Farhi and Gabaix (2020).

1.1   Consumption, Bias, and Welfare
Setup. There are infinite periods indexed by t. There is a numeraire good n and two other goods
indexed by j or k : cigarettes c and e-cigarettes e. All goods are produced at constant marginal
cost in competitive markets. A social planner sets constant taxes  = { c ,  e } and maintains a
balanced budget in each period using a lump sum transfer Tt . Let p = {pc , pe } denote the vector of
after-tax prices for c and e; n is sold at price 1. While  and p might vary in the equations below,
let ~ and p~ denote vectors of baseline taxes and market prices. We write j or k as superscripts to
avoid confusion with other subscripts throughout the paper; any time t superscripts are exponents.
                                                                                   
   Heterogeneous consumers have finite types indexed by  with measure s and  s = 1. Let
qt = {qt
       c , q e } and q n denote possible consumption levels in period t, and let q = {q c , q e } denote
            t         t                                                           t    t t
the actual consumption chosen by type . Type  consumers are endowed with income zt in period
t, giving post-transfer income zt + Tt . For simplicity, there is no saving or borrowing across periods,
so consumers have a period-specific budget constraint zt + Tt = p · qt + qt
                                                                          n.

    Consumers have quasi-linear flow utility in period t that depends on current consumption and
a state variable St representing the consumption capital stock from past smoking and vaping. St
evolves according to St+1 = (St , qt ), with  increasing in both arguments. Discounted utility



                                                   7
from period 0 is
                                          
                                U =                  t [u (qt ; St ) + qt
                                                                        n
                                                                          + zt + Tt ] ,                  (1)
                                              t=0

where  < 1 is the discount factor and u is concave in qt . In this general formulation, past
consumption St can affect both the level of utility (for example, by affecting health) and the
marginal utility of consuming c and e (through habit formation). Furthermore, cigarettes and e-
cigarettes can be complements or substitutes both in period t and in the long run. For example,
they may be substitutes in period t sub-utility u but complements in the long run through effects
on St+1 .
   Optimizing consumers. Consider first a standard optimizing consumer. Let V (St ) be the
optimizing consumer's value function, after substituting in the period-specific budget constraint.
V (St ) is the solution to the Bellman equation



                      V (St ) = max [u (qt ; St ) - p · qt + zt + Tt + V (St+1 )] ,                      (2)
                                     qt


subject to St+1 = (St , qt ).
   The optimizing consumer's first-order condition for good j is
                                          (                                               )
                                                   ;S )
                                              u (qt             V  (St+1 ) St+1
                                                     t
                           0=p - j
                                                      j
                                                               +          ·  j
                                                                                              ,          (3)
                                                     qt          St+1       qt
        denotes optimal consumption for type  .
where qt
   Non-optimizing consumers. An important motivation for regulating both cigarettes and e-
cigarettes is that consumers may not maximize their utility, perhaps because they have biased beliefs
about the health costs of smoking, because they do not correctly predict future habit formation
due to forces such as projection bias, or because they are present biased. To model this, we allow
                                           and thus may not maximize utility. These quantities
consumers to choose qt that differs from qt
could be derived by assuming that consumers maximize some specific "perceived" utility function
such as quasi-hyperbolic utility, but we focus on insights that hold in general for any structural
model of bias.9 Define V (St )  V (St ) as type 's value function, i.e. the present discounted utility
derived from (potentially suboptimal) actual consumption. Substituting in the budget constraint,
we can write utility from time t as


                        Ut (qt ; St ) = u (qt ; St ) - p · qt + zt + Tt + V (St+1 ),                     (4)

subject to St+1 = (St , qt ). Standard optimizing consumers maximize this equation, making it
   9
     See Mullainathan, Schwartzstein and Congdon (2012), Chetty (2015), and Bernheim and Taubinsky (2018) for
further discussion of the "reduced form" or "sufficient statistic" approach to behavioral public economics.


                                                               8
equivalent to Equation (2), but non-optimizing consumers do not.
                                                            j
      Following the sin tax literature, we then define bias   (p, St ) as the difference (in units of
dollars) between price and the marginal utility of good j at the chosen consumption levels qt :

                                                   (                                     )
                             j                         u (qt ; St )     V (St+1 ) St+1
                               (p, St )   := p -
                                             j
                                                             j
                                                                      +          ·  j
                                                                                             .                 (5)
                                                            qt           St+1      qt

                 j
Put differently,   is the period t price increase that would induce consumers of type  to consume
  .  j > 0 means that type  consumes more than the privately optimal amount,  j < 0 means
qt                                                                           
that type  consumes less, and j                 , per Equation (3).  j (p, S ) depends on
                                = 0 when qt = qt                            t
prices and consumption in other periods, as these factors affect flow utility and the continuation
value function.
      To illustrate, consider two examples. First, consider present focused consumers whose smoking
and vaping imposes future health harms, in a model with no habit formation. Specifically, assume
that u (qt ; St ) = v (qt ) - hSt , where the second term is the health harm from past consumption,
                                         c + q e ) for   (0, 1). Considering the infinite discounted
which evolves according to St+1 = (St + qt    t
                                                                                                       V (St+1 )
sum of future health harms hSt , the effect of consumption on the continuation value is                 St+1       ·
St+1
  j  =            so the marginal utility of consumption at qt is v(qj
                                                                     t )
               - 1-
                  1
                     h · ,
                                                                            
                                                                         - 1-  h. Quasi-hyperbolic
qt                                                                 qt
consumers discount future harms by  , choosing consumption to set pj = v(qj         t )
                                                                                        -  1-
                                                                                               h.
                                                                                  qt
                                                                                  j
Substituting marginal utility and the consumption choice into the definition of  from Equation
(5) gives

                                                   j                   
                                                     = (1 -  )            h.                                   (6)
                                                                     1 - 
This is the familiar result that bias is the uninternalized future health cost.10
   As a second example, imagine that projection bias causes consumers to underestimate habit
formation. Specifically, define j := St+1
                                       j  as the habit formation from good j , and allow con-
                                                       qt
                                          j
sumers to misperceive habit formation as ~  . Assume for simplicity that the marginal effect
of habit stock on future utility VS     (St+1 )
                                                is a constant. The marginal utility of consumption is
(                              )         t+1                                   (                              )
  u (qt ;St )
      j       +  VS
                   (St+1 )
                           ·  j , but consumers choose consumption to set pj = u (qt ;St ) +  V (St+1 ) · 
                                                                           t           j       St+1       ~ j
                                                                                                             ,
          qt        t+1                                                                          qt
so
                                             j          V (St+1 ) ( j    )
                                               =                 · ~  - j .                                    (7)
                                                        St+1
      Externalities and social welfare. Consumers impose linear externalities  = {c
                                                                                   ,  } on
                                                                                     e

the government budget, for example due to increased costs of government-sponsored health care or
     10
    Since true utility from Equation (1) uses exponential discounting, this example invokes the long-run criterion,
which is not uncontroversial (Bernheim and Rangel 2009; Bernheim and Taubinsky 2018).


                                                                 9
reduced social security payments due to early death. The results would be the same if some or all
of the externality entered other consumers' utility directly, for example due to second-hand smoke.
We define  > 0 as a negative externality and  < 0 as a positive externality. For simplicity, we
assume that the externality is imposed in the period when consumption occurs.
   Social welfare from period 0 as a function of taxes  is

                                                            
                                                W ( ) =              s U ,                                                   (8)
                                                                 
                                                                                        
and the government's balanced budget constraint requires Tt =                                ( -  ) · qt for all t.

1.2 Optimal Taxes
Define the "marginal distortion" j
                                  as the sum of the marginal bias and marginal externality for
consumer type :


                                           j            j           j
                                            (p, St ) :=  (p, St ) +  .                                                       (9)

j
 (p, St ) will be a key statistic determining welfare and the optimal tax. This highlights that
externalities and internalities enter our model in the same way: they both reflect a difference (in
units of dollars) between consumers' perceived marginal utility (revealed by the demand curve) and
marginal social welfare.
   In Appendix A, we derive socially optimal taxes by maximizing Equation (8) subject to the
balanced budget constraint and consumer decision-making. The optimal tax is

                                         j                                   -j (                       )
                                       dqt                                 dqt     -j                -j
                                 t s       j (p, St )                t s              ( p , S t ) - t
                                       dpj                                  dpj    
                           ,t                               ,t
                   j =                                  +                                                   .               (10)
                                       dq j                                           dq j
                                    t s t                                           t
                                                                                     s t
                                       dpj                                            dpj
                                ,t                                             ,t

                         average marginal distortion                       substitution distortion

The first term is the average marginal distortion, familiar from Diamond (1973): the average
distortion across types, weighted by each type's own-price response. The optimal tax is larger if
the average distortion is larger or if distortions are larger for types who are more responsive to the
tax. The second term is a substitution distortion, familiar from Allcott, Lockwood and Taubinsky
(2019) and others: the average uninternalized distortion from the substitute good, weighted by
each type's cross-price response. The optimal tax is larger if a substitute good has a beneficial
uninternalized distortion or if a complementary good has a harmful uninternalized distortion.
                                  k
                                dqt
   The demand response          dpj
                                       is a total derivative, reflecting changes in period t consumption
                                                                                                                        k
                                                                                                                      dqt
caused by changes in prices in all periods, including the effects of habit formation. Both                            dpj
                                                                                                                            and

                                                            10
the marginal distortion j
                         (p, St ) can vary over time and are affected by changes in tax-inclusive
prices and consumption capital stock.
     This simple extension of standard formulas has interesting implications in our application. First,
the optimal cigarette tax may have changed with the introduction of e-cigarettes. For example,
vaping is particularly popular among youth, and youth may have higher marginal internalities and
externalities. If there are now fewer youth smokers marginal to the e-cigarette tax, this would
decrease the average marginal distortion and thus decrease the optimal cigarette tax. As another
example, many states have not yet implemented e-cigarette taxes because vaping is so new. If the
average e-cigarette tax is lower than the average marginal distortion and e-cigarettes are substi-
tutes (or complements) for cigarettes, then the substitution distortion from e-cigarettes is negative
(positive) and  c would decrease (increase). As a final example, e-cigarettes could reduce the
health harms from cigarette addiction if addicted cigarette smokers can transition to vaping. With
present focus or projection bias, this reduction in the harms from addiction could imply lower bias
j                                      c
 (p, St ) and thus a lower optimal tax  .
     A second implication is that the optimal e-cigarette tax could plausibly be negative, i.e. a
subsidy, if the substitution distortion from cigarettes is relatively large and negative. This could
arise if e-cigarettes are not very harmful (e
                                             is small or negative), baseline cigarette taxes are "too
                                                                      dq c
       -
low" (c ~c > 0), and e-cigarettes are substitutes for cigarettes ( dpe > 0).




1.3    Welfare Effect of an E-Cigarette Ban
We model an e-cigarette ban as an increase in the e-cigarette tax from current level ~e to  for all
periods beginning with period 0. The welfare effect of a ban is thus
                                                  
                                                      W ( ) e
                                       W :=                d .                                    (11)
                                                 ~e
                                                       e
     If the cigarette and e-cigarette taxes are currently set optimally, then raising  e to  by
construction reduces welfare in our model. However, a ban may be preferred to taxation for
unmodeled reasons such as tax evasion or political constraints on tax rates. We thus allow current
taxes ~ to take any value, not necessarily the optimal rates. Furthermore, bias and externalities
(and thus optimal tax rates) may vary across types (e.g. youth versus adults), and it may be
administratively easier to implement a type-specific ban (e.g. a ban on sales to youth) than to
implement type-specific taxes. We thus consider type-specific bans in the welfare analysis in Section
7.
             j     j                 j
   Define qt   := qt   c ,  e = ) - qt
                     (~                (~ ) as the change in period t consumption of good j from a
permanent e-cigarette ban. For e-cigarettes, this is simply period t consumption: qte = -q e (p
                                                                                           t ~) <
0. Further define




                                                  11
                                                                   dq j
                                                        j
                                                         (p, St ) d e d
                                                                   t    e
                                  j
                                   (p, St )   :=   ~e
                                                              j
                                                                            .                                 (12)
                                                             qt
This is the average distortion over the consumption of good j that is marginal to the e-cigarette
ban.
   In Appendix A, we show that the welfare effect of a ban is
                                                                                                
                                                                         
                                                        (               )
                                                      j                j 
                 W =            t s  -     e
                                          qt d e -   qt   j
                                                           (p, St ) -    .                                    (13)
                                        e                                
                          ,t           ~           j                     
                                   perceived CS change
                                                             uninternalized distortion change

   The first term in Equation (13) is the loss in perceived consumer surplus as traced out by the
market demand curve. For standard optimizing consumers, the word "perceived" is unnecessary.
We add the word "perceived" to emphasize that with non-optimizing consumers, this term is not the
actual change in U that results from the price decrease. The second term captures the change in
uninternalized negative distortions from both cigarettes and e-cigarettes. Separating the two terms
in this way foreshadows that one can calculate W by estimating perceived consumer surplus
with standard demand estimation techniques and then separately quantifying the internalities and
externalities in j
                 .
   The period-specific welfare effects of a permanent ban will change over time as the initial stock
of consumption capital St=0 depreciates. For example, reduced St in later periods could decrease
 e and make demand more elastic, thereby reducing the perceived consumer surplus loss.
qt
       c (c -  c ) = 0, which holds if e-cigarettes and cigarettes are neither complements nor
   If qt  t
substitutes or if the cigarette tax exactly internalizes the average distortion marginal to the ban,
then the e-cigarette market can be considered in isolation. Otherwise, an e-cigarette ban affects
                                                                                c (c -  c ) < 0,
uninternalized distortions in the cigarette market. This effect increases W if qt  t
                                                  c > 0) and the current cigarette tax is "too
which holds if the two products are substitutes (qt
       t -  < 0) or if the two products are complements and the cigarette tax is "too low."
high" (c   c

In theory, the reduced uninternalized distortions from cigarettes could justify an e-cigarette ban
even if e-cigarettes have no uninternalized distortions. This is analogous to arguments for banning
drugs like marijuana on the grounds that they are not particularly harmful on their own but could
be gateways to more harmful drugs.

1.4    Empirical Implementation
                                                                                              c /dpe
                                                                                            dqt
For empirical implementation, we define a substitution parameter t :=                         e /dpe
                                                                                            dqt        representing
the ratio of demand responses to a permanent e-cigarette price change. We further define j
                                                                                          =



                                                        12
  [                 ]                                [        ]
Et j ( p , S t ) |   ,  := E [
                            t t |  ] , and q j
                                               := Et   q j
                                                         t |    as expectations over time.  captures the
net long-run substitutability between e-cigarettes and cigarettes.
   We also impose two assumptions. First, we assume a homogeneous and time-invariant own-
                        e
                       qt pe
price elasticity  :=       e
                       pe qt   < 0, because the Nielsen RMS data do not allow us to separately
estimate elasticities by consumer type. Second, we assume pairwise zero covariance between the
marginal distortion j                                        j
                     (p, St ), substitution t , consumption qt , and time t for each type. While
this assumes away potentially interesting dynamics, we are not able to credibly estimate how any
of these parameters covary or would change over time in response to a tax or ban.
   Under these assumptions, Appendix A shows that the optimal tax formula from Equation (10)
reduces to
                                         
                                                    +  ( - 
                                                e
                                             s q  [e    c
                                                           ~c )]
                                   e =    
                                                                               ,                      (14)
                                                         s qe

                                                     

where the first term inside the brackets is the e-cigarette marginal distortion, and the second term
is the uninternalized substitution distortion from cigarettes.
   To estimate the welfare effect of a ban, we write the expected cigarette consumption change
as q c = - q e (p
             ~). To estimate perceived consumer surplus change, some assumption is required
because observed market prices do not rise high enough to identify the demand function at high
prices. This identification problem and the use of functional form assumptions such as linear or
logit demand are common in related literature (Hausman 1996; Petrin 2002). We assume that
each type's perceived consumer surplus change equals the area under a linear demand curve drawn
                                                                                                  e
tangent to their demand function at current prices, which is the triangle qe p
                                                                             ~
                                                                            -2 < 0.
   Under these assumptions, Appendix A shows that the welfare effect of an e-cigarette ban in the
average period is
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
                                              ~e                           (               )   
                                              p                        j                       
                    W =        s       qe
                                                         -            q        j   -   j
                                                                                               .      (15)
                                             -2                                                
                                                                  j                            
                                   perceived CS change
                                                             uninternalized distortion change

In the rest of the paper, we estimate  e and W using these formulas.




                                                    13
2        Data
2.1      Nielsen Scanner Data
For our price elasticity estimates in Section 4, we use scanner data from Nielsen's Retail Measure-
ment Services (RMS). The data include weekly prices and sales volumes by UPC at approximately
27,000 stores in the contiguous U.S. from 96 retail chains. RMS includes e-cigarette products be-
ginning in 2013, and 2017 is the most recent year currently available. See Appendix B for RMS
data construction details.
     RMS includes 53, 32, 55, and 2 percent of total sales in the grocery, mass merchandiser, drug,
and convenience store channels, respectively. In addition to its very limited coverage of convenience
stores, RMS has no coverage of vape shops or online channels where many e-cigarette products are
sold. In 2017, RMS stores sold $114 million in e-cigarette products, out of the $4.6 billion sold
nationwide as shown in Figure 1. This 2.5 percent coverage rate is an important limitation of the
data.11
     We collected data on the volume of each UPC (in milliliters of e-liquid) from online databases,
manufacturer websites, store visits, and from a database kindly shared by the authors of Cotti et
al. (2020).
     As shown in Appendix Table A1, 11 states, counties, or cities in the contiguous U.S. initiated
or changed e-cigarette taxes between 2013 and 2017. We use these tax changes for identification.
For our empirical analysis, we define 51 geographic "clusters": the two counties (Montgomery
County, Maryland and Cook County, Illinois) that have county-level e-cigarette taxes, the contigu-
ous 48 states (where Maryland and Illinois exclude Montgomery County and Cook County), and
Washington, D.C.12 We collapse the UPC-store-week RMS data to the level of UPC-cluster-month,
calculating total units sold and quantity-weighted average price.

2.2      Smoking and Vaping Sample Surveys
For our substitution estimates in Section 5, we use all major annual surveys that have recorded
information on vaping and/or smoking for adults and/or youth in the U.S. since 2004: the Be-
havioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS), the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS),
the National Survey of Drug Use and Health (NSDUH), Monitoring the Future (MTF), and the
National Youth Tobacco Survey (NYTS). Table 1 presents information on each dataset. We have
7.4 million observations across the five datasets in total, or about 500,000 per year. All estimates
    11
      Although the household-level Nielsen Homescan data could also be useful in exploring heterogeneity and mea-
suring additional purchases outside of RMS stores, Homescan's effective sample size is much smaller: Homescan, with
60,000 households, covers about 0.05 percent of the U.S., against the 2.5 percent in RMS.
   12
      The city of Chicago also has an e-cigarette tax; we add this to the Cook County tax because the RMS store
data include identifiers for county but not city.




                                                        14
in the paper are weighted for national representativeness for adults (people aged 18 or older) and
youth (people in grades 6-12).
    Appendix B details how we construct consistent smoking and vaping variables. We construct
smoking in units of packs of cigarettes smoked per day and vaping in units of share of days vaped.
In all datasets other than BRFSS, we can directly estimate the number of packs per day smoked.
BRFSS only records whether someone smokes or vapes "every day," "some days," or "not at all,"
but we use conditional means from the other adult datasets to impute packs per day smoked and
share of days vaped. The datasets do not include the quantity of e-liquid used or the nicotine
content of cigarettes or e-liquid.
    Demographic variables are central to our analysis. From the possible set of standard demo-
graphics (age, race/ethnicity, etc.), we include a demographic variable only if it is observed con-
sistently across all datasets. We denote the vector of demographic group indicators for person i
as Gi . For adults, Gi includes race/ethnicity (Asian, Black, other/missing, Hispanic, white), sex
(male/female), educational attainment (high school, less than high school, some college, college
graduate), income quintiles, and age groups (18­24, 25­29, 30­49, 50­64, and 65+). For youth,
Gi includes race (Black, other/missing, Hispanic, white), sex, and each grade from 6­12.13 We
refer to demographic "cells" as the interactions of our demographic group indicators, e.g. "Asian
women aged 18­24 who are college graduates and are in the lowest-income quintile." There are
5 × 2 × 4 × 5 × 5 = 1,000 cells for adults and 4 × 2 × 7 = 56 cells for youth.
    In our regressions, we will include "dataset controls" to address two sampling issues. First, in
2011, BRFSS was updated to sample people using cell phones instead of only people with land lines
(Pierannunzi et al. 2012). This causes an artificial change in smoking rates, and this change could
differ across demographic groups. Second, the NYTS is collected in 2004, 2006, 2009, and annually
since 2011, but not in 2005, 2007, 2008, or 2010.

2.3    E-cigarette User Survey
To estimate the average e-liquid price and quantity consumed per day, we ran a survey we call the
E-cigarette User Survey in August 2019. The sample is an online panel of U.S. e-cigarette users
provided by polling firm SurveyMonkey through their Audience Panel service. We asked whether
people now use e-cigarettes every day, some days, or not at all, the number of days vaped out of
the past 30, the milliliters of e-liquid consumed in the past 30 days, and the amount of money they
spent to buy the e-liquid consumed in the past 30 days.14 We have 147 valid responses. We weight
the sample to be representative of U.S. adults who vaped in the past 30 days on income, gender,
and vaping frequency.
  13
      We are limited to four race/ethnicity groups in the youth dataset because Asian is not a separate category from
other race in the public-use MTF.
   14
      The survey instrument can be accessed from https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/YRZSZZY.



                                                         15
                                                  ~e  $3.90 per milliliter (ml). For comparison,
   We estimate that the average e-liquid price is p
the popular 0.7 milliliter Juul pods cost $6.41/ml at average tax rates, while large 100 ml e-liquid
bottles can be as cheap as $0.50/ml.     The average day of vaping involves   0.58 milliliters of
e-liquid consumption, slightly less than one Juul pod. This is more than the unweighted average
across vapers of consumption per day, because people who vape every day consume more e-liquid
per day than people who vape on some days.


3 Smoking and Vaping Trends
Figure 1 presents trends in U.S. sales of cigarettes and e-cigarettes. Cigarette sales decreased by
40 percent (from 20 billion to 12 billion packs) from 2004 to 2018. While the first modern e-
cigarettes became available in the late 2000s, sales were relatively low until about 2013. Sales grew
continually from 2013 to 2017 and increased notably in 2018 with the introduction of the popular
Juul e-cigarette.
   Figure 2 presents trends in smoking and vaping recorded in the sample surveys. Self-reported
adult smoking in Panel (a) declined by about 45 percent (from about 0.15 to 0.08 packs per adult
per day) from 2004 to 2018. The 2011 jump in the BRFSS trend is due to the sampling frame
change discussed earlier. Youth smoking in Panel (b) dropped by an even larger proportion, from
about 0.035 to less than 0.01 packs per youth per day.
   Prior work has established that the levels and trends line up imperfectly between these two
figures. In Appendix B.2.8, we calculate that the sample survey data overstate e-cigarette sales
and understate cigarette sales by an amount consistent with earlier estimates by Liber and Warner
(2018). The 2004­2018 percent smoking reductions are fairly consistent between the two figures.
Self-reported vaping grew much less quickly than the e-cigarette sales data, although the 2018
increase in self-reported youth vaping is consistent with the 2018 sales increase.
   On the cigarette consumption figures, we add a vertical line to mark the time just before e-
cigarette sales started to take off in 2013. The smoking declines in Figures 1 and 2 are close to
linear, with no substantial changes as e-cigarettes became popular after 2013. Unless there was some
countervailing force that would have changed cigarette consumption at the same time that vaping
became popular, this suggests that e-cigarettes had little impact on overall cigarette consumption.
Levy et al. (2019) make a similar point focusing on youth vaping.
   To quantify this idea, recall the substitution parameter  = Et [dqt
                                                                     c /dq e | ], in units of cigarette
                                                                          t
                                                                 e from 0 to q e (p
packs per day vaped. The introduction of e-cigarettes increases qt               t ~), which in turn
                                   e (p
changes cigarette consumption by  qt  ~). In the sample survey data, the average day of smoking
by an adult (youth) involves 0.5 (0.15) packs smoked. Thus,   -0.5 (  -0.15) implies that
the average smoking day and the average vaping day are perfect substitutes for adults (youth), and
  0.5 (  0.15) implies that they are perfect complements for adults (youth).


                                                  16
    An average vaping day costs 0.58ml × $3.90/ml  $2.26 of e-liquid, so if the $6.9 billion in 2018
e-cigarette sales were all for e-liquid, this would be equivalent to 3.05 billion average vaping days. At
0.5 cigarette packs per average smoking day, 3.05 billion average smoking days would equal about
1.5 billion packs. Thus, if the average vaping and average smoking days were perfect complements
(substitutes) over a several-year horizon, cigarette sales would have increased (decreased) by 1.5
billion packs per year by 2018 relative to a counterfactual without e-cigarettes. Since the sales
decline on Figure 1 is close to linear over 2004­2018, daily vaping and daily smoking could therefore
only be perfect complements or perfect substitutes if the counterfactual sales trend would have been
noticeably different from its long-standing historical pattern.
    We can do a similar exercise for the sample survey data in Figure 2. In each panel, the left
and right y-axes have the same scales. Panel (a) shows that adults vaped on share 0.025 of days in
2018. Thus, if  = 0.5 (or  = -0.5) over several years, adult cigarette consumption would have
increased (or decreased) by about 0.0125 packs per day relative to counterfactual. Since the adult
cigarette consumption decline on Panel (a) is close to linear over 2004­2018,  must be relatively
close to zero unless the counterfactual smoking trend would have changed noticeably after 2013.
This visual argument is particularly clear for youth, who vape on share 0.05 to 0.08 of days in 2018
but have a steady linear decline in cigarette consumption to less than 0.01 packs per day by 2018.
    Of course, this visual argument relies on strong assumptions about counterfactual trends and
cannot easily rule out values of  closer to 0. We build on this intuition for a more precise estimate
of  in Section 5.


4 Price Elasticity
4.1 Empirical Strategy
In this section, we use tax changes to estimate the own price elasticity  and the substitution
parameter  using Nielsen RMS data. We index UPCs by k , geographic clusters by s, and months
           e ,p
by t. Let qkst ~e          e denote quantity sold, sales-weighted average tax-inclusive price, and the
                kst , and ~kst
                                                             ~c
ad-valorem tax rate, respectively, for e-cigarette UPCs. Let p st and 
                                                                       c denote the sales-weighted
                                                                      ~st
average tax inclusive price and average tax rate as a percentage of tax-exclusive price, respectively,
for cigarettes in a given state and month.15 Let Xst denote a cluster-specific linear time trend and
an additional vector of controls for potential confounders that might be correlated with both taxes
and consumption: the state unemployment rate and beer tax rate as well as indicators for whether
the state has an indoor vaping ban, has a medical marijuana law, has passed or implemented a
prescription drug program, and implemented the Medicaid expansion.
   15
     Some e-cigarette taxes are "specific" taxes per milliliter of e-liquid, and all cigarette taxes are specific taxes per
pack. We transform these tax rates to the implied ad-valorem rate using the UPC's size and price. See Appendix B
for details.



                                                            17
    Let E0st be an indicator variable that takes value 1 if month t is 0­2 months after an e-cigarette
                                                                      e + 1)]. The event study
tax change in cluster s, and define the vector Qkst = [E0st , E0st ln(kst
figure presented below suggest that prices and sales are slow to adjust in the first quarter after a
tax change; controlling for Qkst identifies the elasticity  beginning in the second quarter. Finally,
let kt , µks , and d(s)t , respectively denote UPC-month, UPC-cluster, and census division-month
fixed effects.
    Our primary specification is

                e
            ln(qkst            pe
                    + 1) =  ln(~        e
                                            pc
                                kst ) +  ln(~st ) + Xst + Qkst + kt + µks + d(s)t + kst ,                      (16)

                           pe
where we instrument for ln(~             pc
                            kst ) and ln(~st ) with ln(~
                                                        e +1) and ln(~
                                                       kst            c +1). The coefficient  is our
                                                                     st
estimate of the own-price elasticity of demand for e-cigarettes. The coefficient e is the elasticity
of substitution, which we transform into  below.
    We keep the estimates at the UPC level instead of aggregating for two reasons. First, unlike
cigarettes, there is no individual unit that is natural to aggregate across UPCs: vapor products are
primarily e-liquid refills but also include e-cigarette base units and starter kits with both base units
and e-liquid. Second, the price variation across UPCs provides additional variation to identify the
effects of ad-valorem taxes. To estimate the aggregate elasticity of demand for e-cigarettes using
UPC-level data while accounting for the possibility that elasticities might vary by UPC, we would
like to weight observations by sales. To avoid mechanical biases arising from the effect of taxes on
sales, we weight each UPC-cluster-month observation by the UPC's sales in non-taxed clusters in
that calendar year, normalized by total sales across all UPCs in non-taxed clusters in that year.
We cluster standard errors by geographic cluster.
    We also present event study figures to test for any trends before tax changes and examine how
the tax effects vary over time. In four geographic clusters, e-cigarette tax rates change twice during
the sample period. We index tax change events within a cluster by v  {1, 2}, and we define Vs as
the set of changes within cluster s. We define  ln(~
                                                   ksv + 1) as the change in the log e-cigarette
tax variable that occurs for UPC k in cluster s in event v . Let Eqst represent an indicator variable
that takes value 1 if month t is q quarters after an e-cigarette tax change in cluster s, with E0st as
defined above.16 We then estimate a multiple event study specification (Sandler and Sandler 2014):


                
       ykst =                         ksv + 1) + e ln(~
                           q Eqst  ln(~                c
                                                      st + 1) + Xst + kt + µks + d(s)t + kst ,                 (17)
                v Vs q Q


for ykst  {ln(qkst + 1), ln p
                            ~kst }. Since we have µks fixed effects and  ln(~
                                                                            ksv + 1) is constant within
ks for each tax change event, we let Q be a mutually exclusive and exhaustive set of event time
  16
     Specifically, E1st = 1 if month t is 3­5 months after a tax change, E2st = -1 if month t is 1­3 months before a
tax change, etc.


                                                        18
indicators excluding -1 (the quarter before the tax change) to avoid collinearity.
   This empirical strategy has several limitations. First, as we have discussed, RMS covers only
2.5 percent of national e-cigarette sales. The demand elasticity estimated in RMS might differ from
the true nationwide demand elasticity if RMS stores serve a non-representative set of e-cigarette
consumers or if consumers substitute toward or away from RMS stores in response to a tax. For
example, consumers might substitute purchases to retailers in other states or to illegal retailers that
evade taxes. Second, while we observe sales for up to several years after a tax change, our estimates
may still not reflect the full long-run price elasticity if habit formation takes longer to manifest.
Third, we must assume that no other factors affected e-cigarette demand at the same time as the tax
changes. Rees-Jones and Rozema (2020) show that local media coverage of cigarettes increases as
cigarette taxes are debated and implemented, and such forces could also change e-cigarette demand
as e-cigarette taxes are implemented.

4.2   Event Study Figures
                                                                           ~e
Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 3 presents estimates of Equation (17) with ln p             e
                                                                             kst and ln(qkst +1) as the
dependent variables. Panel (a) shows that we have a strong first stage: in the six quarters after a
tax change, retail prices rise by 0.5­0.8 log points, suggesting substantial but not full pass-through
of the tax. Panel (b) presents the reduced form: in the six quarters after a tax change, quantities
decline by 0.7­1.2 log points. We can divide these first stage and reduced form coefficients for
an approximate IV estimate of   -1.5, although this approximation to a Wald estimator only
holds if the other endogenous variable (cigarette price) has no effect on e-cigarette price or demand.
There is no trend in either prices or quantities in the six quarters before the tax change. Appendix
Figure A2 shows that we get very similar point estimates and more precise standard errors when
we exclude the cluster-specific linear time trends.

4.3   Parameter Estimates
Table 2 presents estimates of Equation (16). Panel (a) presents the first stages and reduced form.
Columns 1 and 2 show that a tax on one good strongly predicts that good's price and has only
limited relationship to the other good's price. Column 3 shows that e-cigarette taxes reduce e-
cigarette demand, while cigarette taxes have a positive but insignificant coefficient.
   Panel (b) presents the instrumental variables estimates of  and e . Our primary estimate in
column 1 suggests that e-cigarette demand is more than unit elastic, with ^  -1.32. Columns
2­4 progressively add fixed effects; after the UPC-cluster effects, the additional fixed effects make
little difference. Column 5 presents the primary estimates without the cluster-specific linear time
trend; this reduces the estimate to ^  -1.00. Column 6 shows that the additional controls in Xst
make little difference. Column 7 presents estimates in a "quasi-panel" in which we add zero-sales


                                                  19
observations for all UPCs that had non-zero sales in cluster s in any prior month, but the panel
begins with the first month in which we observe any sales in that UPC-cluster. We impute price
~e
p kst from the last month a sale was observed in that cluster. This also does not substantially change
the estimates.
    In column 1, the point estimate of the substitution elasticity is ^e  0.27, with standard error
of 0.46. In the other columns, ^e is more positive but not statistically different at conventional
levels. Column 5 shows that excluding the cluster-specific linear time trends gives ^e  0.66, with
a standard error of 0.34. Appendix Table A2 presents symmetric estimates of cigarette demand on
cigarette and e-cigarette prices (instrumented by taxes), using an equation analogous to Equation
(16). The resulting substitution parameter is c  -0.06, with a standard error of 0.30. Excluding
the cluster-specific linear time controls gives ^c  0.77, with a standard error of 0.26. Appendix
Figure A3 shows that without these linear time controls, there is an upward trend in cigarette
purchases in the six quarters before the e-cigarette tax change. If that upward trend would have
continued after the tax change, this would produce an upward-biased estimate of the cross-price
elasticity c . This is why we include the cluster-specific linear time controls in our primary speci-
fication.17
    Appendix Tables A3 and A4 present additional robustness checks.18 The price elasticity es-
timates do not change substantially if we limit the identification of  to the 18-month window
around the tax change, exclude e-cigarette UPCs with imputed volumes, or include only clusters
with ad-valorem taxes, excluding clusters with specific taxes. When we exclude the controls Qkst
and thereby also identify off of the effects in the quarter beginning with the tax change, the e-
cigarette ^ estimate moves slightly toward zero. This is consistent with the small quantity effect
in quarter q = 0 shown in Panel (b) of Figure 3.
    We can use the cross-price elasticities to estimate the average substitution parameter  . Be-
ginning with e from Table 2 and using Slutsky symmetry and quasi-linear demand, we have a
population average substitution parameter
                                             c /pe    e /pc
                                            q        q        e p
                                                                ~e 
                                      =      e /pe =  e /pe =       ,                                             (18)
                                            q        q         p ~c
                ~e to units of dollars per day vaped, giving  in the desired units of packs of
where  converts p
cigarettes per day vaped. This gives ^  -0.059 (standard error  0.091), consistent with mild
   17
      Using analogous regressions in the RMS data, Cotti et al. (2020) estimate an e-cigarette own-price elasticity of
-1.3, closely in line with our estimates. They do not include linear time trends in any specification, and their cross-
price elasticity estimates (e and c ) of 1.4 and 0.8 are comparable to our estimates when we exclude cluster-specific
linear time trends.
   18
      In Appendix Tables A2 and A4, our estimates of the cigarette own-price elasticity are higher than most previous
estimates, but the primary point estimates are within about one standard deviation of the mean estimate in the
meta-analysis by Gallet and List (2003), and we cannot reject the upper end of the "consensus" range of -0.4 to -0.7
reported in Chaloupka and Warner (2000). In any event, the cigarette price elasticity is not relevant for any analysis
in our paper.


                                                          20
substitutability. Similarly, beginning with c from Appendix Table A2, we have
                                                 c /pe      c
                                                q        c q
                                           =     e /pe =    e.                                           (19)
                                                q         q
Using qc and q e from the sample survey data displayed in Figure 2, this gives 
                                                                               ^youth  0.005 (SE
 0.027) and ^adult  0.144 (SE  0.766). Combining these two estimates using a minimum distance
estimator gives ^youth  -0.0003 (almost exactly zero, with SE  0.0262) and ^adult  -0.056 (SE
 0.090). See Appendix D.1 for additional details.
   These substitution parameter estimates are credible because they are identified from plausibly
exogenous tax changes in administrative data. However, we have seen that the point estimates are
somewhat sensitive to controls, and we are not able to estimate separate substitution elasticities for
youth versus adults. An additional alternative approach to estimating the substitution parameter
 would therefore be valuable.


5 Substitution Between Cigarettes and E-cigarettes
5.1 Graphical Illustrations
In this section, we extend the graphical analysis of cigarette smoking trends from Section 3 into a
formal empirical strategy for estimating the substitution parameter  . While Section 3 considered
aggregate nationwide data, we now exploit the fact that e-cigarette demand varies substantially
across demographic groups.
   To demonstrate this demand variation, we regress e-cigarette use on a vector demographic group
indicators Gi using the following equation:

                                               e         e
                                              qit = Gi + it ,                                            (20)

where i indexes individuals in the sample surveys and t indexes years. Figure 4 presents results for
adults and youth. White people (the omitted race category), men, non-college graduates, lower-
income people, and younger adults (but older youth) have higher e-cigarette demand.19
   What explains this variation? Academic papers (Hartwell et al. 2017; Pepper et al. 2014;
Perikleous et al. 2018) and industry sources (Bour 2019) discuss early adopters of e-cigarettes and
often draw analogies to early adopters of other technologies. To explore this, Appendix Figure A5
presents estimates of Equation (20) for social media use in 2008 and internet use in 2000. As with
e-cigarettes, men and younger adults were more likely to adopt these other new technologies. One
difference is that people with less formal education are conditionally more likely to vape, whereas
they were conditionally less likely to be early adopters of social media and the internet.
  19
     Appendix Figure A4 shows that these patterns are similar across the multiple datasets that record vaping,
although the estimated coefficients vary slightly.


                                                     21
    Figure 5 presents smoking and vaping trends for people with above- versus below-median pre-
dicted vaping  ^ Gi . Cigarette use is residual of dataset controls that address the 2011 BRFSS
sampling frame change and rescale cigarette use to levels in the NSDUH. As in Figure 2, the right
and left panels are on the same scales. The figures show that high-vaping demographics are also
high-smoking demographics, and the high-smoking demographics are reducing smoking faster than
low-smoking demographics. For both high- and low-vaping demographics, smoking is decreasing at
a very steady annual rate beginning in 2004.
    The vertical red line before 2013 again marks the time when e-cigarette sales start to take off.
Recall that in the sample survey data, the average day of smoking by an adult (youth) involves 0.5
(0.15) packs smoked. If an average day of vaping were a perfect complement (or perfect substitute)
for an average day of smoking, one would expect that the relative cigarette consumption of high-
vaping demographics would start to increase (or decrease) after 2013. In reality, is difficult to
visually detect any change in the annual smoking decreases as e-cigarettes become popular.
    Figure 6 continues this logic by presenting the difference in cigarette use between the same high-
and low-vaping demographics. The dashed line is a time trend fitted only on pre-2013 data, while
the solid line is a time trend fitted only on post-2013 data. The top (bottom) of the shaded area at
the right of the figure presents the predicted difference in smoking if  = 1 ( = -1), i.e. if daily
vaping were a perfect complement (perfect substitute) for smoking one pack per day.20 For adults,
the actual smoking difference is slightly below the pre-2013 prediction until 2018, but much closer
to zero than to the  = -1 bound. This suggests limited complementarity or substitutability.
For youth, the actual smoking difference is almost exactly the same as the pre-2013 prediction,
suggesting close to zero complementarity or substitutability.
    Appendix Figures A6­A9 present versions of Figure 5 for splits of each specific demographic
group (sex, race, age/grade, education, and income). Appendix Figures A10­A13 present versions
of Figure 6 for the most predictive split of each demographic group (e.g. whites versus non-whites,
college versus non-college adults, etc.). These allow informal overidentification tests. The results
are quite similar across all groups, suggesting limited complementarity or substitutability, with one
exception: the adult income split suggests very strong complementarity, as there is little difference
in vaping by income, and thus even small deviations from trends by income group are large when
scaled by the small vaping difference. In econometric terms, this means that income is a relatively
weak instrument. This will not drive the formal estimates below because other vaping predictors
generate more variation in q e.
                           ^it
  20
     To construct the perfect complement (substitute) predictions, we predict smoking using the pre-2013 time trend
                                                                                                  c         c
and then add (subtract) average vaping in the years when it is observed. Specifically, define q  ^Ht and q ^Lt as the
                                                                                         e         e
predicted smoking rates for people in high- and low-vaping demographics, and define qHt and qLt as their actual
vaping rates in year t. The perfect complement and substitute bounds for group g  {H, L} are q c
                                                                                              ^gt ± qgt
                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                        . The bounds
plotted on the figure are (^c
                           qHt -q  c
                                  ^Lt ) ± (qHt
                                            e
                                               - qLt
                                                  e
                                                     ).




                                                         22
5.2    Empirical Strategy
To identify  , we estimate the extent to which the demographic differences in vaping affect cigarette
consumption after e-cigarettes are introduced. Specifically, we regress cigarette consumption on
e-cigarette consumption using two-stage least squares (2SLS), instrumenting for e-cigarette con-
sumption with demographic-by-time predictors and controlling for linear time trends. Let t denote
year indicators, and let µdgt denote "dataset controls" to address the 2011 BRFSS sampling change
and the fact that NYTS is not available in certain years.21 The second stage regression is

                             c
                            qit = q e
                                  ^it + Gi +  (t - 2004)Gi + t + µdgt + it .                                   (21)

The inclusion of group-specific intercepts and time trends Gi and (t - 2004)Gi mean that we identify
 from changes in smoking conditional on those linear trends. However, because we now exploit
demand variation across demographic groups, we can also include time dummies t that soak up
demand shifts that are common across groups in levels, although not in proportions.
                                e , denoted Z , are G · 1[t  2013], G · 1[t  2013] · (t - 2012),
    The instruments for vaping qit           it      i               i
and Gi · 1[t = 2018], where 1[·] denotes the indicator function. The first two sets of instruments
allow vaping to have different levels and trends by demographic group after vaping begins to grow
in 2013. The third set is useful in fitting the 2018 increase in youth vaping seen in Figure 2.
    The first stage is

                            e
                          ~it
                          q   =  Zit + 1 Gi +  1 (t - 2004)Gi + t
                                                                1
                                                                  + µ1
                                                                     dgt + it ,                                (22)

where e-cigarette consumption q e is defined below, and we use "1" superscripts to indicate first-
                              ~it
stage parameters.
                                                            e is not recorded in any dataset for the
    We must modify the first stage for two reasons. First, qit
years between when e-cigarettes were introduced and 2014 (for youth) and 2016 (for adults). We
                                                         e is not recorded at all in the NSDUH data,
denote this initial year with vaping data as t. Second, qit
and it is missing for about ten percent of observations in dataset-years when it is supposed to be
recorded.
                            e for early years, we impute the averages by demographic group as-
    To address the missing qit
suming linear growth from zero in 2012 to the level in year t. This assumption is motivated by the
sales trends from Figure 1, which showed limited vaping until 2013 and roughly linear growth for
the several years after that. We predict vaping by demographic group by estimating Equation (20)
with data from year t, giving demographic coefficients ^ t , and then construct observed or imputed
vaping as follows:
  21
     For adults and youth, dgt includes an indicator for each dataset (with NSDUH as the omitted dataset) interacted
with the demographic indicators Gi . For adults, dgt also includes a pre-2011 indicator and a pre-2011 BRFSS
indicator, both interacted with Gi . The dgt controls thereby address the variability introduced by BRFSS and
NYTS sampling and rescale smoking to levels in the NSDUH.


                                                        23
                                                                                
                                     
                                               e,
                                              qit                  tt           
                                                   t-2012
                             q e
                             ~it =      ^ t Gi ·
                                                   t-2012 ,   2013  t < t - 1      .                   (23)
                                                                                
                                               0,                t  2012
We carry out this imputation in all datasets other than NSDUH.
   To address the missing vaping data in the NSDUH (for all years) and in other datasets (beginning
in year t), we use two-sample 2SLS. We estimate the first stage (Equation (22)) in all datasets other
than NSDUH, construct the fitted values q e for all observations, and run the second stage (Equation
                                        ^it
(21)) with all observations.22 We bootstrap the entire procedure including imputation steps and
draw bootstrap samples by demographic cell.
   This approach is a cousin of the "shift-share" identification strategy popularized by Bartik (1991)
and Blanchard and Katz (1992), and discussed in Goldsmith-Pinkham, Sorkin and Swift (2019):
we primarily exploit cross-sectional variation in demand across demographic groups with the time-
series growth of e-cigarette use. The exclusion restriction is that the instruments affected post-2013
smoking only through vaping--intuitively, that there would have been no changes in smoking trends
for higher- versus lower-vaping demographics if e-cigarettes had not been introduced.
   We provide two types of suggestive evidence in favor of the exclusion restriction. First, we
present a set of informal overidentification tests using different demographic groups as instruments.
If the estimates remain stable across different demographic groups, then any potential confounder
must have affected all demographic groups. Second, we present graphical event studies that test
for trends in smoking in demographics with high versus low latent e-cigarette demand, before e-
cigarettes were introduced. If there are no such trends, then any potential confounder must have
arisen at the same time as e-cigarettes became popular.
   The event study regression is analogous to our second stage (Equation (21)), except that  is
allowed to vary by year:

                        c
                       qit      Gi ) + Gi +  (t - 2004)Gi + t + µdgt + it ,
                           = t (^                                                                      (24)

where t is a vector of time-varying coefficients and ^ Gi is the fitted value from an estimate of
Equation (20) using vaping in all years observed. Because we have demographic group intercepts
and time trends and ^ Gi varies only by demographic group, we must omit at least two years from
the t parameters. The more years we omit, the more precisely we can estimate the time trends
 . We estimate one indicator for the combined 2004­2010 period and one for each individual year
after, omitting 2012, the year before vaping starts to become popular.
  22
     We impute predicted values with dataset controls for the NSDUH by assuming that NSDUH is the average of
NHIS and post-2011 BRFSS.




                                                         24
5.3   Event Study Figures
Figure 7 presents estimates of the t parameters from Equation (24), the event study specification.
For adults, the 2004­2010 and 2011 indicators are very close to the omitted year (2012), implying
no differential smoking trends prior to e-cigarette introduction for demographic groups with higher
versus lower e-cigarette demand. The estimates are not statistically distinguishable from zero in
any year.
   For youth, the 2004­2010 point estimate is below the omitted year, and the 2011 estimate is
slightly above, although the latter difference is not statistically significant with 95 percent con-
fidence. Consistent with Figure 6, the point estimates are very close to zero in the years after
e-cigarettes are introduced.

5.4   Parameter Estimates
Figure 8 presents separate estimates of Equation (21) for adults and youth. The first row of
each panel presents our preferred estimates. For adults (youth), the primary point estimates are
^  0.03 (
         ^  0.01). This implies that groups that are ten percentage points more likely to vape
on a given day reduced smoking by 0.003 (0.001) packs per day relative to trend. Both adult and
youth estimates are statistically indistinguishable from zero. We can rule out  coefficients of less
than -0.16 or more than 0.29 for adults (less than -0.03 or more than 0.06 for youth) with 95
percent confidence.
   The subsequent rows in each panel present robustness checks. Control for 2003 smoking allows
the smoking trends to differ for demographics with higher versus lower initial smoking rates, by
including an additional control for the 2003 smoking rate in person i's demographic cell and the
interaction of that variable with a linear time trend. Vaping begins in 2012 modifies the construction
of q e in Equation (23) to use 2012 instead of 2013 as the year when e-cigarettes first saw non-
   ~it
negligible use. The standard errors widen slightly as the linear demographic time trends  must
be estimated off fewer years, but the point estimates do not change much. No imputed vaping data
                           e instead of imputing missing q e beginning in 2013.
uses only observed vaping qit                             it
   In the youth estimates, Demog. cell predictors uses demographic cells, rather than linear demo-
graphic groups, in Gi . Drop race other/missing is motivated by Appendix Figure A4, which shows
that the predicted vaping among people whose race is other/missing differs in MTF versus NYTS.
   The next set of robustness checks, Predictors excl. age (or race, etc.) omit age (or race, or other
demographic categories) from the vaping predictors Gi . These are informal overidentification tests,
allowing us to see whether the results are driven by any one demographic category. Consistent
with the earlier informal overidentification tests in Appendix Figures A10­A13, the point estimates
move little when we exclude any given demographic category. The standard errors illustrate that
most of the identifying variation is from age (for adults) and grade (for youth), consistent with fact


                                                 25
that these are the most predictive demographic categories illustrated in Figure 4.
   The final set of robustness checks presents estimates using each dataset individually in the
second stage regression. Our primary results from combining three datasets are about the average
of the estimates from each individual dataset. The point estimates differ somewhat across datasets,
which highlights the importance of our efforts to use all available data.
   To argue that vaping is a material complement or substitute to smoking over our sample period,
one would have to believe that some unobserved force increased or decreased smoking over the exact
period that vaping became popular, breaking a previously steady downward trend. One would also
have to believe that this unobserved force affected all demographic groups. And since the primary
 estimates are similar in the RMS data and the sample surveys, one would have to believe that
this force could confound both sets of estimates.
   Table 3 helps to put the primary results in context. We multiply ^ for   {adults, youth}
by 2018 average vaping qe to estimate the change in smoking caused by the introduction of e-

cigarettes. For the average adult, we can reject with 95 percent confidence that vaping increased
(decreased) smoking by 0.007 (0.004) packs per day, or about 8 percent (4 percent) of average
cigarette consumption. For the average youth, we can rule out with 95 percent confidence that
vaping increased (decreased) smoking by more than 0.003 (0.001) packs per day, or about 51 (21)
percent of average consumption. The percent terms are larger for youth because they already had
low baseline smoking, but both substitution parameters are economically precise zeros in the sense
that they rule out any material gateway effect (long-run complementarity) from vaping to smoking
through 2018. We cannot rule out gateway effects that have not yet manifested themselves as of
the 2018 surveys--for example, if high-vaping youth demographics will transition to smoking over
a longer period.
   Aggregating across all adults and youth, we can rule out that the introduction of e-cigarettes
increased (decreased) smoking by more than about 660 (354) million packs in 2018. Furthermore,
we can rule out that the introduction of e-cigarettes changed cigarette demand by more than 5 to
11 percent of the total decrease observed from 2004­2018. Thus, these estimates suggest that while
e-cigarettes may be smoking cessation aids from some people and gateways to smoking for others,
neither of these effects dominates in an economically significant way.
   An important caveat to our welfare analysis is that we do not study the effects of e-cigarettes on
other behaviors that may involve uninternalized harms. One key concern is that e-cigarettes may
make it easier to consume marijuana. In Appendix D.2, we study trends in marijuana use among
youth, for whom this concern is particularly salient. We find no evidence that youth marijuana use
grew as e-cigarettes became popular. However, marijuana is increasingly being consumed through
vaping, and this may be a more harmful form of consumption: the 2,807 lung injuries and 68
deaths from vaping in 2019 and early 2020 were primarily linked to marijuana e-liquids (Centers
for Disease Control 2020).


                                                 26
6     Expert Survey
6.1    Health Harms Overview
The National Academy of Sciences (2018) report stated that "e-cigarettes contain and emit numer-
ous potentially toxic substances, although at significantly lower levels than regular cigarettes." The
report described two "modes of action," endothelial cell disfunction and oxidative stress, through
which inhaling e-cigarette vapors could cause a range of diseases. The report then discussed several
types of diseases, including cardiovasular disease, cancer, and respiratory disease, that might be
affected.23 The report concluded that "e-cigarettes are not risk-free, but current evidence suggests
that e-cigarettes are likely to be far less harmful than combustible tobacco cigarettes."
    Other prior assessments agreed that vaping is materially less harmful than smoking cigarettes.
A prominent early assessment from 12 experts suggested that e-cigarettes were only five percent as
harmful as combustible cigarettes (Nutt et al. 2014). Public Health England argued that "based
on current knowledge, stating that vaping is at least 95% less harmful than smoking remains a
good way to communicate the large difference in relative risk" (McNeill et al. 2018). Viscusi (2016)
argued that early evidence suggested that vaping could be at least 100 times safer than smoking.
    However, the prior assessments express substantial uncertainty. Nutt et al. (2014) wrote that
there was a "lack of hard evidence" for their conclusions, and the National Academy of Sciences
report wrote that "little is known about the long term effects of e-cigarette use, and there is little
data to assess the impact on cancer and heart disease risk. The long-term effects of e-cigarette use
on morbidity and mortality are not yet clear."
    Furthermore, there is substantial disagreement among researchers, and the science appears to
be changing. Eissenberg et al. (2020) argue that the Nutt et al. (2014) assessment is outdated
and unreliable because e-cigarettes and e-liquids are more harmful than they were a few years ago
and "evidence of potential harm has accumulated." An anti-tobacco research organization (Truth
Initiative 2020) argues that "the growing evidence of potential health risks related to e-cigarette use
has led some researchers to question whether e-cigarettes are safer than combustible cigarettes."
Furthermore, "while a 2018 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine report
found substantial evidence that exposure to toxic substances from e-cigarettes is significantly lower
compared to combustible cigarettes, recent studies are showing that is not the end of the story
on health impact. It now appears that e-cigarettes may present their own unique health risks,
including to the respiratory and cardiovascular systems."
   23
      Chapter 9 described how the nicotine in e-cigarettes can increase heart rate and blood pressure and how toxic
chemicals in e-cigarette aerosols could cause cardiovascular disease (pages 340­341). Chapter 10 identified "several
biologically plausible pathways for which components of e-cigarette aerosols could conceptually influence cancer
development" (page 383); for instance, e-cigarette aerosols, particularly formaldehyde and acrolein, may damage
DNA. Chapter 11 described how e-cigarettes could impair lung defense mechanisms such as the urge to cough (page
407).



                                                        27
6.2    Survey Overview
Motivated by the uncertainty and quickly evolving evidence about health harms, we fielded a
survey of e-cigarette experts that makes two advances: it measures the current state of expert
opinion as informed by the latest research, and it does so in a quantitative format appropriate for
policy analysis. Our sample frame was, after excluding people with tobacco industry affiliations, (i)
the 13 committee members, 13 reviewers, and 122 corresponding authors of papers on the health
impacts of e-cigarettes from the landmark National Academy of Sciences (2018) report; (ii) the
113 editors, contributing authors, and reviewers of the 2020 Surgeon General Report on smoking
cessation; (iii) the 91 editors, contributing editors, contributing authors, and reviewers of the 2016
Surgeon General Report on e-cigarettes; (iv) the 34 people who served on the FDA Tobacco Product
Scientific Advisory Committee between 2017 and 2020; (v) the 65 people who have been honored as
Fellows of the Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco; (vi) the 70 editors, senior editors, and
senior associate editors at three leading academic journals (Tobacco Regulatory Science, Tobacco
Control, and Nicotine and Tobacco Research), as well as the 62 associate editors at the latter two
journals, and (vii) the 55 authors of papers about cigarettes or e-cigarettes cited in Cutler et al.
(2015), Chaloupka, Levy and White (2019), and our September 2019 draft.24 Many people qualified
through multiple inclusion criteria; the initial sample frame included 432 "public health experts"
who qualified for reasons (i)­(vi) and another 50 "economists" who qualified only for reason (vii).
We were unable to find email addresses for 15 people, and another 20 explicitly reported that they
did not feel they were experts on the health effects of vaping, leaving 447 eligible experts.
    We fielded the survey in August 2020. Of the 447 eligible experts, 190 consented to the survey.
Of those who consented, 34 dropped out before finishing the description of the randomized experi-
ment, and another 21 did not complete the survey. Feedback from participants suggested that this
attrition was due to a combination of the length of the survey, feeling that they were not experts
on the health effects of vaping, concerns that eliciting confidence intervals on respondents' beliefs
(described below) was insufficient to reflect uncertainty, concerns that the survey was inappropriate
because our hypothetical randomized trial (described below) would not be ethical, and concerns
that our hypothetical randomized trial did not contemplate "dual use" of both e-cigarettes and
cigarettes. Our survey completion rate was 137/447, or 31 percent.
   24
      The lists of people in groups (i)­(vi) are available from nap.edu/catalog/24952/public-
health-consequences-of-e-cigarettes,                  https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/2020-cessation-sgr-full-
report.pdf,                   https://e-cigarettes.surgeongeneral.gov/documents/2016_SGR_Full_Report_508.pdf,
https://www.fda.gov/advisory-committees/tobacco-products-scientific-advisory-committee/roster-
tobacco-products-scientific-advisory-committee,                        https://www.srnt.org/page/Current_Fellows,
https://tobreg.org/reviewers/senior-associate-editors/,      https://tobaccocontrol.bmj.com/pages/editorial-board/,
and https://academic.oup.com/ntr/pages/Editorial_Board.




                                                         28
6.3      Survey Questions
The survey began by asking, "over the past five years, approximately how many peer-reviewed
research papers have you published on the health effects of e-cigarettes or combustible cigarettes?"25
   To be precise about the parameters we wanted to elicit, the survey then described a hypothetical
randomized trial that compares vaping and smoking.
   To be concrete, we'll ask you to predict the effects of a hypothetical randomized control trial
with a random sample of people in the U.S. who currently smoke or vape or might do
so in the future. Participants would be assigned one of three groups:
   1. "Smoking group": Smoke one pack of typical cigarettes every day
   2. "Vaping group": Vape every day using typical e-cigarettes currently available in the
U.S., consuming a comparable amount of nicotine as the smoking group
   3. "Control group": Not vape or smoke at all


  · Please assume there is no dual use: the smoking group does not vape, and the vaping group
        does not smoke cigarettes.

  · Please assume the experiment starts next year and continues for a long time, with full
        compliance.

  · Please assume that participants in the experiment do not use illegal products and do not vape
        or smoke THC/marijuana. (This is because we want to evaluate regulations that only affect
        the use of legal products.)

           ­ The 2019 outbreak of e-cigarette product use-associated lung injury (EVALI) was largely
              linked to use of e-liquids containing THC. We ask you to ignore any EVALI or other
              health effects that you think are caused by illegal products or THC .

It's important for the rest of the survey that we've clearly communicated this hypothetical randomized
trial (random sample of current or possible future smokers or vapers, comparable amount of nicotine,
typical legal products, full compliance, no THC, etc.). If you understand, please continue. If
something is unclear, please email the PI at hunt.allcott@nyu.edu and we'll answer your question
quickly.
   Part 1: predicted effects on health outcomes. The first part of the survey asked experts
to predict the effects on health outcomes (cardiovascular disease, respiratory disease, cancer, other
health problems, mortality, and quality-adjusted life expectancy (QALE)) for vaping compared to
smoking in our hypothetical randomized trial. For example, the QALE question read:
  25
       The survey instrument can be accessed from https://mit.co1.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_7PrkbeRvZKATfxP.




                                                      29
   If smoking one pack per day reduces quality-adjusted life expectancy (compared to Control) by
100 units, by how many units do you think vaping every day would reduce quality-adjusted life
expectancy (compared to Control)?

  · If vaping and smoking have equal effects on morbidity and mortality, your answer would be
     100 units.

  · If vaping is much more harmful than smoking, your answer might be much larger than 100.

  · If vaping is much less harmful than smoking, your answer might be close to 0.

We also included a graphical illustration; see Appendix Figure A15.
   Much of our analysis focuses on this QALE question. We define  as the response to this
question, divided by 100. After this question, we also asked experts to report their 90 percent
confidence intervals on .
   Part 2: disagreement with prior assessments. The second part of the survey was designed
to understand whether and why our experts' views might differ from the asessments of Nutt et al.
(2014) and McNeill et al. (2018).
   To measure sample selection bias, the survey told experts that "we'd like to get your sense of
whether you think you are more optimistic or pessimistic about vaping than the average public
health expert," reminded them of their , and asked "what do you think the average expert would
report?" The survey then presented a confirmation screen stating that "your answer implies that
you are [are more optimistic / are more pessimistic / have the same views] about the health effects
of vaping [than / as] the average expert," and asked them to confirm that they were satisfied with
their answers.
   The survey then asked, "How optimistic or pessimistic are you about the health effects of
vaping now, compared to five years ago?" Experts who reported that they were more optimistic
or pessimistic than they were five years ago were then asked to select reasons why their views had
changed.
   The survey then reminded experts of past assessments of :
   Public Health England (2018) concluded that "Based on current knowledge, stating that vaping
is at least 95% less harmful than smoking remains a good way to communicate the large difference
in relative risk." A paper by Nutt et al. (2014) came to a similar conclusion.
   For experts who had reported  = 0.05, the survey then said, "You predicted that the relative
effect of vaping for quality-adjusted life expectancy was [ × 100] units, i.e. [ × 100] percent
of the relative effect of smoking. By that measure, you are more [pessimistic / optimistic] about
vaping than Nutt et al. (2014) and Public Health England (2018). Why? (Please select all that
apply.)" One of the possible responses was "I misunderstood the questions. I would like to click
the back arrow and change my answers." Any experts who clicked that response were required to


                                                30
go back before continuing. Thus, all experts who disagreed with prior assessments were required
to explicitly confirm and explain their disagreement.
   Part 3: internalities for youth versus adults. The third part of the survey was designed
to elicit the internalities for youth relative to adults. The survey said,
   A final key parameter is the harm e-cigarettes impose on the user that the user does
not correctly perceive. (The italicized text is important: users may have some perception of
personal harms, and we are asking you about the difference between that perception and reality.)
Misperceptions might arise from:

  · misunderstanding the health risks,

  · misunderstanding the likelihood of addiction or the difficulty of quitting, and/or

  · focusing too much on the present benefits instead of the long-run health harms.

The survey then asked, "Imagine that vaping every day causes 100 units of actual harms on
[adults/youth]. How many units do you think the average [adult/youth] perceives?" We define a
variable  measuring experts' beliefs about the ratio of internalities for youth compared to adults:
 := 1 + (adult perceived harms - youth perceived harms)/100. For example,  = 1 for experts who
believe that adults and youth perceive the same harms, and  = 1 + (70 - 20)/100 = 1.5 for experts
who believe that adults perceive 70 percent of the actual harms and youth perceive 20 percent.
   Confirmation checks. To ensure that experts understood the questions and gave thoughtful
answers, we included confirmation checks after every major question in the survey. Experts were
required to affirm that they agreed with a given confirmation check and were satisfied with their
answers. If they did not explicitly affirm, they were required to click backward in the survey and
adjust their previous answers until they were satisfied. Respondents were always allowed to go back
and change their answers on any question.
   For example, in one confirmation check after eliciting beliefs about the relative effects of vaping
on life expectancy, we also elicited beliefs about the effect of a lifetime of daily smoking on life
expectancy, which is thought to be more than ten years (U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services 2014), and then confirmed that they agreed that a lifetime of daily vaping would have
the effect implied by their answers. Thus, an expert who reported that the effect of vaping on life
expectancy would be 40 percent as large as the effect of smoking and that lifetime smoking reduces
life expectancy by 10 years would be required to confirm that she believed that lifetime vaping
would reduce life expectancy by four years. As a result of this and the other confirmation checks,
it would be hard to argue that experts misunderstood the survey.




                                                  31
6.4   Expert Survey Results
Figure 9 presents the distribution of  across experts. The mean (median) expert believes that the
effect of vaping on quality-adjusted life expectancy would be 37 (25) percent as large as the effect
of smoking. There is substantial disagreement across experts: the interquartile range is 10 to 60
percent. Individual experts also perceive substantial uncertainty: the average expert reported a 90
percent condence interval spanning 32 percentage points.
   78 percent of experts reported  > 0.05. As described above, these experts all explicitly
confirmed on our survey instrument that they were more pessimistic than the conclusion of Nutt
et al. (2014) and McNeill et al. (2018) that vaping is at least 95 percent safer than smoking. 44
percent of experts reported that  = 0.05 was below the lower bound of their 90 percent confidence
interval.
   Experts' beliefs about the relative effects on (unadjusted) life expectancy are similar to their
beliefs about the relative effects on QALE: the mean (median) expert believes that the effect of
vaping on life expectancy would be 38 (30) percent as large as the effect of smoking; see Appendix
Figure A16. Experts report that vaping has material effects (relative to smoking) on cardiovascular
disease, respiratory disease, cancer, and other health outcomes, although they believe that the
relative effects are smaller for cancer than for other diseases; see Appendix Figure A17. Regressions
in Appendix Table A7 show that beliefs about effects on cardiovascular disease, respiratory disease,
and cancer all predict beliefs about QALE and life expectancy, although the point estimates suggest
that respiratory disease is a weaker predictor of mortality than it is of QALE, while cancer and
cardiovascular disease are slightly stronger predictors of mortality. These results show that experts
beliefs about effects on QALE are well-justified by their beliefs about the effects on specific health
conditions.
   Our average public health (economist) expert reported having published six (one) peer reviewed
research paper(s) on the health effects of e-cigarettes and combustible cigarettes in the past five
years. There is no relationship between  and this measure of expertise; see Appendix Figure A18.
Public health experts, who have stronger publication backgrounds in this area, report higher 
than the economists; see Appendix Figure A19.
   Several facts suggest that sample selection bias does not explain why our experts disagree with
prior work. First, as illustrated in Appendix Figure A20, our experts report being slightly more
optimistic than average about e-cigarettes: the mean (median) respondent believes that the average
public health expert would report an  of 41 (40). Taking this result at face value suggests that
sample selection might bias  slightly downwards. Second, we sent three survey invite emails spaced
six days apart, and almost all responses came within two days of an email being sent. There is
no statistically detectable correlation between  and whether the experts responded in the days
after the first, second, or third invite, meaning that experts who are more eager to respond do not
have systematically different views; see Appendix Figure A21. Third, we can bound the possible

                                                 32
effects of sample selection bias using our 31 percent response rate: even in an extreme case where
all non-respondents would have reported  = 0, the average  in our sample of eligible experts
would be 0.37 × 0.31  0.11, still more than twice the prior assessment that   0.05.
   The second part of our survey allows us to understand why our experts disagree with prior
assessments. Experts report that their own personal views have evolved over time: 45 percent of
experts report being more pessimistic about the health effects of vaping now compared to five years
ago, against 34 percent who report having "about the same view" and 20 percent who report being
more optimistic. When asked why their views have changed, 92 percent reported that "there is
new research evidence," and 56 percent reported that "e-cigarette devices have changed."
   Figure 10 shows that these same factors explain why most of our expert respondents disagree
with the assessments of Nutt et al. (2014) and McNeill et al. (2018) that   0.05. 52, 45, and
47 percent of experts who reported  > 0.05 responded that "there is new research evidence," "e-
cigarette devices have changed," and "I disagree with how the researchers interpreted the research
evidence available at the time," respectively. Our average expert thus explicitly agrees with the
arguments of Eissenberg et al. (2020) and others that e-cigarettes and e-liquids are more harmful
than they were a few years ago and that "evidence of potential harm has accumulated."
   On the final part of the survey, the mean (median) expert reported that misperceptions of the
harms from vaping are 47 (30) percentage points larger for youth than for adults; see Appendix
Figure A24. Thus,   1 + 47/100 = 1.47 for the average expert.
   Appendix E presents additional information on the expert survey. The three key results above--
material harms relative to combustible cigarettes, substantial uncertainty, and larger harms for
youth compared to adults--will be central to our welfare analysis in the next section.


7 Optimal Regulation
7.1 Parameter Calibrations
In this section, we estimate the optimal e-cigarette tax using Equation (14) and the welfare effects of
an e-cigarette ban using Equation (15). We use Monte Carlo simulations to capture the sampling
variation in each parameter. Specifically, we re-estimate Equations (14) and (15) one million
times, drawing each parameter from its distribution. Unless otherwise stated below, we draw each
parameter from a normal distribution with mean and standard deviation equal to its point estimate
and standard error.
   Table 4 summarizes the parameters, their mean values in our primary simulations, and their
sources. To further acknowledge uncertainty, we will also consider alternative assumptions for the
key parameters in the next section. We use parameters from 2018, the most recent available year,
and we inflate monetary amounts to 2018 dollars. We consider two consumer types   {a, y },
representing adults and youth.

                                                  33
    We use the empirical estimate of  from Table 2 and the adult and youth  from Figure 8. To
avoid positive own-price elasticities, we re-draw any positive draw of  ; this happens in only about
0.02 percent of simulations. We compute s , the share of each type, by calculating the number of
youth ages 12­17 and adults ages 18­100 in the 2018 American Community Survey.
    We use the 2018 population-weighted average tax rates ~c and ~e across states, and we use
~e  $3.90 per ml from our E-cigarette User Survey. Only about 1/4 of the U.S. population lives in
p
states, counties, or cities with e-cigarette taxes, so ~e is about 1/4 of the average tax rate in areas
that currently have taxes.
    Current youth and adult e-cigarette consumption qe (p
                                                        ~) are the 2018 averages from the sample
surveys plotted in Figure 2. Vaping is now in units of milliliters (ml) per person-day, and the e-
cigarette tax rate and marginal distortion are in dollars per ml. We transform qe from the original

survey units (share of days) to ml/person-day using , the e-liquid consumption on an average
vaping day from our E-cigarette User Survey.
    Externalities. We import the Sloan et al. (2004) average marginal externality from smoking,
except that we follow DeCicca, Kenkel and Lovenheim (2020) in removing the component from life
insurance cross-subsidies, as most life insurance policies now adjust for smoking status. This gives
c  $0.64 per pack in 2018 dollars.
    We assume that the harms from smoking can be translated to harms from vaping using , the
relative effects of vaping on health. To recognize the complementary value from expert reviews such
as McNeill et al. (2018) and our expert survey, our simulations place equal weight on  = 0.05 and
draws from our experts' distribution of .26 Since we asked experts to contemplate the effects of
smoking one pack per day versus vaping an equivalent amount of nicotine every day, we translate
smoking harms (in $/pack) to vaping harms (in $/ml) by multiplying by /, where  is the volume
of e-liquid that delivers the same amount of nicotine as a pack of cigarettes.  depends heavily on
usage patterns, but since the popular 0.7 ml Juul pod is advertised as delivering about the same
amount of nicotine as a pack of cigarettes (Willett et al. 2019), we assume  = 0.7 ml/pack. The
externality from vaping is thus e = c /  $0.19/ml at our mean .
    Internalities. For our primary simulations, we follow Cutler et al. (2015) in assuming that the
                                    c = (1 -  )H c , where  is the present focus parameter and H c
marginal bias from adult smoking is a
is the discounted private cost of smoking per pack. As we showed in an example in Section 1, this is
the correct formula for marginal bias if present focus is the only behavioral bias, the social planner
uses the long-run criterion (so that normative utility uses exponential discounting), and there is
                                          c would be smaller with sophisticated present focus
no habit formation. With habit formation, a
and probably larger with naive present focus (Gruber and Kszegi 2001). Projection bias would
  26
     To account for both disagreement across experts and individual-level uncertainty, in each Monte Carlo simulation
using our expert survey distribution, we first draw one expert and then draw  from a uniform distribution centered
at that expert's  with support equal to 10/9 times the width of that expert's reported 90 percent confidence interval.
Because  cannot be negative we replace any negative draw of  with  = 0.


                                                         34
                  c . We use the stylized  c = (1 -  )H c because of these modeling uncertainties.
probably increase a                       a
   We assume that the present discounted private health cost from smoking is H c = $44.40 per
pack, inflating the estimate from Gruber and Kszegi (2001) to 2018 dollars. For adults, our
simulations place equal weight on two different assessments of present focus:  = 0.67 and its
standard error as estimated by Chaloupka, Levy and White (2019), and  = 0.9 as assumed by
                                                                                        c =
Gruber and Kszegi (2001). At our mean  and , the internality from adult smoking is thus a
(1 -  )H c  $9.55 per pack, and the internality from adult vaping is a
                                                                     e = (1 -  )H c /  $2.88

per ml. For youth, we inflate internalities by , the ratio of youth to adult internalities from the
                      j   j
expert survey, giving y = a . We draw  from the empirical distribution in Appendix Figure
A24.
   Appendix F provides additional details about empirical implementation.

7.2    Optimal Regulation Results
Three key parameters. Three key parameters drive our results on optimal regulation. First,
we estimate that e-cigarette demand is more than unit elastic. This relatively elastic demand
reduces the perceived consumer surplus from vaping, pushing toward the possibility that a ban
might increase welfare.
   Second, our point estimates of the substitution parameter  imply very limited complementarity
or substitutability between e-cigarettes and cigarettes. This means that in our mean Monte Carlo
simulation, optimal e-cigarette policy places little weight on cigarette market distortions. However,
cigarette market distortions will matter for simulation draws with  further from zero.
   Third, the e-cigarette internality assumptions generate substantial uncertainty.        With our
smaller assumptions for present focus ( = 0.9) and health harms ( = 0.05), the adult vap-
                   e = (1 -  )H c /  (1 - 0.9) × $44.40 × 0.05/0.7  $0.32/ml. With larger
ing internality is a
present focus from Chaloupka, Levy and White (2019) ( = 0.67) and larger health harms from
our expert survey (mean   0.37), we have a
                                         e  (1 - 0.67) × $44.40 × 0.37/0.7  $7.81/ml. The

                             e benchmarks is more than eight times larger than the current aver-
difference between these two a
age e-cigarette tax in states, counties, and cities that have taxes, which is $0.89/ml. Furthermore,
the latter  e has substantial uncertainty driven by the variation in  from our expert survey and
the standard errors on  from Chaloupka, Levy and White (2019), and inflating the internality by
 for youth further increases variance.
   Monte Carlo simulation results. Panel (a) of Figure 11 presents optimal e-cigarette tax
rates over the distribution of Monte Carlo simulation draws. Uncertainty about health harms
generates a long right tail for  and thus for optimal tax rates. In the mean simulation, the
optimal tax is $3.73/ml. As discussed in Section 1, the optimal tax could be negative (i.e. a
subsidy) if cigarettes are much more harmful than e-cigarettes and the two goods are substitutes.
While this is the case in some simulations, the optimal tax is positive 91 percent of the time. The


                                                 35
vertical line marks the current average e-cigarette tax in states and local areas that have taxes,
$0.89/ml. The optimal tax exceeds that current average in about 60 percent of simulations. Thus,
the model predicts with high confidence that it is optimal to impose some positive e-cigarette tax,
and the optimal tax is probably larger than the current norm.
   Panel (b) presents the welfare effects of an e-cigarette ban. Recall that in our model, the optimal
tax is always preferred to a ban, and we compare a ban to the status quo with current tax rates.
Thus, a ban increases welfare when current tax rates are much lower than optimal. In the mean
simulation, a full e-cigarette ban increases welfare by $10.33 per person per year, or $2.9 billion
per year over the 279 million people aged 12 and older nationwide. A ban increases welfare in 46
percent of simulations.
   Sources of uncertainty. After incorporating the empirical estimates in our paper, what
parameters generate the most remaining uncertainty in setting optimal policy? Figure 12 presents
the variance in predicted welfare effects of a ban from Monte Carlo simulations that hold each listed
parameter fixed, as a fraction of the variance in the primary simulations in Panel (b) of Figure 11.
Health harms  and present focus  contribute the most to policy uncertainty. This underscores
the importance of future work to measure the health effects, internalities, and externalities from
vaping. It also highlights the importance of our empirical estimates and expert survey: without
our results or parallel estimates from other papers, there would be even more uncertainty about  ,
 , and .
   Simulations at different . Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 13 present the mean and 95 percent
confidence intervals for the optimal e-cigarette tax and welfare effects of a ban for a range of  from
0 to 1. At the  = 0.05 inspired by prior assessments of health harms, the optimal e-cigarette tax in
the mean simulation is $1.20/ml, and banning e-cigarettes reduces welfare by about $4 per person
per year. At about   0.1, the optimal tax is positive in about 95 percent of simulations, and
a ban is approximately welfare-neutral in the mean simulation. At the   0.37 corresponding to
our average expert's beliefs about health harms, the optimal tax is $6.27/ml, and the ban increases
welfare in about 95 percent of simulations.
   Alternative assumptions. To further understand the sources of policy uncertainty, Table 5
presents optimal tax rates and welfare effects of a ban under alternative assumptions. In each row
of Panels (a) and (b), we present the mean  e or W at the parameter assumption listed in the
first column for  = 0.05 and for  = 0.37, drawing the other parameters from their distributions.
The first 14 rows are parallel across the two panels.
   Rows 1­6 present alternative assumptions about internalities. Row 1 corresponds to the primary
estimates described above. Rows 2 and 3 vary the present focus parameter between  = 0.9 and
 = 0.67. Only for the most optimistic combination of  = 0.05 and  = 0.9 is the optimal tax
below the current norm of $0.89/ml.
   Row 4 considers the implications of evidence presented by Viscusi (2016, Forthcoming), Elton-


                                                 36
Marshall et al. (2020), McNeill et al. (2018), and others that people overestimate the risks of
vaping relative to smoking. The ideal policy instrument to address incorrect beliefs about the
health effects of vaping would be information provision, and the results of Jin et al. (2015) suggest
that information provision policies had substantial effects on smoking prevalance from 1964­2010.
However, if e-cigarette public health information campaigns are not fully effective, it could be
optimal to subsidize e-cigarettes to offset remaining misperceptions. The average respondent in
Viscusi (Forthcoming, Table 2) believes that 28 percent of people who vape and 43 percent of
cigarette smokers will die from lung cancer, heart disease, throat cancer, or any other illness because
they vape or smoke. If we interpret 28/43 as consumers' perception of relative health harms
for a day of vaping relative to a day of smoking, the internality from incorrect beliefs is  e =
H c ( - 28/43) /. If the true  is 0.05, we have  e  $44.40 (0.05 - 28/43) /0.7  -$38. If
 = 37, we have  e  $44.40 (0.37 - 28/43) /0.7  -$18.27
    Rows 5 and 6 present alternative internality assumptions. Row 5 uses the internality estimate
   c = $4.16/ml from Jin et al. (2015).28 The results are very similar to those in row 2 with
of a
 = 0.9. Row 6 assumes that the conventional wisdom of policymakers is more informative about
the marginal distortion from smoking than the academic research we use in our primary estimates.
In that row, we assume that existing average cigarette taxes ~c are set optimally by setting the
smoking marginal distortion equal to the tax: c = ~c . We then translate that smoking distortion
to vaping using the relative health harms: e  c                c  e
                                            =  /. This reduces  ,  , and the resulting
optimal e-cigarette tax.
    The remaining rows present additional sensitivity analyses relative the primary estimates in
row 1. Rows 7­11 present alternative assumptions for the substitution parameter  . Since smoking
generates uninternalized distortions (c > ~c ), more substitutability (more negative  ) pushes
toward a lower optimal tax and lower welfare gains from a ban, and more complementarity (more
positive  ) pushes in the other direction. Row 7 uses the minimum distance estimates from the
Nielsen RMS data in Section 4, ^adult  -0.056 and ^youth  -0.0003, which suggest slightly more
substitutability between smoking and vaping. Row 8 uses the ^ and ^ from column 5 of Table
2, the estimates without cluster-specific linear time trends, which imply more substitutability and
more inelastic demand. Row 9 uses the ^ parameters from both Sections 4 and 5, combined using
a minimum distance estimator as described in Appendix D.1. In all three cases, the increased
substitutability means that the optimal tax and welfare gains from a ban are less positive (or more
   27
      These numbers are so large because smoking substantially reduces life expectancy, consumers substantially
overestimate the mortality effects of vaping relative to smoking, and the value of a statistical life is in the millions
of dollars. However, these calculations imply that consumers would be willing to pay $18 to $38 more per ml if they
could be debiased of their health risk misperceptions. Given the current average price of p   ~e  $3.90 per ml, such
large effects seem implausible. Perhaps the effects of belief bias on choice are diminished by severe inattention or
present bias. In the absence of additional data, we think of these results as illustrative.
   28
      To estimate this, Jin et al. (2015) use what Allcott, Lockwood and Taubinsky (2019) later called a "counterfactual
normative consumer" approach: they calculate the price increase that would reduce consumption to the level of
consumers who are likely to be well-informed about the health costs of smoking.


                                                          37
negative).
   Rows 10 and 11 present results assuming that an average day of vaping is a perfect complement
( = 0.5 for adults and  = 0.15 for youth) or a perfect substitute ( = -0.5 for adults and
 = -0.15 for youth) for an average day of smoking. For perfect substitutes and lower values of
, it is optimal to subsidize e-cigarettes, and a ban reduces welfare. These parameter assumptions
would be consistent with some policy arguments to encourage e-cigarettes as a harm-reduction
approach for existing smokers, notwithstanding the harms from vaping.
   These two rows highlight that our estimates of substitution patterns are quite informative about
optimal policy. In both columns 1 and 2, the range of optimal tax (or subsidy) rates between perfect
complements and perfect substitutes is very wide--about 13 times larger than the current average
e-cigarete tax rate of $0.89/ml. Thus, if the conflicting evidence we discussed in the introduction
led one to initially have diffuse priors over  between perfect complements and perfect substitutes,
this would generate substantial uncertainty about optimal policy. Our confidence intervals on 
rule out substantial ranges of values closer to perfect complements or perfect substitutes, such that
the remaining uncertainty measured in Figure 12 is over other parameters.
   Row 12 allows the social planner to set the optimal cigarette tax  c =  c = c . Optimal
policy then considers the e-cigarette market in isolation. Because our primary estimates already
use   0, this makes little difference relative to row 1, especially when  is large.
   Rows 13 and 14 consider the youth and adult markets in isolation. Since the mean   1.47, the
average marginal distortion (and thus the optimal tax, if the substitution distortion is negligible)
is almost 50 percent larger for youth as it is for adults. At  = 0.37, the per-youth gains from a
youth-specific ban are 3­4 times larger than the per-adult gains from an adult-specific ban. This
underscores that there are plausible parameters under which the current policy norm of a youth
sales ban plus a tax on the remaining sales to adults would be the constrained optimum if leakage
or enforcement issues make it easier to impose type-specific bans than type-specific taxes.
   Rows 15 and 16 (in Panel (b) only) present the welfare effects of a ban under alternative
assumptions for the demand elasticity  . Since we assume that the perceived consumer surplus loss
from a ban is the area under a line drawn tangent to the demand curve at current prices, more
inelastic demand implies larger perceived consumer surplus loss.


8 Conclusion
Electronic cigarettes are one of the most controversial new products of the past decade, due to
uncertainty about their health effects and whether they are primarily a quit aid or a gateway drug
for combustible cigarettes. We lay out a simple behavioral optimal policy framework that delivers
formulas for the optimal e-cigarette tax and welfare effects of a ban as functions of several key
statistics. We estimate these statistics using Nielsen RMS scanner data, sample surveys, and a new


                                                 38
survey of e-cigarette experts. We find that e-cigarette demand is price elastic, vaping is neither a
significant complement nor substitute for smoking combustible cigarettes over the medium term,
and experts now believe that vaping is more harmful than prior assessments had suggested.
   In our model, the optimal e-cigarette tax to address plausible amounts of present focus is
probably higher than the current norm--much higher, if e-cigarettes are as harmful as our expert
survey respondents believe. However, Monte Carlo simulations highlight substantial uncertainty,
and heavy subsidies could be optimal if information provision cannot address consumers' misper-
ceptions of the health harms from vaping. Since most of the remaining policy uncertainty in our
model is driven by the uninternalized externalities and internalities from vaping, more research on
those parameters would be very valuable.




                                                39
References
Abouk, Rahi and Scott Adams, "Bans on Electronic Cigarette Sales to Minors and Smoking
  Among High School Students," Journal of Health Economics, 2017, 54, 17­24.

  ,     , Bo Feng, Johanna Catherine Maclean, and Michael F Pesko, "The Effect of E-
  Cigarette Taxes on Pre-Pregnancy and Prenatal Smoking, and Birth Outcomes," 2019. NBER
  Working Paper No. 26126.

Aguiar, Luis and Joel Waldfogel, "Quality Predictability and the Welfare Benefits From New
  Products: Evidence From the Digitization of Recorded Music," Journal of Political Economy,
  2018, 126 (2), 492­524.

Allcott, Hunt and Dmitry Taubinsky, "Evaluating Behaviorally-Motivated Policy: Experi-
  mental Evidence from the Lightbulb Market," American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (8), 2501­
  2538.

  , Benjamin B Lockwood, and Dmitry Taubinsky, "Regressive Sin Taxes, with an Applica-
  tion to the Optimal Soda Tax," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2019, 134 (3), 1557­1626.

Ashley, Elizabeth M, Clark Nardinelli, and Rosemarie A Lavaty, "Estimating the Benefits
  of Public Health Policies That Reduce Harmful Consumption," Health Economics, 2015, 24 (5),
  617­624.

Bartik, Timothy J, Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?, W.E.
  Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 1991.

Bernheim, B. Douglas and Antonio Rangel, "Beyond Revealed Preference: Choice-Theoretic
  Foundations for Behavioral Welfare Economics," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (1),
  51­104.

      and Dmitry Taubinsky, "Behavioral Public Economics," in B. Douglas Bernheim, Stefano
  DellaVigna, and David Laibson, eds., The Handbook of Behavioral Economics, Vol. 1, New York:
  Elsevier, 2018.

Berry, Kaitlyn M, Jessica L Fetterman, Emelia J Benjamin, Aruni Bhatnagar, Jes-
  sica L Barrington-Trimis, Adam M Leventhal, and Andrew Stokes, "Association of
  Electronic Cigarette Use With Subsequent Initiation of Tobacco Cigarettes in US Youths," JAMA
  Network Open, 2019, 2 (2), e187794­e187794.

Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Lawrence F Katz, "Regional Evolutions," Brookings Papers on
  Economic Activity, 1992, 1, 1­75.


                                                40
Bour,        Norm,    "Vaping    Trends:      Early    Adopters    and    Future    Directions,"
  https://vapementors.com/vaping-trend-early-adapters-and-future-directions/   2019.       Vape
  Mentors.

Boxell, Levi, Matthew Gentzkow, and Jesse M Shapiro, "Greater Internet Use is Not
  Associated With Faster Growth in Political Polarization Among US Demographic Groups," Pro-
  ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2017, 114 (40), 10612­10617.

Cantrell, Jennifer, Jidong Huang, Marisa S Greenberg, Haijuan Xiao, Elizabeth C
  Hair, and Donna Vallone, "Impact of E-Cigarette and Cigarette Prices on Youth and Young
  Adult E-Cigarette and Cigarette Behaviour: Evidence from a National Longitudinal Cohort," To-
  bacco Control, 2019. https://tobaccocontrol.bmj.com/content/early/2019/06/05/tobaccocontrol-
  2018-054764.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, "Outbreak of Lung Injury Associ-
  ated with E-Cigarette Use, or Vaping," https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/basic_information/e-
  cigarettes/severe-lung-disease.html 2020.

Chaloupka, Frank J and Kenneth E Warner, "The Economics of Smoking," Handbook of
  Health Economics, 2000, 1, 1539­1627.

  ,   , Daron Acemolu, Jonathan Gruber, Fritz Laux, Wendy Max, Joseph Newhouse,
  Thomas Schelling, and Jody Sindelar, "An Evaluation of the FDA's Analysis of the Costs
  and Benefits of the Graphic Warning Label," Tobacco Control, 2015, 24 (2), 112­119.

  , Matthew R Levy, and Justin S White, "Estimating Biases in Smoking Cessation: Evidence
  from a Field Experiment," 2019. NBER Working Paper No. 26522.

Chatterjee, Kshitij, Bashar Alzghoul, Ayoub Innabi, and Nikhil Meena, "Is Vaping a
  Gateway to Smoking: a Review of the Longitudinal Studies," International Journal of Adolescent
  Medicine and Health, 2016, 30 (3).

Chetty, Raj, "Behavioral Economics and Public Policy: A Pragmatic Perspective," American
  Economic Review, 2015, 105 (5), 1­33.

Cooper, Michael T and Michael F Pesko, "The Effect of E-Cigarette Indoor Vaping Restric-
  tions on Adult Prenatal Smoking and Birth Outcomes," Journal of Health Economics, 2017, 56,
  178­190.

Cotti, Chad, Charles Courtemanche, Catherine Maclean, Erik Nesson, Michael Pesko,
  and Nathan Tefft, "The Effects of E-Cigarette Taxes on E-Cigarette Prices and Tobacco Prod-
  uct Sales: Evidence from Retail Panel Data," 2020. NBER Working Paper No. 26724.

                                              41
  , Erik Nesson, and Nathan Tefft, "The Relationship Between Cigarettes and Electronic
  Cigarettes: Evidence from Household Panel Data," Journal of Health Economics, 2018, 61, 205­
  219.

Cutler, David, Amber Jessup, Donald Kenkel, and Martha Starr, "Valuing Regulations
  Affecting Addictive or Habitual Goods," Journal of Benefit Cost Analysis, 2015, 6 (2), 247­280.

  ,    ,    , and   , "Economic Aproaches to Estimating Benefits of Regulations Affecting Addictive
  Goods," American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 2016, 50 (5), 520­526.

Dave, Dhaval, Bo Feng, and Michael F Pesko, "The Effects of E-Cigarette Minimum Legal
  Sale Age Laws on Youth Substance Use," Health Economics, 2019, 28 (3), 419­436.

DeCicca, Philip, Donald Kenkel, Feng Liu, and Hua Wang, "Behavioral Welfare Economics
  and FDA Tobacco Regulations," in "Human Capital and Health Behavior," Emerald Publishing
  Limited, 2017, pp. 143­179.

  , Donald S Kenkel, and Michael F Lovenheim, "The Economics of Tobacco Regulation: A
  Comprehensive Review," 2020. NBER Working Paper No. 26923.

DellaVigna, Stefano and Devin Pope, "Predicting Experimental Results: Who Knows What?,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 2018, 126 (6), 2410­2456.

      and    , "Stability of Experimental Results: Forecasts and Evidence," 2019. NBER Working
  Paper No. 25858.

  , Nicholas Otis, and Eva Vivalt, "Forecasting the Results of Experiments: Piloting an
  Elicitation Strategy," AEA Papers and Proceedings, May 2020, 110, 75­79.

Diamond, Peter A., "Consumption Externalities and Imperfect Corrective Pricing," The Bell
  Journal of Economics and Management Science, 1973, 4 (2), 526­538.

Eissenberg, Thomas, Aruni Bhatnagar, Simon Chapman, Sven-Eric Jordt, Alan Shi-
  hadeh, and Eric K. Soule, "Invalidity of an Oft-Cited Estimate of the Relative Harms of
  Electronic Cigarettes," American Journal of Public Health, 2020, 110 (2), 161­162.

Elton-Marshall, Tara, Pete Driezen, Geoffrey T. Fong, K. Michael Cummings, Alexan-
  der Persoskie, Olivia Wackowski, Kelvin Choi, Annette Kaufman, David Strong,
  Shannon Gravely, Kristie Taylor, Jonathan Kwan, Maansi Bansal-Travers, Mark
  Travers, and Andrew Hyland, "Adult Perceptions of the Relative Harm of Tobacco Prod-
  ucts and Subsequent Tobacco Product Use: Longitudinal Findings from Waves 1 and 2 of the
  Population Assessment of Tobacco and Health (PATH) Study," Addictive Behaviors, 2020, 106
  (106337), 1­7.

                                                 42
Farhi, Emmanuel and Xavier Gabaix, "Optimal Taxation with Behavioral Agents," American
  Economic Review, January 2020, 110 (1), 298­336.

Friedman, Abigail S, "How Does Electronic Cigarette Access Affect Adolescent Smoking?,"
  Journal of Health Economics, 2015, 44, 300­308.

Gallet, Craig A. and John A. List, "Cigarette Demand: a Meta-Analysis of Elasticities," Health
  Economics, 2003, 12 (10), 821­835.

Gentzkow, Matthew, "Valuing New Goods in a Model With Complementarity: Online Newspa-
  pers," American Economic Review, 2007, 97 (3), 713­744.

Goldsmith-Pinkham, Paul, Isaac Sorkin, and Henry Swift, "Bartik Instruments: What,
  When, Why, and How," 2019. NBER Working Paper No. 24408.

Goolsbee, Austan and Amil Petrin, "The Consumer Gains from Direct Broadcast Satellites
  and the Competition With Cable TV," Econometrica, 2004, 72 (2), 351­381.

Gottlieb, Scott, "Statement from FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb, M.D., on New Steps
  to Address Epidemic of Youth E-Cigarette Use," https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-
  announcements/statement-fda-commissioner-scott-gottlieb-md-new-steps-address-epidemic-
  youth-e-cigarette-use Sep 2018. U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

Gotts, Jeffrey E, Sven-Eric Jordt, Rob McConnell, and Robert Tarran, "What Are the
  Respiratory Effects of E-Cigarettes?," BMJ, 2019, 366.

Gruber, Jonathan and Botond Kszegi, "Is Addiction `Rational'? Theory and Evidence,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (4), 1261­1303.

  and    , "Tax Incidence When Individuals Are Time-Inconsistent: The Case of Cigarette Excise
  Taxes," Journal of Public Economics, 2004, 88 (9-10), 1959­1987.

  and Sendhil Mullainathan, "Do Cigarette Taxes Make Smokers Happier?," The B.E. Journal
  of Economic Analysis & Policy, 2005, 5 (1).

Hainmueller, Jens, "Entropy Balancing for Causal Effects: A Multivariate Reweighting Method
  to Produce Balanced Samples in Observational Studies," Political Analysis, 2012, 20 (1), 25­46.

Hajek, Peter, Anna Phillips-Waller, Dunja Przulj, Francesca Pesola, Katie Myers
  Smith, Natalie Bisal, Jinshuo Li, Steve Parrott, Peter Sasieni, Lynne Dawkins et al.,
  "A Randomized Trial of E-Cigarettes Versus Nicotine-Replacement Therapy," New England Jour-
  nal of Medicine, 2019, 380, 629­637.



                                                43
Hartwell, Greg, Sian Thomas, Matt Egan, Anna Gilmore, and Mark Petticrew, "E-
  Cigarettes and Equity: a Systematic Review of Differences in Awareness and Use Between So-
  ciodemographic Groups," Tobacco Control, 2017, 26 (e2), e85­e91.

Hausman, Jerry, "Valuation of New Goods Under Perfect and Imperfect Competition," in Tim-
  othy Bresnaham and Roger Gordon, eds., The Economics of New Goods, Vol. 58, University of
  Chicago Press, 1996, pp. 207­248.

Huang, Jidong, Cezary Gwarnicki, Xin Xu, Ralph S Caraballo, Roy Wada, and Frank J
  Chaloupka, "A Comprehensive Examination of Own-and Cross-Price Elasticities of Tobacco and
  Nicotine Replacement Products in the US," Preventive Medicine, 2018, 117, 107­114.

Jin, Lawrence, Don Kenkel, Feng Liu, and Hua Wang, "Retrospective and Prospective
  Benefit-Cost Analyses of US Anti-Smoking Policies," Journal of Benefit-Cost Analysis, 2015, 6
  (1), 154­186.

Kenkel, Donald S, Sida Peng, Michael F Pesko, and Hua Wang, "Mostly Harmless Reg-
  ulation? Electronic Cigarettes, Public Policy and Consumer Welfare," 2019. NBER Working
  Paper No. 23710.

Leventhal, Adam M, David R Strong, Matthew G Kirkpatrick, Jennifer B Unger,
  Steve Sussman, Nathaniel R Riggs, Matthew D Stone, Rubin Khoddam, Jonathan M
  Samet, and Janet Audrain-McGovern, "Association of Electronic Cigarette Use with Ini-
  tiation of Combustible Tobacco Product Smoking in Early Adolescence," JAMA, 2015, 314 (7),
  700­707.

Levy, David T, Kenneth E Warner, K Michael Cummings, David Hammond, Char-
  lene Kuo, Geoffrey T Fong, James F Thrasher, Maciej Lukasz Goniewicz, and Ron
  Borland, "Examining the Relationship of Vaping to Smoking Initiation among US Youth and
  Young Adults: a Reality Check," Tobacco Control, 2019, 28 (6), 629­635.

Levy, Helen G, Edward C Norton, and Jeffrey A Smith, "Tobacco Regulation and Cost-
  Benefit Analysis: How Should We Value Foregone Consumer Surplus?," American Journal of
  Health Economics, 2018, 4 (1), 1­25.

Liber, Alex C and Kenneth E Warner, "Has Underreporting of Cigarette Consumption
  Changed Over Time? Estimates Derived From US National Health Surveillance Systems Be-
  tween 1965 and 2015," American Journal of Epidemiology, 2018, 187 (1), 113­119.

McNeill, Ann, Leonie S Brose, Robert Calder, Linda Bauld, and Debbie Robson,
  "Evidence Review of E-cigarettes and Heated Tobacco Products 2018," Technical Report, Public
  Health England 2018.

                                              44
Mullainathan, Sendhil, Joshua Schwartzstein, and William J Congdon, "A Reduced-Form
  Approach to Behavioral Public Finance," Annual Review of Economics, 2012, 4 (1), 511­540.

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, Public Health Consequences
  of E-Cigarettes, National Academies Press, 2018.

Nevo, Aviv, "New Products, Quality Changes, and Welfare Measures Computed From Estimated
  Demand Systems," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2003, 85 (2), 266­275.

Nutt, David J, Lawrence D Phillips, David Balfour, H Valerie Curran, Martin Dock-
  rell, Jonathan Foulds, Karl Fagerstrom, Kgosi Letlape, Anders Milton, Riccardo
  Polosa et al., "Estimating the Harms of Nicotine-Containing Products Using the MCDA Ap-
  proch," European Addiction Research, 2014, 20 (5), 218­225.

O'Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin, "Optimal Sin Taxes," Journal of Public Economics,
  2006, 90 (10-11), 1825­1849.

Pepper, Jessica K, Sherry L Emery, Kurt M Ribisl, and Noel T Brewer, "How US Adults
  Find Out About Electronic Cigarettes: Implications for Public Health Messages," Nicotine &
  Tobacco Research, 2014, 16 (8), 1140­1144.

Perikleous, Evanthia P, Paschalis Steiropoulos, Emmanouil Paraskakis, Theodoros C
  Constantinidis, and Evangelia Nena, "E-Cigarette Use Among Adolescents: an Overview of
  the Literature and Future Perspectives," Frontiers in Public Health, 2018, 6, 86.

Pesko, Michael F and Casey Warman, "The Effect of Prices on Youth Cigarette
  and   E-Cigarette    Use:      Economic    Substitutes   or   Complements?,"        SSRN,   2017.
  https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3077468.

  and Janet M Currie, "E-Cigarette Minimum Legal Sale Age Laws and Traditional Cigarette
  Use Among Rural Pregnant Teenagers," Journal of Health Economics, 2019, 66, 71­90.

  , Charles J Courtemanche, and Johanna Catherine Maclean, "The Effects of Traditional
  Cigarette and E-Cigarette Taxes on Adult Tobacco Product Use," Forthcoming.

  , Jenna M Hughes, and Fatima S Faisal, "The Influence of Electronic Cigarette Age Pur-
  chasing Restrictions on Adolescent Tobacco and Marijuana Use," Preventive Medicine, 2016, 87,
  207­212.

  , Jidong Huang, Lloyd D Johnston, and Frank J Chaloupka, "E-Cigarette Price Sensitiv-
  ity Among Middle-and High-School Students: Evidence from Monitoring the Future," Addiction,
  2018, 113 (5), 896­906.


                                                45
Petrin, Amil, "Quantifying the Benefits of New Products: The Case of the Minivan," Journal of
  Political Economy, 2002, 110 (4), 705­729.

Pierannunzi, Carol, Machell Town, William Garvin, Frederick E. Shaw, and Lina
  Balluz, "Methodologic Changes in the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System in 2011 and
  Potential Effects on Prevalence Estimates.," MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report,
  2012, 61 (22), 410.

Primack, Brian A, Samir Soneji, Michael Stoolmiller, Michael J Fine, and James D
  Sargent, "Progression to Traditional Cigarette Smoking After Electronic Cigarette Use Among
  US Adolescents and Young Adults," JAMA Pediatrics, 2015, 169 (11), 1018­1023.

Rees-Jones, Alex and Kyle Rozema, "Price Isn't Everything: Behavioral Response around
  Changes in Sin Taxes," 2020. NBER Working Paper No. 25958.

Saffer, Henry, Daniel Dench, Dhaval Dave, and Michael Grossman, "E-Cigarettes and
  Adult Smoking," 2018. NBER Working Paper No. 24212.

  ,   , Michael Grossman, and Dhaval Dave, "E-Cigarettes and Adult Smoking: Evidence
  from Minnesota," 2019. NBER Working Paper No. 26589.

Sandler, Danielle H. and Ryan Sandler, "Multiple Event Studies in Public Finance and
  Labor Economics: A Simulation Study With Applications," Journal of Economic and Social
  Measurement, 2014, 39 (1-2), 31­57.

Sloan, Frank A, Jan Ostermann, Donald H Taylor Jr, Christopher Conover, and
  Gabriel Picone, The Price of Smoking, MIT Press, 2004.

Soneji, Samir, Jessica L Barrington-Trimis, Thomas A Wills, Adam M Leventhal,
  Jennifer B Unger, Laura A Gibson, JaeWon Yang, Brian A Primack, Judy A An-
  drews, Richard A Miech et al., "Association Between Initial Use of E-Cigarettes and Sub-
  sequent Cigarette Smoking Among Adolescents and Young Adults: a Systematic Review and
  Meta-Analysis," JAMA Pediatrics, 2017, 171 (8), 788­797.

Stoklosa, Michal, Jeffrey Drope, and Frank J Chaloupka, "Prices and E-Cigarette Demand:
  Evidence from the European Union," Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 2016, 18 (10), 1973­1980.

Tax Foundation, "Vapor Taxes by State, 2018," https://taxfoundation.org/vapor-taxes-2018//
  2018.

  , "How High Are Vapor Excise Taxes in Your State?," https://taxfoundation.org/state-vapor-
  taxes-2019/ 2019.


                                               46
Trajtenberg, Manuel, "The Welfare Analysis of Product Innovations, with an Application to
  Computed Tomography Scanners," Journal of Political Economy, 1989, 97 (2), 444­479.

Truth       Initiative,         "E-cigarettes:         Facts,       Stats    and     Regulations,"
  https://truthinitiative.org/research-resources/emerging-tobacco-products/e-cigarettes-facts-
  stats-and-regulations 2020.

U.S.    Department        of    Health      and    Human        Services,   "The   Health   Conse-
  quences of Smoking -- 50 Years of Progress:              a Report of the Surgeon General,"
  https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/consequences-smoking-exec-summary.pdf 2014.

Viscusi, W Kip, "Do Smokers Underestimate Risks?," Journal of Political Economy, 1990, 98,
  1253­1269.

  , "Risk Beliefs and Preferences for E-Cigarettes," American Journal of Health Economics, 2016,
  2 (2), 213­240.

  , "Electronic Cigarette Risk Beliefs and Usage after the Vaping Illness Outbreak," Journal of
  Risk and Uncertainty, Forthcoming.

Watkins, Shannon Lea, Stanton A Glantz, and Benjamin W Chaffee, "Association of
  Noncigarette Tobacco Product Use With Future Cigarette Smoking Among Youth in the Popu-
  lation Assessment of Tobacco and Health (PATH) Study, 2013-2015," JAMA Pediatrics, 2018,
  172 (11), 181­187.

Willett, Jeffrey G, Morgane Bennett, Elizabeth C Hair, Haijuan Xiao, Marisa S Green-
  berg, Emily Harvey, Jennifer Cantrell, and Donna Vallone, "Recognition, Use and Per-
  ceptions of JUUL among Youth and Young Adults," Tobacco Control, 2019, 28 (1), 115­116.

Zeller, Mitch, "Response to the Epidemic of E-Cigarette Use, Especially Among Chil-
  dren," https://www.fda.gov/news-events/congressional-testimony/federal-response-epidemic-e-
  cigarette-use-especially-among-children-and-food-and-drug Dec 2019. U.S. Food and Drug Ad-
  ministration.

Zheng, Yuqing, Chen Zhen, Daniel Dench, and James M Nonnemaker, "US Demand for
  Tobacco Products in a System Framework," Health Economics, 2017, 26, 1067­1086.




                                                  47
                        Table 1: Smoking and Vaping Sample Surveys

    Dataset     Population      Observations     Years              Notes
    BRFSS       Adults          5,346,115        2004­2018          Sampling change in 2011
    MTF         Youth           591,740          2005­2018          Inconsistent race data in 2004
    NHIS        Adults          412,888          2004­2018
    NSDUH       Adult sample    590,303          2004­2018          No vaping data
    NSDUH       Youth sample    268,676          2004­2018          No vaping data
                                                 2004, 2006,
    NYTS        Youth           227,813
                                                 2009, 2011­2018
Notes: Datasets are the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS), the National Health Interview
Survey (NHIS), the National Survey of Drug Use and Health (NSDUH), Monitoring the Future (MTF), and
the National Youth Tobacco Survey (NYTS)




                                                   48
                                        Table 2: Own- and Cross-Price Elasticity of Demand for E-cigarettes
                                                                  (a) First Stage and Reduced Form

                                                                                    (1)             (2)               (3)
                                                 Dependent variable:         ln(e-cig price)   ln(cig price)   ln(e-cig units)
                                               ln(e-cig % tax rate + 1)           0.580            0.126            -0.730
                                                                                 (0.048)          (0.051)          (0.144)
                                               ln(cig % tax rate + 1)             -0.011           0.620             0.181
                                                                                 (0.061)          (0.087)          (0.285)
                                               Observations                     285,985          285,985          285,985

                                                                 (b) Instrumental Variables Estimates

                                                (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)               (7)
          Dependent variable:            ln(e-cig units)   ln(e-cig units)   ln(e-cig units)   ln(e-cig units)   ln(e-cig units)   ln(e-cig units)   ln(e-cig units)
          ln(e-cig price)                     -1.318            -1.513            -1.060            -0.924            -1.000            -1.406            -1.290
                                             (0.366)           (0.322)           (0.420)           (0.370)           (0.246)           (0.308)           (0.498)
          ln(cig price)                        0.267            0.612             0.588             0.610             0.655             0.327             0.447
                                             (0.459)           (0.550)           (0.538)           (0.527)           (0.344)           (0.458)           (0.599)
          UPC-cluster FE                        Yes               No               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
          UPC-month FE                          Yes               No                No               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
49




          Division-month FE                     Yes               No                No                No               Yes               Yes               Yes
          Cluster × month trend                 Yes               No                No                No                No               Yes               Yes
          Quasi-panel                           No                No                No                No                No                No               Yes
          Time-varying state controls           Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes                No               Yes
          Observations                      285,985           286,491           286,303           285,985           285,985           285,985           499,664


     Notes: This table presents estimates of the own- and cross-price elasticity of demand for e-cigarettes from Equation (16), using UPC-cluster-month data.
     There are 51 geographic clusters: the two counties that have e-cigarette taxes, each of the contiguous 48 states (excluding those two counties), and Washington,
     D.C. Standard errors are clustered by geographic cluster. Observations are weighted by the UPC's sales in non-taxed clusters in that calendar year, divided
     by total sales across all UPCs in that year in non-taxed clusters. Panel (a) presents the first stage and reduced form, using the same set of controls as in our
     primary estimate in column 1 of Panel (b). Panel (b) presents the instrumental variables estimates. Time-varying state controls are the state unemployment
     rate and beer tax rate as well as indicators for whether the state has an indoor vaping ban, has a medical marijuana law, has passed or implemented a
     prescription drug program, and implemented the Medicaid expansion. Column 7 presents estimates in a "quasi-panel" in which we add zero-sales observations
     for all UPCs that had non-zero sales in cluster s in any prior month, beginning with the month in which the UPC first had sales.
                              Table 3: Effects of Vaping on Smoking

                                                              Adults                     Youth
          ^ (packs per day/share of days)
                                                                0.03                      0.01
          95% confidence interval                           (-0.16, 0.29)             (-0.03, 0.06)

          2018 average vaping (share of days)                   0.024                  0.053
          Effect of vaping on smoking (packs/day)              0.00083                0.00068
          95% confidence interval                        (-0.00374, 0.00690)    (-0.00138, 0.00329)

          2018 average smoking (packs/day)                      0.082                     0.006
          Effect of vaping on smoking (%)                        1.0                       10.6
          95% confidence interval                            (-4.5, 8.4)              (-21.4, 51.2)

          2018 implied total smoking (million packs)            7,495                     58.7
          Effect of vaping on smoking (million packs)            76.0                      6.2
          95% confidence interval                          (-340.9, 629.7)            (-12.6, 30.0)

          2004­2018 smoking decrease (packs/day)                0.071                    0.030
          Effect of vaping on smoking (% of decrease)            -1.2                     -2.3
          95% confidence interval                            (-9.8, 5.3)              (-11.1, 4.7)
                                                                               dq c
Notes: This table presents estimates of the substitution parameter  := dq      e and further analysis.  We
                                                                               
compute the effect of vaping on smoking (packs/day) by multiplying    ^ by average vaping. We compute the
effect of vaping on smoking (%) by dividing the effect of vaping on smoking (packs/day) by average packs
per day smoked in 2018. We compute the effect of vaping on smoking in 2018 (million packs) by multiplying
the effect of vaping on smoking (%) by the total smoking in 2018 (million packs) implied by the sample
survey data. We compute the effect of vaping on smoking (% of decrease) by dividing the effect of vaping on
smoking (packs per day) by the change in packs per day smoked from 2004­2018. The confidence intervals
for ^ reflect the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of estimates from 200 bootstrap replications, where we draw
bootstrap samples by demographic cell.




                                                    50
                             Table 4: Parameters for Policy Analysis

 Object    Description and units                                   Mean     Data source
           E-cigarette own-price elasticity                        -1.318   RMS (Table 2)
 adult     E-cig effect on smoking (packs/day vaped)               0.035    Figure 8
 youth     E-cig effect on smoking (packs/day vaped)               0.013    Figure 8
 sadult    Population share adults                                 0.910    2018 American Community Survey
 syouth    Population share youth                                  0.090    2018 American Community Survey
 p
 ~e        E-liquid price ($/ml)                                   3.90     E-cigarette User Survey
 ~c
           Average cigarette tax ($/pack)                          2.92     Tax Policy Center (2019), ACS
 ~e
           Average e-liquid tax ($/ml)                             0.233    Tax Foundation, RMS, Census
  e
 qadult    Share of person-days vaped                              0.024    BRFSS, NHIS 2018
  e
 qyouth    Share of person-days vaped                              0.053    MTF, NYTS 2018
           Average e-liquid use (ml/day vaped)                     0.58     E-cigarette User Survey
           Nicotine in e-liquid relative to cigarettes (ml/pack)   0.7      CDC (2020)
 c         Smoking externality ($/pack)                            0.64     Sloan et al. (2004)
           Health harms from vaping relative to smoking            0.373    E-cigarette Expert Survey
           Health harms from vaping relative to smoking            0.05     McNeill et al. (2018)
 Hc        Private health cost of smoking ($/pack)                 44.4     Gruber and Kszegi (2001)
           Present focus                                           0.670    Chaloupka et al. (2019)
           Present focus                                           0.9      Gruber and Kszegi (2001)
           Internalities for youth relative to adults              1.474    E-cigarette Expert Survey
Notes: This table summarizes the parameters used for policy analysis. All dollar values are inflated to 2018
dollars. BRFSS, NHIS, MTF, and NYTS refer to sample surveys described in Table 1. Cigarette and e-liquid
tax rates are averages across all U.S. states, weighted by population; the cigarette tax includes the federal
cigarette tax of $1.01 per pack.




                                                     51
 Table 5: Optimal Tax and Welfare Effects of a Ban under Alternative Assumptions
                                   (a) Optimal E-cigarette Tax ($/ml)

                                                             (1)                      (2)
                                                         = 0.05                    = 0.37
         Parameter assumptions                      (McNeill et al. 2018)   (mean, Expert Survey)
         1. Primary                                         1.20                     6.27
         2. Present focus only,  = 0.9                      0.52                     3.03
         3. Present focus only,  = 0.670                    1.88                     9.51
         4. Belief bias only                              -37.65                    -16.87
         5. Jin et al. (2015) internality only              0.48                     2.85
         6. Rescale distortions so c =    ~c                0.23                     1.68

         7.  =    ^ from Nielsen RMS                         0.20                    5.27
         8.  and  from Nielsen RMS without                  -1.92                    3.15
         time trends
         9.  = combined      ^                               0.60                     5.68
         10. Perfect complements                             6.58                    11.65
         11. Perfect substitutes                            -5.00                     0.07
         12.  c = c adult                                    0.80                     5.87
         13. sadult = 0, syouth = 1                          1.32                     8.10
         14. sadult = 1, syouth = 0                          1.17                     5.87

                         (b) Welfare Effects of E-cigarette Ban ($/person-year)

                                                            (1)                       (2)
                                                         = 0.05                    = 0.37
         Parameter assumptions                      (McNeill et al. 2018)   (mean, Expert Survey)
         1. Primary                                        -3.91                    24.63
         2. Present focus only,  = 0.9                     -9.43                     6.45
         3. Present focus only,  = 0.670                   -0.14                    42.73
         4. Belief bias only                             -222.10                   -105.36
         5. Jin et al. (2015) internality only             -8.06                     5.34
         6. Rescale distortions so c =    ~c               -9.35                    -1.11

         7.  =    ^ from Nielsen RMS                        -9.48                    18.96
         8.  and  from Nielsen RMS without                 -23.71                     4.72
         time trends
         9.  = combined      ^                              -7.21                    21.26
         10. Perfect complements                            25.84                    54.38
         11. Perfect substitutes                           -38.38                    -9.88
         12.  c = c adult                                   -6.09                    22.23
         13. sadult = 0, syouth = 1                         -6.36                    69.13
         14. sadult = 1, syouth = 0                         -3.66                    20.21
         15.  = -.5                                        -16.49                    12.00
         16.  = -1                                          -5.56                    22.94

Notes: Panel (a) presents estimates of the optimal e-cigarette tax using Equation (14). Panel (b) presents
estimates of the welfare effects of an e-cigarette ban relative to current tax rates using Equation (15). The
two columns present results under different assumptions for , the health harms from vaping relative to
smoking. Each row varies a specific parameter assumption, and all other parameters are drawn from their
distributions.

                                                     52
              Figure 1: National E-cigarette and Cigarette Sales over Time
                                                                                        (a) Combustible Cigarettes

                                                            20

                                                            18
                 U.S. cigarette sales (billions of packs)


                                                            16

                                                            14

                                                            12

                                                            10

                                                                8

                                                                6

                                                                4

                                                                2

                                                                0
                                                                04

                                                                      05

                                                                            06

                                                                                   07

                                                                                         08

                                                                                                09

                                                                                                      10

                                                                                                               11

                                                                                                                      12

                                                                                                                            13

                                                                                                                                  14

                                                                                                                                        15

                                                                                                                                              16

                                                                                                                                                    17

                                                                                                                                                          18
                                                             20

                                                                     20

                                                                           20

                                                                                 20

                                                                                        20

                                                                                               20

                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                               Year


                                                                                                (b) E-cigarettes

                                                            7


                                                            6
                U.S. e-cigarette sales ($ billions)




                                                            5


                                                            4


                                                            3


                                                            2


                                                            1


                                                            0
                                                              08


                                                                       09


                                                                                  10


                                                                                          11


                                                                                                  12


                                                                                                            13


                                                                                                                       14


                                                                                                                                  15


                                                                                                                                         16


                                                                                                                                                17


                                                                                                                                                           18
                                                            20


                                                                     20


                                                                                20


                                                                                        20


                                                                                                20


                                                                                                          20


                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                                20


                                                                                                                                       20


                                                                                                                                              20


                                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                            Year



Notes: Data are from the Euromonitor Passport Cigarette and E-Vapour Products Databases.




                                                                                                          53
                                                                    Figure 2: Smoking and Vaping Trends
                                                                                              (a) Adults


                                                              Combustible Cigarettes                                                                           Electronic Cigarettes
                                                    .2                                                                                             .2




                                                                                                        Average e-cigarette use (share of days)
               Average cigarette use (packs/day)




                                                   .15                                                                                            .15




                                                    .1                                                                                             .1




                                                   .05                                                                                            .05




                                                    0                                                                                              0
                                                         04 0506 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18                                                    2016              2017            2018
                                                                        Survey year                                                                                    Survey year




                                                                              BRFSS                     NHIS                                                           NSDUH




                                                                                              (b) Youth


                                                              Combustible Cigarettes                                                                           Electronic Cigarettes
                                                   .08                                                                                            .08
                                                                                                        Average e-cigarette use (share of days)
               Average cigarette use (packs/day)




                                                   .06                                                                                            .06




                                                   .04                                                                                            .04




                                                   .02                                                                                            .02




                                                    0                                                                                              0
                                                         04 0506 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18                                                    2014    2015      2016     2017   2018
                                                                        Survey year                                                                                    Survey year




                                                                               MTF                     NSDUH                                                            NYTS




Notes: This figure presents combustible cigarette and e-cigarette use by survey and year. The BRFSS
sampling frame changes in 2011, causing a jump in reported cigarette use. The NSDUH does not record
data on vaping.

                                                                                                   54
                       Figure 3: Event Study of E-cigarette Tax Changes
                                                                                     (a) First Stage: Effect on ln(Price)


                                                                      1


                       Coefficient on ln( (tax/(pre-tax price) + 1)




                                                                      .5




                                                                      0


                                                                           -6   -5    -4   -3   -2   -1      0      1    2   3   4   5   6
                                                                                                 Quarters after tax change



                                                                       (b) Reduced Form: Effect on ln(Quantity Sold + 1)

                                                                       1
                       Coefficient on ln( (tax/(pre-tax price) + 1)




                                                                       0




                                                                      -1




                                                                      -2




                                                                      -3
                                                                           -6   -5    -4   -3   -2   -1      0      1    2   3   4   5   6
                                                                                                 Quarters after tax change



Notes: This figure presents estimates of the q parameters from Equation (17), an event study of the effects
of e-cigarette tax changes. Panel (a) presents the first stage regression of ln(e-cigarette price) on the change
in the log tax variable. Panel (b) presents the reduced form regression of the ln(e-cigarette units sold) on
the change in the log tax variable.




                                                                                                       55
                          Figure 4: Demographic Predictors of Vaping
                                                    (a) Adults

                              Asian
                              Black
                           Hispanic
                     Other/missing
                               Male
                                 HS
                     Less than HS
                     Some college
                         Income Q2
                         Income Q3
                         Income Q4
                         Income Q5
                         Age 25-29
                         Age 30-49
                         Age 50-64
                            Age 65+
                   Omitted category
                                      -.04          -.02            0              .02    .04
                                                    Vaping coefficient (share of days)


                                                    (b) Youth


                             Black

                      Other/missing

                          Hispanic

                              Male

                           Grade 7

                           Grade 8

                           Grade 9

                          Grade 10

                          Grade 11

                          Grade 12

                   Omitted category

                                             -.02       0             .02           .04   .06
                                                    Vaping coefficient (share of days)



Notes: These figures present coefficients from Equation (20), a regression of vaping on demographic indi-
cators. For adults, the omitted categories are white, female, college graduate, the lowest income quintile,
and age group 18­24. For youth, the omitted categories are white, female, and grade 6. Panel (a) pools
2016­2018 data from BRFSS and NHIS; Panel (b) pools 2014­2018 data from MTF and NYTS. Standard
errors are clustered by demographic cell.
                                                        56
  Figure 5: Smoking and Vaping Trends for High- versus Low-Vaping Demographics
                                                                                                (a) Adults

                                                                 Combustible Cigarettes                                                                             Electronic Cigarettes

                                                       .2                                                                                             .2




                                                                                                           Average e-cigarette use (share of days)
                  Average cigarette use (packs/day)




                                                      .15                                                                                            .15



                                                       .1                                                                                             .1



                                                      .05                                                                                            .05



                                                       0                                                                                              0
                                                            04 0506 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18                                                    2016                2017            2018
                                                                           Survey year                                                                                      Survey year




                                                                           Above median vaping                                                                    Below median vaping




                                                                                                 (b) Youth

                                                                 Combustible Cigarettes                                                                             Electronic Cigarettes
                                                      .08                                                                                            .08
                                                                                                           Average e-cigarette use (share of days)
                  Average cigarette use (packs/day)




                                                      .06                                                                                            .06




                                                      .04                                                                                            .04




                                                      .02                                                                                            .02




                                                       0                                                                                              0
                                                            04 0506 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18                                                    2014      2015      2016     2017   2018
                                                                           Survey year                                                                                      Survey year




                                                                           Above median vaping                                                                    Below median vaping




Notes: These figures present combustible cigarette and e-cigarette use for demographics with above- versus
below-median predicted vaping, as predicted by Equation (20). Average cigarette use for each group is
residual of dataset controls, which address the 2011 BRFSS sampling frame change and rescale cigarette use
to levels in the NSDUH.

                                                                                                      57
    Figure 6: Difference in Smoking Trends for High versus Low Predicted Vaping
                                                                                                     (a) Adults

                                                              .16                                                                                       .16

                    Difference in cigarette use (packs/day)
                                                              .14                                                                                       .14




                                                                                                                                                               Substitutes | Complements 
                                                              .12                                                                                       .12


                                                               .1                                                                                       .1

                                                                           Perfect complement/substitute bounds
                                                              .08                                                                                       .08
                                                                           Differences fit on pre-2013 data

                                                              .06                                                                                       .06
                                                                           Differences fit on post-2013 data


                                                              .04                                                                                       .04
                                                                04

                                                                      05

                                                                            06

                                                                                  07

                                                                                        08

                                                                                              09

                                                                                                   10

                                                                                                         11

                                                                                                                   12

                                                                                                                        13

                                                                                                                             14

                                                                                                                                  15

                                                                                                                                       16

                                                                                                                                            17

                                                                                                                                                 18
                                                               20

                                                                     20

                                                                           20

                                                                                20

                                                                                      20

                                                                                           20

                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                                                         20

                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                          Year


                                                                                                     (b) Youth

                                                                      .1                                                                         .1

                                                                     .08                                                                         .08
                    Difference in cigarette use (packs/day)




                                                                                                                                                               Substitutes | Complements 
                                                                     .06                                                                         .06

                                                                     .04                                                                         .04

                                                                     .02                                                                         .02

                                                                      0                                                                          0

                                                                    -.02          Perfect complement/substitute bounds
                                                                                                                                                 -.02

                                                                    -.04                                                                         -.04
                                                                                  Differences fit on pre-2013 data
                                                                    -.06                                                                         -.06
                                                                                  Differences fit on post-2013 data
                                                                    -.08                                                                         -.08

                                                                     -.1                                                                         -.1
                                                                      20 4
                                                                      20 5
                                                                      20 6
                                                                      20 7
                                                                      20 8
                                                                      20 9
                                                                      20 0
                                                                      20 1
                                                                      20 2
                                                                      20 3
                                                                      20 4
                                                                      20 5
                                                                      20 6
                                                                      20 7
                                                                        18
                                                                        0
                                                                        0
                                                                        0
                                                                        0
                                                                        0
                                                                        0
                                                                        1
                                                                        1
                                                                        1
                                                                        1
                                                                        1
                                                                        1
                                                                        1
                                                                        1
                                                                      20




                                                                                                          Year



Notes: These figures present the difference in cigarette use for demographics with above- versus below-median
predicted vaping, as predicted by Equation (20). Average cigarette use for each group is residual of dataset
controls, which address the 2011 BRFSS sampling frame change and rescale cigarette use to levels in the
NSDUH. The perfect complement (substitute) bounds show the difference in cigarette use that would be
expected if daily vaping were a perfect complement (substitute) for smoking one pack of cigarettes per day.
To construct perfect complement (substitute) bounds, we predict the difference in cigarette use using the
pre-2013 time trend, then add (subtract) the difference in share of days vaped.

                                                                                                              58
                                                           Figure 7: Event Study of E-cigarette Introduction
                                                                               (a) Adults

                                                                 .6
                                                                 .5
                  Association between smoking and vaping

                                                                 .4
                      (packs per day / share of days)


                                                                 .3
                                                                 .2
                                                                 .1
                                                                  0
                                                                -.1
                                                                -.2
                                                                -.3
                                                                -.4
                                                                -.5
                                                                -.6
                                                                 2004-2010         2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
                                                                                          Year


                                                                               (b) Youth

                                                                 .6
                                                                 .5
                  Association between smoking and vaping




                                                                 .4
                      (packs per day / share of days)




                                                                 .3
                                                                 .2
                                                                 .1
                                                                  0
                                                                -.1
                                                                -.2
                                                                -.3
                                                                -.4
                                                                -.5
                                                                -.6
                                                                 2004-2010         2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
                                                                                          Year



Notes: These figures present estimates of t from Equation (24), a regression of cigarette use on predicted
vaping interacted with year indicators, controlling for linear time trends and other controls. We estimate one
indicator for the 2004­2010 period, and 2012 is the omitted year category. The confidence intervals reflect
the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of estimates from 200 bootstrap replications, where we draw bootstrap
samples by demographic cell.
                                                                                  59
                 Figure 8: Substitution Parameters and Robustness Checks
                                                            (a) Adults

                                Preferred estimate
                          Control for 2003 smoking
                            Vaping begins in 2012
                           No imputed vaping data
                           Predictors excl. income
                         Predictors excl. education
                               Predictors excl. age
                              Predictors excl. race
                               Predictors excl. sex
                         BRFSS smoking data only
                          NHIS smoking data only
                        NSDUH smoking data only
                                                      -.6 -.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6
                                                             Association between smoking and vaping
                                                                  (packs per day / share of days)



                                                            (b) Youth

                                Preferred estimate
                          Control for 2003 smoking
                            Vaping begins in 2012
                           No imputed vaping data
                            Demog. cell predictors
                           Drop race other/missing
                             Predictors excl. grade
                              Predictors excl. race
                               Predictors excl. sex
                           MTF smoking data only
                        NSDUH smoking data only
                          NYTS smoking data only
                                                      -.2   -.15 -.1 -.05      0     .05     .1  .15   .2
                                                             Association between smoking and vaping
                                                                 (packs per day / share of days)



Notes: These figures present estimates of  from Equation (21), a regession of smoking on predicted vaping
controlling for controlling for linear time trends and other controls. Control for 2003 smoking includes
additional controls for the 2003 cigarette use in person i's demographic cell and the interaction of that
variable with a linear time trend. Vaping begins in 2012 assumes zero vaping for all years before 2012
(instead of 2013 in the preferred estimate) and imputes vaping beginning in 2012 (instead of 2013). Demog.
cell predictors uses demographic cells, rather than linear demographic groups, in Gi . Drop race other/missing
drops all observations with "other" or missing race/ethnicity. No imputed vaping data uses only observed
vaping instead of imputing missing data beginning in 2013. Predictors excl. age (or race, etc.) omits
age (or race, etc.) from the predictors in Equation (20). BRFSS (or NHIS, etc.) smoking data only uses
only BRFSS (or NHIS, etc.) data when estimating Equation (5). Drop race other/missing drops all youth
whose race/ethnicity is not Black, Hispanic, or white from both the predicted vaping and the smoking effects
regressions. The confidence intervals reflect the 2.5th60
                                                        and 97.5th percentiles of estimates from 200 bootstrap
replications, where we draw bootstrap samples by demographic cell.
   Figure 9: Expert Survey: Effects of Vaping on Quality-Adjusted Life Expectancy

                            .15




                             .1
                 Fraction




                            .05




                             0
                                  0   .1   .2      .3    .4    .5   .6   .7     .8    .9   1   1.1 1.2
                                                Health harms from vaping relative to smoking


Notes: Our expert survey asked, "If smoking one pack per day reduces quality-adjusted life expectancy
(compared to Control) by 100 units, by how many units do you think vaping every day would reduce
quality-adjusted life expectancy (compared to Control)?" This figure presents the distribution of responses
across experts, after dividing by 100. 93 percent of experts who completed the survey responded to this
question.




                                                                61
      Figure 10: Expert Survey: Reasons for Disagreement with Prior Conclusions


                     I generally agree, but my belief is
                   different when measured in QALYs

                             E-cigarettes are different
                      in the U.S. compared to abroad


                               New research evidence


                   Disagree with how the researchers
                      interpreted research at the time


                                     Devices changed


                                                 Other


                                                           0          .1       .2      .3     .4       .5
                                                                    Share (of experts who disagreed)


Notes: Our expert survey compared respondents' answers to prior conclusions by Nutt et al. (2014) and
McNeill et al. (2018) that vaping was at least 95 percent safer than smoking. For the 78 percent of experts who
were more pessimistic than those prior assessments, we asked why, allowing them to select multiple reasons.
This figure presents the share of those respondents who selected each potential reason for disagreement.




                                                               62
Figure 11: Optimal Tax and Welfare Effects of a Ban across Monte Carlo Simulations
                                                (a) Optimal E-cigarette Tax

                            .15




                             .1
                 Fraction




                            .05




                             0
                                  2




                                                                                                      0
                                       -1

                                            0

                                                  1

                                                       2

                                                             3

                                                                   4

                                                                         5

                                                                               6

                                                                                     7

                                                                                            8

                                                                                                9
                                  -




                                                                                                    1
                                                 Optimal e-cigarette tax (dollars per ml)


                                        (b) Welfare Effects of an E-Cigarette Ban

                             .3


                            .25


                             .2
                 Fraction




                            .15


                             .1


                            .05


                             0
                                      -50                            0                              50
                                             Welfare effect of ban (dollars per person-year)



Notes: Panel (a) presents the optimal e-cigarette tax from Equation (14) over the distibution of Monte Carlo
simulations. The vertical line at $0.89/ml represents the average existing e-cigarette tax rate. Panel (b)
presents the welfare effects of an e-cigarette ban compared to current tax rates from Equation (15).


                                                              63
                                       Figure 12: Contribution of Parameters to Policy Uncertainty


                                             E-cig to cig harms ratio ()

                                                         Present bias ()

                                   E-cig effect on smoking (adult) (adult)
  Parameter held fixed ...




                                                                     e
                             Share of person-days vaped (youth) (q    youth      )
                                                                     e
                             Share of person-days vaped (adult) (q       adult)

                                  E-cig effect on smoking (youth) (youth)

                                                Average e-liquid use ()

                                                 E-cig price elasticity ()

                               Ratio of youth to adult e-cig distortion ()

                                                                                     0                .2               .4                .6                .8              1
                                                                                     Variance in welfare from an e-cig ban, as a fraction of variance with no fixed parameter


Notes: This figure presents the variance across Monte Carlo simulations of the welfare effects of an e-cigarette
ban from Equation (15), holding the reported parameter fixed at its mean.




                                                                                                  64
 Figure 13: Optimal Tax and Welfare Effects of a Ban as a Function of Health Harms
                                                                                                                        (a) Optimal E-cigarette Tax

                                                            40
                 Optimal e-cigarette tax (dollars per ml)
                                                            35




                                                                       from Public Health England (2018)
                                                            30




                                                                                                                                     Mean  from Expert Survey
                                                            25

                                                            20

                                                            15

                                                            10

                                                             5

                                                             0

                                                             -5

                                                            -10
                                                                  0         .1                                        .2     .3      .4    .5      .6      .7     .8                              .9   1
                                                                                                                     Health harms from vaping relative to smoking ()

                                                                                                                          Mean                                        95% CI from MC estimation



                                                                                         (b) Welfare Effects of an E-cigarette Ban

                                                            200
                                                                                 from Public Health England (2018)




                                                            175
                                                                                                                                           Mean  from Expert Survey




                                                            150
                          Dollars per person-year




                                                            125

                                                            100

                                                             75

                                                             50

                                                             25

                                                              0

                                                            -25

                                                            -50
                                                                  0                    .1                             .2     .3      .4    .5      .6      .7    .8                               .9   1
                                                                                                                     Health harms from vaping relative to smoking ()

                                                                                                                           Mean                                       95% CI from MC estimation



Notes: Panel (a) presents the mean and 95 percent confidence interval of optimal e-cigarette tax rates from
Equation (14) over the distribution of Monte Carlo simulations, for different values of , the health harms
from vaping relative to smoking. Panel (b) presents the welfare effects of an e-cigarette ban compared to
current tax rates from Equation (15).

                                                                                                                                                 65
Online Appendix                  Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence




                                     Appendix

                               For Online Publication



             Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence

                           Hunt Allcott and Charlie Rafkin




                                         1
Online Appendix                                             Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


A Theory Appendix
A.1        Optimal Taxes
After substituting the utility function and consumer budget constraint, social welfare at time 0 is

                                                    
                                        W ( ) =           t s [u (qt ; St ) - p · qt + zt + Tt ] .             (25)
                                                    ,t
                                                                          
Substituting in the balanced budget constraint Tt =                             ( -  ) · qt gives

                                              
                               W ( ) =              t s [u (qt ; St ) - p · qt + zt + ( -  ) · qt ] .          (26)
                                              ,t

                                    k on type  's value function is the effect on current period
The effect of a marginal change in qt
           u (qt ;St )
utility,     qtk            - pk , plus the discounted effect on the continuation value,  VS
                                                                                            (St+1 ) St+1
                                                                                             t+1
                                                                                                   · qk . Thus,
                                                                                                          t
recalling that p is the tax-inclusive price, the derivative of social welfare with respect to  j is

                [(                                   ) k        (    ) k       ]
Wr ( )  t          u (qt ; St )   V (St+1 ) St+1    k dqt           k dqt
      =       s                 +          ·     -p       - qt +  - 
                                                             k    k          k
                                                                          + qt
 j                   qtk           St+1        k
                                              qt      d j             d j
        ,t,k
                [             k  (      ) k]
                           dqt         k dqt
      =       s - (p, St ) j +  - 
             t     k               k
                           d               d j
                ,t,k
                              (                      ) dq k
            =           s  -
                        t           k
                                         k
                                          (p, St )
                                                           t
                                                               ,                                               (27)
                                                         d j
                ,t,k

                                                     j
where the second line follows from the definition of   (p, St ) in Equation (5) and the third line
follows from the definition of k
                                (p, St ) in Equation (9). Setting equal to zero and re-arranging gives

                                      j
                                    dqt                         j
                                                              dqt         (                     ) -j
                                                j                           -j                -j dqt
                j             t s       =   t
                                              s   ( p , S t )     +   t
                                                                        s      ( p , S t ) -          ,        (28)
                                    d j                       d j                                 d j
                       ,t                     ,t                           ,t

                                          j
                                    t s dqt
and dividing by              ,t         d j   gives Equation (10).

A.2        Welfare Effect of a Ban
The welfare effect of banning e-cigarettes beginning in period 0 is




                                                                     2
Online Appendix                                            Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence



                                         
                                     W ( ) e
                        W =                   d
                                 ~e
                                         e
                                                (                   ) dq j
                               =          t s  j - j     ( p , S t )     t
                                                                          e
                                                                            d e
                                  e
                                 ~ ,t,j                                 d
                                         [                                                  ]
                                                   dq j
                                                                                    dq j
                               =     t s          j t   d e -            j             t
                                                                           (p, St ) d e d
                                                                                          e
                                                                                              .                                      (29)
                                             ~e    d e               ~e
                                                                     
                                    ,t,j


      Integrating by parts gives

                                                                                                           
                                                                
                          dq j                              j
                                                                                                     j
                                                                                                              
                         j t   d e          =            j qt        -           e
                                                                                qt d e =         ~j qt
                                                                                                       -          e
                                                                                                                 qt d e .            (30)
                   ~e
                          d e                                            ~e
                                                                                                           ~e
                                                                                                           
               j                                    j           ~e
                                                                                             j


      Substituting Equations (12) and (30) into Equation (29) gives

                                                                                                              
                                                                                                 
                    W =                   t s -                  e
                                                                qt d e +                j
                                                                                    ~j qt
                                                                                          -           j  j 
                                                                                                      t qt .
                                    ,t                     ~e
                                                                                j                j


Re-arranging gives Equation (13).

A.3     Empirical Implementation
We impose two assumptions to estimate both the optimal tax and the welfare effect of a ban.
                                                             j
Assumption 1. Homogeneous and constant own-price elasticity: t =  j , for all (, t).

Assumption 2. Zero covariance: j          j    j
                                (p, St ), t , qt , and t have pairwise zero covariance conditional
on .
                                              j                                 -j
                                            dqt /dpj            j             dqt  /dpj
      Optimal tax. Define  j =                   j          and t :=              j        as the own-price elasticity and substi-
                                                qt /pj                          dqt /dpj
                                                                                                                       j
                                                                                                                     dqt /dpj
tution parameters. The  and t defined in Section 1 are for j = e. Since  j =                                           j        , we have
                                                                                                                      qt /pj
  j                       -j
dqt         j           dqt      j j j j
dpj
      =  j qt /pj and    dpj
                               = t  q /p . Under Assumption 1, the optimal tax from Equation (10)
becomes                                                                                (                )
                                          j j
                                     t s qt  (p, St )                         t s qt t -
                                                                                   j j   j           -j
                                                                                          (p, St ) - t
                               ,t                                    ,t
                    j =                                j
                                                                 +                                j
                                                                                                                 .                   (31)
                                                t
                                                    s qt                                     t s qt
                                       ,t                                              ,t

Adding Assumption 2 yields


                                                                         3
Online Appendix                              Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


                                                                  (          )
                                         s qj j
                                                           s q  -
                                                              j j
                                                                    
                                                                     j
                                                                       - t
                                                                          -j


                             j =               j
                                                   +   
                                                                           j
                                                                                     .              (32)
                                            s q                         s q
                                                                    

Welfare effect of ban. We add a further functional form assumption to identify the perceived
consumer surplus change.
                                                                              e (p)d e = q e p
                                                                                             ~  e
Assumption 3. Perceived consumer surplus change: -                      ~e
                                                                             q             -2 .

      Under Assumption 3, Equation (13) becomes

                                                                    
                                           p
                                           ~ e    j ( j           )
                     W =           t s qt
                                        e
                                               - qt  (p, St ) -  j  .                               (33)
                                          -2
                             ,t                             j


Adding Assumption 2 yields
                                                                                             
                                 1                     ~e
                                                       p                       (         )
                          W =                s qe
                                                                -       qj
                                                                           j
                                                                            -
                                                                              j 
                                                                                 .                  (34)
                                1-                     -2
                                                                    j

Multiplying by 1 -  gives the average per-period welfare effect:
                                                           
                                            p
                                            ~ e    j( j  )
                           W =        s qe
                                                - q  -  j  .                                        (35)
                                           -2
                                                                j


B     Data Appendix
B.1     RMS Data
B.1.1     Data Construction

We construct two datasets: (1) a UPC-cluster-month dataset of e-cigarette units sold and prices
data, and (2) a UPC-cluster-month dataset of cigarette units sold and prices data.
      Sample restrictions. We exclude data from stores that are not observed for the full 2013­
2017 sample period. Since UPCs with low sales are more likely to enter and exit the sample and
create an unbalanced panel, we drop UPCs with less than $100,000 in total sales from the analysis
sample.
      Weeks that occur in two months are assigned to the later month (i.e., the month in which the
week's Saturday falls).



                                                       4
Online Appendix                           Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


    Weights. For simplicity, we refer to our estimates as being weighted by sales, but we do
not weight by raw sales because sales are endogenous to the tax rate. We construct e-cigarette
weights as follows. We construct the total sales for a given UPC-year that occur in states without
e-cigarette taxes. We then divide this number by the total e-cigarette sales that occur in untaxed
states in that year. Cigarette sales are nearly always subject to some tax. To construct weights for
cigarette analyses, we construct the total sales in a given UPC-year (excluding that observation's
own UPC-year-cluster sales), as a fraction of the total sales in that year across UPCs (excluding
sales in the given UPC-year-cluster). We exclude the observation's own UPC-cluster-year sales
from the numerator and denominator to account for the fact that sales are endogenous to the tax
environment.
    E-cigarette dataset. We construct unit-weighted prices at the UPC-cluster-month level. The
cigarette prices in this dataset are cluster-month unit-weighted cigarette post-tax prices, including
the monthly cigarette sales tax per pack. The cigarette tax rate is the state and national cigarette
tax in a given state-month, divided by the unit-weighted cigarette post-tax price less the state-
month cigarette tax.
    Cigarette dataset. We convert Nielsen units and prices per unit to packs. We construct unit-
weighted prices at the UPC-cluster-month level. The cigarette tax rate is the state and national
cigarette tax as a fraction of the observation's unit-weighted UPC-month cigarette post-tax price
less the state cigarette tax, excluding the UPC's own cluster. We drop observations where the
official cigarette tax is more than the scanner post-tax price. We construct unit-weighted cluster-
month e-cigarette prices, and we obtain the e-cigarette tax by using the algorithm in the following
subsection. Since we are working with cluster-month data, we use the sales-weighted e-cigarette
size across all clusters and the unit-weighted price across untreated clusters.

B.1.2   Constructing the E-cigarette Tax Variable

There are two types of e-cigarette taxes: ad-valorem taxes (where the tax is a percentage of the
UPC price) and specific taxes (where the tax is a constant per milliliter of e-liquid). In all clusters,
                                                                    represent the ad-valorem
taxes collected are included in the UPC price recorded in RMS. Let st
                                                      in ad-valorem cluster-months, for all UPCs
tax rate in cluster s. With full pass-through, kst = st
k . To construct a consistent instrument that appropriately scales the magnitude of the tax across
different regimes, we convert specific taxes to ad-valorem taxes. For each UPC-month, we generate
the unit-weighted price pk , across all months, using only clusters with no e-cigarette taxes. Let
sizek denote the mililiters of e-liquid contained in UPC k . The ad-valorem tax for UPC k in a
                                                                                            st ·sizek
cluster s with a specific tax st per mililiter of e-liquid in month t is given by kst =       p
                                                                                                      .   In
                                                                                                k
the final analysis, we drop the 0.12% of the total observations have kst > 1 or for which we do not
observe any sales in states with no e-cigarette taxes (to construct pk ). Summarizing,




                                                   5
Online Appendix                                       Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


                                                                                             
                                            0,             s has no e-cigarette tax          
                                                                                             
                                            ,
                                           st         s has an ad-valorem e-cigarette tax
                             kst =                                                              .
                                                                                             
                                        st ·sizek
                                                  ,     s has a specific e-cigarette tax     
                                          p k

          The RMS data do not consistently record the size, in milliliters of liquid, of vaping products.
We begin with the list of UPC sizes generously shared by the authors of Cotti et al. (2020). We
augment their list with hand-collected information on the mililiters of liquid for the largest UPCs.
For UPCs where we could accurately record size, we convert the per-ml taxes to taxes that are a
fraction of the UPC price. In the final dataset, we observe 79 percent of the observations' sizes.
For other UPCs, we convert prices to the average sales-weighted size for UPCs whose size we did
record.
          The city of Chicago enacted a separate tax several months before Cook County. Because we
only observe the county in which sales take place, we assume that: (i) taxes that occur in Chicago
apply throughout Cook County, Illinois, and: (ii) the Cook County tax was additive on top of the
Chicago tax. Moreover, Chicago enacted a tax of $0.80 per unit or $0.55 per ml of e-liquid. Because
of the difficulty in converting RMS units to the units taxed, we assume Chicago's tax is per ml of
e-liquid.
                                                               
          In the event study analysis, we construct a variable kstq that varies by UPC, cluster, calendar
month, and event quarter. In months prior to treatment in specific tax states, where ksq varies by
k and q , we construct s0 , the size of the specific tax in cluster s in event-month 0, and generate
              s0 ·sizek 29
kstq =                 .
                pk


                              Table A1: E-cigarette Tax Changes Through 2017

                   Area (state, county, or city)      Date               Tax rate
                   California                         4/2017, 7/2017     27.3%, 65% of wholesale price
                   Chicago, IL                        1/2016             $0.80 per unit / $0.55 per ml
                   Cook County, IL                    5/2016             $0.20 per ml
                   Kansas                             7/2016, 7/2017     $0.20, $0.05 per ml
                   Louisiana                          7/2015             $0.05 per ml
                   Minnesota                          8/2010, 7/2013     35%, 95% of wholesale price
                   Montgomery County, MD              8/2015             30% of wholesale price
                   North Carolina                     6/2015             $0.05 per ml
                   Pennsylvania                       7/2016             40% of retail price
                   Washington, DC                     10/2015, 10/2016   67%, 65% of wholesale price
                   West Virginia                      7/2016             $0.075 per ml
Notes: Data are from Pesko, Courtemanche and Maclean (Forthcoming, Appendix Table 2) and Tax Foun-
dation (2019). The table excludes changes in Alaska, which does not appear in the RMS data.
     29
          For consistency with other sample restrictions, we drop the pre-treatment observations where the implied ksq >
1.


                                                               6
Online Appendix                         Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


B.2     Sample Surveys
This section details our construction of harmonized samples across the BRFSS, MTF, NHIS, NS-
DUH, and NYTS.

B.2.1    Sample Weights

All surveys excluding MTF come with nationally representative sample weights; MTF provides
relative sampling odds, which we transform to sample weights. We use the survey-provided sample
weights for adults. For youth, we rescale the sampling weights by the sum of weights within dataset-
grade-year grade. Hence, within dataset, each observation retains its sampling weight relative to
other observations within the dataset. Once we append the datasets, the sampling weights are
appropriately scaled with respect to one another.

B.2.2    Income quintile construction

We construct income quintile within dataset-year, including sampling weights. Income is often
recorded in bins, and occasionally the bins cut across quintile cut points. We assign to the lower
quintile except in the case of the NHIS's first quintile, because doing so would only four quintiles
in some years. To ensure there are five income quintiles in every year, we re-assign incomes that
cut across the first and second quintiles to income quintile 1 in the NHIS prior to 2006 and income
quintile 2 for 2007­2018. In the 2018 NSDUH, there are only four income groups recorded, which
we code as quintiles 1, 2, 4, and 5.

B.2.3    Adult Smoking (NHIS, NSDUH, BRFSS)

NHIS. We use the smknow, cigsda1, and cigsda2 variables to identify people who report smoking
"every day," "some days," or "not at all." Among people who smoke every day, we use cigsda1
to construct the average number of cigarettes smoked per day. If someone reports smoking "not
at all," we impose that these people smoke 0 cigarettes per day on all days. Among people who
report smoking "some days," we use cigdamo to generate the average number of days smoked in the
past 30 days and the cigsda2 variable to generate the average number of cigarettes smoked on days
when the person smokes; we extract the average number of cigarettes smoked per day as cigsda2 ×
cigdamo/30.
      NSDUH. We use the cig30av variable to compute the average number of cigarettes smoked per
day on days smoked. Because the variable is interval censored, we use the midpoint of the reported
ranges. We code the final interval ("35 cigarettes or more, about two packs") as 50 cigarettes (2.5
packs), for consistency with other top-coded datasets. We use the cig30use variable to compute
the average number of days in the past 30 days when the respondent smoked. Among the small
proportion of people who do not remember the precise number of days smoked, we use the midpoint

                                                 7
Online Appendix                          Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


of ranges reported in the cg30est variable to compute an estimate of the number of days smoked.
We extract the number of cigarettes smoked per day in the past 30 as (number of days smoked in
the past 30 / 30 ) × (number of cigarettes smoked on days smoked).
    BRFSS. We use the smokeday and smokday2 variables to construct a variable encoding
whether someone smokes "every day," "some days," or "not at all." We rescale these variables
for comparability by using the following algorithm.
    For each year in 2004-2018, append the NHIS and NSDUH datasets. Keep only those people
with non-missing values of demographic variables used in the main analysis. Extract smoking
intensity among "every day" smokers: compute the average number of cigarettes smoked per day
among people who report smoking 30 days in the past 30 in the NSDUH, or who smoke "every
day" in the NHIS. Extract smoking intensity among "sometimes" smokers: compute the average
number of cigarettes smoked per day among people who report smoking between 1 and 29 days
in the past 30 in the NSDUH or who smoke "some days" in the NHIS. Construct a "predicted"
smoking intensity for that year and smoking status by regressing the number of cigarettes smoked
on survey year (i.e, compute a linear fit). Weight regression by sampling weights in each dataset.
Divide the number of cigarettes smoked by 20 to obtain number of packs consumed per day.
    Among people who report smoking "every day" in BRFSS, we impose that the person smokes
the average number of packs in that year among every day smokers. Among people who report
smoking "some days" in BRFSS, we impose that the person smokes the average number of packs
in that year among "sometimes" smokers.

B.2.4   Adult Vaping (NHIS, BRFSS)

NHIS. We use the ecig30d2, ecigcur2, and ecigev2 variables to construct a variable that is 1 if
the person vaped "every day" (in ecigcur2 ), 0 if the person vaped "not at all" (in ecigcur2 ) and is
ecig30d2 /30 if the person reports vaping "some days" (in ecigcur2 ).
    BRFSS. We use the ecignow and ecigaret variables to construct a variable that encodes
whether the person vapes "every day," "some days," or "not at all." We use a similar algorithm
as for vaping to rescale the variable for comparability: Among people who report vaping "not at
all" in BRFSS, impose that the person has a vaping equivalent of 0. Among people who report
vaping "every day" in BRFSS, impose that the person has a vaping equivalent of 1. For each
year in 2016­2018, append the NHIS datasets. Keep only those people with non-missing values of
demographic variables used in the main analysis. Extract smoking intensity among "sometimes"
vapers: compute the average number of days vaped in the past 30 among people who report vaping
"some days" in the NHIS. Among people who report smoking "some days" in BRFSS, impose that
the person has a vaping equivalent of the average value extracted among vapers who report vaping
"some days." Unlike in the exercise for smoking, do not generate separate values for each year.



                                                 8
Online Appendix                             Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


B.2.5     Youth Smoking (MTF, NYTS, NSDUH)

MTF. We define packs per day as the number of cigarettes smoked per day on average, divided by
20. We recode the top-coded observations that report smoking 2 or more packs per day as smoking
50 cigarettes per day.
    NYTS. We use the midpoint of the interval containing the number of cigarettes per day
smoked and the midpoint of the number of days smoked to obtain the number of packs smoked per
day. We code "20 or more" cigarettes per day as 30 cigarettes per day.
    NSDUH. Same as adults.

B.2.6     Youth Vaping (MTF, NYTS)

Both datasets. We extract the midpoint of the interval containing the number of times the
respondent reports vaping electronic cigarettes last month. We define vaping equivalents as the
midpoint of this interval, divided by 30.
    Additional details about the MTF vaping data. The MTF has several different variables
from 2014­2018 that record the number of days the respondent reports vaping. By year, they are
as follows (emphasis from MTF codebooks).
    2014:

  · During the LAST 30 DAYS, on how many occasions (if any) have you used electronic cigarettes
        (e-cigarettes)?

2015:

  · During the LAST 30 DAYS, on how many occasions (if any) have you used electronic cigarettes
        (e-cigarettes)?

  · During the LAST 30 DAYS, on how many days (if any) have you used an electronic vaporizer
        such as an e-cigarette?

2016:

  · During the LAST 30 DAYS, on how many days (if any) have you used electronic cigarettes
        (e-cigarettes)?

  · During the LAST 30 DAYS, on how many days (if any) have you used an electronic vaporizer
        such as an e-cigarette?

2017:

  · On how many occasions (if any) have you vaped NICOTINE during the last 30 days?



                                                    9
Online Appendix                                               Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


   · During the LAST 30 DAYS, on how many occasions (if any) have you used electronic cigarettes
        (e-cigarettes)?

2018:

   · On how many occasions (if any) have you vaped NICOTINE during the last 30 days?

   · During the LAST 30 DAYS, on how many occasions (if any) have you used electronic cigarettes
        (e-cigarettes)?

We combine these reports as follows. If a respondent is ever recorded asked multiple vaping ques-
tions, we take the average. If the respondent records vaping more than 30 times in the past month,
we recode this as 30 (such that the maximum number of days in the last month is 30). Figure A1
illustrates that mean vaping rates align well across these reports.

                                  Figure A1: MTF Vaping Rates by Question

                                  2014                                2015                           2016




                   0      .01     .02         .03   .04   0     .01   .02     .03    .04   0   .01      .02   .03


                                  2017                                2018




                   0        .01         .02         .03   0     .02   .04    .06    .08



                                                    Average across vaping reports
                                                    Number days smoked e-cigarettes last month
                                                    Days used e-vaporizer last month
                                                    Days vaped nicotine

Notes: This figure presents vaping rates by year and question from the Monitoring the Future survey.


B.2.7     Additional Issues in Sample Surveys

NSDUH. The NSDUH is the sole youth survey that does not have a clean way of identifying
students' current grade to provide comparability with MTF and NYTS. We therefore count people
in grades 6­12, or people who are age 18, as youth. Because we include 18­24 year olds in the
adult estimations, this means the 18 year-olds in the NSDUH appear in both the youth and adult
surveys. The public-use NSDUH data also provide ages in bins that are not comparable to the

                                                                       10
Online Appendix                          Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


BRFSS and NHIS for some adults. For demographic controls, we code NSDUH 18­23 year olds as
18­24 year olds and NSDUH 24­29 year olds as 25­29 year olds.
      BRFSS. Because of inconsistent data collection, we drop survey respondents from Guam,
Puerto Rico, and other territories from the BRFSS sample.
      MTF. The MTF samples only the 48 contiguous states. The MTF does not sample dropouts.
We are limited to four race/ethnicity groups in the youth dataset because Asian is not a separate
category from other race in the public-use MTF.
      NYTS. The NYTS does not sample dropouts.

B.2.8    Total Quantities in Sample Surveys versus Sales Data

The total cigarette and e-cigarette sales implied by our sample survey data and unit conversion
parameters line up reasonably closely with national sales data. Multiplying 2018 average smoking
for adults and youths from Figure 2 by the total population sizes gives (0.082 packs/day × 254
million adults + 0.006 packs/day × 25 million youth) × 365 days/year  7.7 billion packs. This
is 64 percent of the 12 billion packs sold in 2018 as reported in Figure 1. This 64 percent ratio
is consistent with the public health literature on under-reported smoking prevalence in sample
surveys: for example, Liber and Warner (2018) find 61 percent ratio in the NHIS and about 70
percent in the NSDUH.
      For e-cigarettes, multiplying 2018 average vaping for adults and youths from Figure 2 by total
population sizes gives (0.03 × 254 million adults + 0.06 × 25 million youth) × 0.58 ml/day ×
$3.90/ml  $7.54 billion. This is nine percent larger than the $6.9 billion in vapor products sold
in 2018 as reported in Figure 1.

B.3     Other Data
E-cigarette User Survey:

  · Weight construction. We construct weights using Entropy Weight Rebalancing (Hainmueller
       2012), targeting the distribution of gender, income, and e-cigarette use from adults in the
       sample of BRFSS and the NHIS who report non-zero vaping.

  · E-liquid use per day. Several participants record more than 3 ml per day of e-liquid use. We
       drop their reports from the data, since these are unrealistically large, and winsorize other
       reports at 2 ml per day.

  · Price per day. We construct the weighted mean among participants who report using 3 ml
       or less e-liquid per day.

E-cigarette Expert Survey:


                                                 11
Online Appendix                       Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


  · Internalities. One expert reports an "infinite" internality of e-cigarettes. We recode this
     observation as the maximum among experts who report less than an infinite internality.

E-cigarette Tax Rates:

  · We use January 1, 2018 tax rates from Tax Foundation (2018). We convert specific taxes to
     ad valorem taxes using the mean e-cigarette size from RMS and price from the E-cigarette
     User Survey.




                                              12
Online Appendix                                Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


C     Price Elasticity Appendix

Table A2: Own- and Cross-Price Elasticity of Demand for Cigarettes (UPC-level esti-
mates)
                                      (a) First Stage and Reduced Form

                                                         (1)                (2)              (3)
                      Dependent variable:          ln(cig price)     ln(e-cig price)   ln(cig units)
                    ln(cig % tax rate + 1)             1.073              -0.130           -1.037
                                                      (0.024)            (0.150)          (0.242)
                    ln(e-cig % tax rate + 1)           -0.002              0.570           -0.030
                                                      (0.018)            (0.109)          (0.173)
                    Observations                     1,949,823         1,949,823         1,949,823

                                             (b) Instrumental Variables Estimates

                                         (1)               (2)               (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)
  Dependent variable:              ln(cig units)     ln(cig units)     ln(cig units)   ln(cig units)   ln(cig units)   ln(cig units)
  ln(cig price)                        -0.974            -6.060            -0.558          -1.321          -1.333          -0.993
                                      (0.194)           (2.762)           (0.758)         (0.280)         (0.282)         (0.224)
  ln(e-cig price)                      -0.056             2.090             0.678          0.843            0.771          -0.193
                                      (0.296)           (0.985)           (0.437)         (0.322)         (0.260)         (0.319)
  UPC-cluster FE                        Yes                No                Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes
  UPC-month FE                          Yes                No                No             Yes              Yes            Yes
  Division-month FE                     Yes                No                No              No              Yes            Yes
  Cluster × month trend                 Yes                No                No              No              No             Yes
  Time-varying state controls           Yes                Yes               Yes            Yes              Yes             No
  Observations                       1,949,823         1,952,925         1,949,875       1,949,823       1,949,823       1,949,823


Notes: This table presents estimates of the own- and cross-price elasticity of demand for cigarettes from
an analogue to Equation (16), using UPC-cluster-month data. There are 51 geographic clusters: the two
counties that have e-cigarette taxes, each of the contiguous 48 states (excluding those two counties), and
Washington, D.C. Standard errors are clustered by geographic cluster. Observations are weighted by the
UPC's sales in other clusters in that calendar year, divided by total sales in other clusters across all UPCs
in that year. Panel (a) presents the first stage and reduced form, using the same set of controls as in our
primary estimate in column 1 of Panel (b). Panel (b) presents the instrumental variables estimates. Time-
varying state controls are the state unemployment rate and beer tax rate as well as indicators for whether
the state has an indoor vaping ban, has a medical marijuana law, has passed or implemented a prescription
drug program, and implemented the Medicaid expansion.




                                                          13
Online Appendix                                 Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


 Table A3: Own- and Cross-Price Elasticity of Demand for E-cigarettes, Robustness

                                (1)                    (2)                        (3)                     (4)
 Dependent variable:        18-month               Exclude                     Exclude                Exclude
    ln(e-cig units)          window     1(quarter of e-cig tax) controls   imputed volumes      specific-tax clusters
 ln(e-cig price)              -1.137                 -1.154                     -1.297                  -1.276
                             (0.455)                (0.544)                    (0.505)                 (0.514)
 ln(cig price)                0.405                   0.442                      0.443                  0.444
                             (0.574)                (0.593)                    (0.610)                 (0.562)
 Observations                499,664                499,664                    496,070                 457,997

Notes: This table presents instrumental variables estimates of the own- and cross-price elasticity of demand
for e-cigarettes from Equation (16), using UPC-cluster-month data. There are 51 geographic clusters: the
two counties that have e-cigarette taxes, each of the contiguous 48 states (excluding those two counties),
and Washington, D.C. Standard errors are clustered by geographic cluster. Observations are weighted by
the UPC's sales in non-taxed clusters in that calendar year, divided by total sales across all UPCs in that
year in non-taxed clusters. All columns include UPC-cluster, UPC-month, and Census division-month fixed
effects and cluster-specific linear time trends, as well as time-varying state controls. Column 1 includes
additional controls so as to identify the elasticities only using an 18-month window around e-cigarette tax
changes. Column 2 excludes controls for the quarter of the e-cigarette tax treatment and interaction with
the e-cigarette tax, to identify the elasticities also off of the effects in the first three months after a tax
change. Column 3 excludes e-cigarette UPCs with imputed volumes. Column 4 excludes states that ever
have a specific (i.e. per-milliliter) e-cigarette tax.


  Table A4: Own- and Cross-Price Elasticity of Demand for Cigarettes, Robustness

                                       (1)                   (2)                           (3)
                 Dep. variable:    18-month    Exclude 1(quarter of e-cig tax)         Exclude
                  ln(cig units)     window                controls                specific-tax states
                 ln(cig price)       -0.974                -0.969                        -0.978
                                    (0.194)               (0.186)                       (0.187)
                 ln(e-cig price)     -0.066                -0.072                        -0.113
                                    (0.279)               (0.312)                       (0.192)
                 Observations      1,949,823             1,949,823                    1,764,557

Notes: This table presents instrumental variables estimates of the own- and cross-price elasticity of demand
for cigarettes from an analogue to Equation (16), using UPC-cluster-month data. There are 51 geographic
clusters: the two counties that have e-cigarette taxes, each of the contiguous 48 states (excluding those
two counties), and Washington, D.C. Standard errors are clustered by geographic cluster. Observations are
weighted by the UPC's sales in other clusters in that calendar year, divided by total sales in other clusters
across all UPCs in that year. All columns include UPC-cluster, UPC-month, and Census division-month
fixed effects and cluster-specific linear time trends, as well as time-varying state policy controls. Column
1 includes additional controls so as to identify the elasticities only using an 18-month window around e-
cigarette tax changes. Column 2 excludes controls for the quarter of the e-cigarette tax treatment and
interaction with the e-cigarette tax, to identify the elasticities also off of the effects in the first three months
after a tax change. Column 3 excludes states that ever have a specific (i.e. per-milliliter) e-cigarette tax.




                                                        14
Online Appendix                                                                              Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


   Figure A2: Event Study of E-cigarette Tax Changes without Linear Time Trends
                                                                                   (a) First Stage: Effect on ln(Price)

                                                                      1.5



                       Coefficient on ln( (tax/(pre-tax price) + 1)
                                                                        1




                                                                       .5




                                                                        0




                                                                      -.5
                                                                             -6   -5   -4   -3   -2    -1     0      1    2   3   4   5   6
                                                                                                  Quarters after tax change



                                                                       (b) Reduced Form: Effect on ln(Quantity Sold + 1)

                                                                        .5
                       Coefficient on ln( (tax/(pre-tax price) + 1)




                                                                        0



                                                                       -.5



                                                                       -1



                                                                      -1.5



                                                                       -2
                                                                             -6   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1     0      1    2    3   4   5   6
                                                                                                 Quarters after tax change



Notes: This figure presents estimates of the q parameters from Equation (17), an event study of the effects
of e-cigarette tax changes. This parallels Figure 3, except it excludes cluster-specific linear time trends.
Panel (a) presents the first stage regression of ln(e-cigarette price) on the change in the log tax variable.
Panel (b) presents the reduced form regression of the ln(e-cigarette units sold) on the change in the log tax
variable.




                                                                                                        15
Online Appendix                                                                             Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


       Figure A3: Event Study of E-cigarette Tax Changes on Cigarette Demand
                                                                             (a) With Cluster-Specific Linear Time Trends

                                                                  1
                  Coefficient on ln( (tax/(pre-tax price) + 1)



                                                                  .5




                                                                  0




                                                                 -.5




                                                                 -1
                                                                       -6    -5   -4   -3    -2   -1      0      1    2   3   4   5   6
                                                                                              Quarters after tax change


                                                                            (b) Without Cluster-Specific Linear Time Trends

                                                                  1
                  Coefficient on ln( (tax/(pre-tax price) + 1)




                                                                  .5




                                                                  0




                                                                 -.5




                                                                 -1
                                                                       -6    -5   -4   -3    -2   -1      0      1    2   3   4   5   6
                                                                                              Quarters after tax change



Notes: This figure presents estimates of the q parameters from Equation (17), an event study of the effects
of e-cigarette tax changes. This parallels Figure 3, except with combustible cigarette purchases as the
dependent variable. Panel (a) presents estimates with cluster-specific linear time trends. Panel (b) presents
estimates without cluster-specific linear time trends.

                                                                                                    16
Online Appendix                                 Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


D     Substitution Patterns Appendix

                  Figure A4: Demographic Predictors of Vaping, by Dataset
                                                     (a) Adults

                              Asian
                              Black
                           Hispanic
                     Other/missing
                               Male
                                 HS
                     Less than HS
                     Some college
                         Income Q2
                         Income Q3
                         Income Q4
                         Income Q5
                         Age 25-29
                         Age 30-49
                         Age 50-64
                            Age 65+
                   Omitted category
                                         -.05                          0                      .05
                                                     Vaping coefficient (share of days)

                                                                   BRFSS
                                                                   NHIS



                                                     (b) Youth

                             Black
                      Other/missing
                             White
                              Male
                           Grade 7
                           Grade 8
                           Grade 9
                          Grade 10
                          Grade 11
                          Grade 12
                   Omitted category
                                      -.04       -.02         0            .02          .04   .06
                                                     Vaping coefficient (share of days)

                                                                    NYTS
                                                                    MTF



Notes: These figures present coefficients from Equation (20), a regression of vaping on demographic indica-
tors, estimated separately by dataset. For adults, the omitted categories are white, female, college graduate,
the lowest income quintile, and age group 18-24. For  17youth, the omitted categories are white, female, and
grade 6. Panel (a) pools 2016­2018 data from BRFSS and NHIS; Panel (b) pools 2014­2018 data from MTF
and NYTS. Standard errors are clustered by demographic cell.
Online Appendix                            Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


  Figure A5: Demographic Predictors of E-cigarette, Social Media, and Internet Use

                             Asian
                             Black
                          Hispanic
                    Other/missing
                              Male
                                HS
                    Less than HS
                    Some college
                        Income Q2
                        Income Q3
                        Income Q4
                        Income Q5
                        Age 25-29
                        Age 30-49
                        Age 50-64
                           Age 65+
                  Omitted category
                                     -2        -1            0                 1       2
                                                     Standard deviations

                                                    Adult vaping (2016-2018)
                                                    Social media use (2008)
                                                    Internet use (2000)



Notes: These figures present coefficients from regressions of vaping, social media use, or internet use on
demographic indicators. Each dependent variable is normalized into standard deviation units for compara-
bility. For adults, the omitted categories are white, female, college graduate, the lowest income quintile,
and age group 18-24. For youth, the omitted categories are white, female, and grade 6. Standard errors are
clustered by demographic cell.




                                                    18
Online Appendix                                                                          Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


                                                             Figure A6: Smoking and Vaping Trends by Sex
                                                                                                (a) Adults

                                                                 Combustible Cigarettes                                                                           Electronic Cigarettes
                                                       .2                                                                                             .2




                                                                                                           Average e-cigarette use (share of days)
                  Average cigarette use (packs/day)




                                                      .15                                                                                            .15




                                                       .1                                                                                             .1




                                                      .05                                                                                            .05




                                                       0                                                                                              0
                                                            04 0506 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18                                                    2016              2017            2018
                                                                           Survey year                                                                                    Survey year




                                                                                               Male                                                           Female




                                                                                                 (b) Youth

                                                                 Combustible Cigarettes                                                                           Electronic Cigarettes
                                                      .08                                                                                            .08
                                                                                                           Average e-cigarette use (share of days)
                  Average cigarette use (packs/day)




                                                      .06                                                                                            .06




                                                      .04                                                                                            .04




                                                      .02                                                                                            .02




                                                       0                                                                                              0
                                                            04 0506 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18                                                    2014    2015      2016     2017   2018
                                                                           Survey year                                                                                    Survey year




                                                                                               Male                                                           Female




Notes: These figures present combustible cigarette and e-cigarette use by demographic group. Average
cigarette use for each group is residual of dataset controls, which address the 2011 BRFSS sampling frame
change and rescale cigarette use to levels in the NSDUH.



                                                                                                      19
Online Appendix                                                                          Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


                Figure A7: Smoking and Vaping Trends by Race/Ethnicity
                                                                                                (a) Adults

                                                                 Combustible Cigarettes                                                                           Electronic Cigarettes
                                                      .25                                                                                            .25




                                                                                                           Average e-cigarette use (share of days)
                  Average cigarette use (packs/day)



                                                       .2                                                                                             .2



                                                      .15                                                                                            .15



                                                       .1                                                                                             .1



                                                      .05                                                                                            .05



                                                       0                                                                                              0
                                                            04 0506 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18                                                    2016              2017               2018
                                                                           Survey year                                                                                    Survey year




                                                                  Other/missing             Asian                                            Black                   Hispanic           White




                                                                                                 (b) Youth

                                                                 Combustible Cigarettes                                                                           Electronic Cigarettes
                                                      .08                                                                                            .08
                                                                                                           Average e-cigarette use (share of days)
                  Average cigarette use (packs/day)




                                                      .06                                                                                            .06




                                                      .04                                                                                            .04




                                                      .02                                                                                            .02




                                                       0                                                                                              0
                                                            04 0506 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18                                                    2014    2015      2016     2017      2018
                                                                           Survey year                                                                                    Survey year




                                                                    Black                 Hispanic                                                         Other/missing                White




Notes: These figures present combustible cigarette and e-cigarette use by demographic group. Average
cigarette use for each group is residual of dataset controls, which address the 2011 BRFSS sampling frame
change and rescale cigarette use to levels in the NSDUH.



                                                                                                      20
Online Appendix                                                                          Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


                                                      Figure A8: Smoking and Vaping Trends by Age/Grade
                                                                                                (a) Adults

                                                                 Combustible Cigarettes                                                                           Electronic Cigarettes
                                                       .2                                                                                             .2




                                                                                                           Average e-cigarette use (share of days)
                  Average cigarette use (packs/day)




                                                      .15                                                                                            .15



                                                       .1                                                                                             .1



                                                      .05                                                                                            .05



                                                       0                                                                                              0
                                                            04 0506 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18                                                    2016              2017              2018
                                                                           Survey year                                                                                    Survey year




                                                                   Age 18-24               25-29                                                     30-49                50-64          65+




                                                                                                 (b) Youth

                                                                 Combustible Cigarettes                                                                           Electronic Cigarettes
                                                       .1                                                                                             .1
                                                                                                           Average e-cigarette use (share of days)
                  Average cigarette use (packs/day)




                                                      .08                                                                                            .08


                                                      .06                                                                                            .06


                                                      .04                                                                                            .04


                                                      .02                                                                                            .02


                                                       0                                                                                              0
                                                            04 0506 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18                                                    2014    2015      2016     2017     2018
                                                                           Survey year                                                                                    Survey year




                                                                      Grades 6-8                     Grades 9-10                                                             Grades 11-12




Notes: These figures present combustible cigarette and e-cigarette use by demographic group. Average
cigarette use for each group is residual of dataset controls, which address the 2011 BRFSS sampling frame
change and rescale cigarette use to levels in the NSDUH.



                                                                                                      21
Online Appendix                                                                          Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


     Figure A9: Smoking and Vaping Trends by Education and Income, for Adults
                                                                                              (a) Education

                                                                 Combustible Cigarettes                                                                           Electronic Cigarettes
                                                      .25                                                                                            .25




                                                                                                           Average e-cigarette use (share of days)
                  Average cigarette use (packs/day)



                                                       .2                                                                                             .2



                                                      .15                                                                                            .15



                                                       .1                                                                                             .1



                                                      .05                                                                                            .05



                                                       0                                                                                              0
                                                            04 0506 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18                                                    2016            2017            2018
                                                                           Survey year                                                                                  Survey year




                                                                    College               HS                            Less than HS                                          Some college




                                                                                                (b) Income

                                                                 Combustible Cigarettes                                                                           Electronic Cigarettes
                                                       .2                                                                                             .2
                                                                                                           Average e-cigarette use (share of days)
                  Average cigarette use (packs/day)




                                                      .15                                                                                            .15




                                                       .1                                                                                             .1




                                                      .05                                                                                            .05




                                                       0                                                                                              0
                                                            04 0506 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18                                                    2016            2017            2018
                                                                           Survey year                                                                                  Survey year




                                                                    Income Q1                  Q2                                                      Q3               Q4            Q5




Notes: These figures present combustible cigarette and e-cigarette use by demographic group. Average
cigarette use for each group is residual of dataset controls, which address the 2011 BRFSS sampling frame
change and rescale cigarette use to levels in the NSDUH.



                                                                                                      22
Online Appendix                                                                             Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


                                                              Figure A10: Difference in Smoking Trends by Sex
                                                                                                   (a) Adults

                                                             .1                                                                                     .1
                 Difference in cigarette use (packs/day)
                                                            .08                                                                                     .08




                                                                                                                                                            Substitutes | Complements 
                                                            .06                                                                                     .06


                                                            .04                                                                                     .04


                                                            .02                                                                                     .02
                                                                          Perfect complement/substitute bounds

                                                             0                                                                                      0
                                                                          Differences fit on pre-2013 data

                                                           -.02           Differences fit on post-2013 data
                                                                                                                                                    -.02


                                                           -.04                                                                                     -.04
                                                              04
                                                                     05
                                                                           06
                                                                                 07
                                                                                      08
                                                                                            09
                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                       11
                                                                                                              12
                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                         14
                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                   16
                                                                                                                                        17
                                                                                                                                             18
                                                             20
                                                                   20
                                                                         20
                                                                               20
                                                                                    20
                                                                                          20
                                                                                               20
                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                        Year


                                                                                                    (b) Youth

                                                                    .1                                                                       .1

                                                                   .08                                                                       .08
                 Difference in cigarette use (packs/day)




                                                                                                                                                            Substitutes | Complements 
                                                                   .06                                                                       .06

                                                                   .04                                                                       .04

                                                                   .02                                                                       .02

                                                                    0                                                                        0

                                                                  -.02          Perfect complement/substitute bounds
                                                                                                                                             -.02

                                                                  -.04                                                                       -.04
                                                                                Differences fit on pre-2013 data
                                                                  -.06                                                                       -.06
                                                                                Differences fit on post-2013 data
                                                                  -.08                                                                       -.08

                                                                   -.1                                                                       -.1
                                                                    20 4
                                                                    20 5
                                                                    20 6
                                                                    20 7
                                                                    20 8
                                                                    20 9
                                                                    20 0
                                                                    20 1
                                                                    20 2
                                                                    20 3
                                                                    20 4
                                                                    20 5
                                                                    20 6
                                                                    20 7
                                                                      18
                                                                      0
                                                                      0
                                                                      0
                                                                      0
                                                                      0
                                                                      0
                                                                      1
                                                                      1
                                                                      1
                                                                      1
                                                                      1
                                                                      1
                                                                      1
                                                                      1
                                                                    20




                                                                                                        Year



Notes: These figures present the difference in cigarette use for men versus women. Average cigarette use for
each group is residual of dataset controls, which address the 2011 BRFSS sampling frame change and rescale
cigarette use to levels in the NSDUH. The perfect complement (substitute) bounds show the difference in
cigarette use that would be expected if daily vaping were a perfect complement (substitute) for smoking one
pack of cigarettes per day. To construct perfect complement (substitute) bounds, we predict the difference
in cigarette use using the pre-2013 time trend, then add
                                                      23 (subtract) the difference in share of days vaped.
Online Appendix                                                                             Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


                                                             Figure A11: Difference in Smoking Trends by Race
                                                                                                    (a) Adults

                                                            .16                                                                                     .16
                  Difference in cigarette use (packs/day)
                                                            .14                                                                                     .14




                                                                                                                                                           Substitutes | Complements 
                                                            .12                                                                                     .12

                                                             .1                                                                                     .1

                                                            .08                                                                                     .08

                                                            .06          Perfect complement/substitute bounds                                       .06

                                                            .04          Differences fit on pre-2013 data                                           .04

                                                            .02          Differences fit on post-2013 data                                          .02

                                                             0                                                                                      0
                                                              04

                                                                    05

                                                                          06

                                                                                07

                                                                                      08

                                                                                            09

                                                                                                 10

                                                                                                       11

                                                                                                              12

                                                                                                                    13

                                                                                                                         14

                                                                                                                              15

                                                                                                                                   16

                                                                                                                                        17

                                                                                                                                             18
                                                             20

                                                                   20

                                                                         20

                                                                              20

                                                                                    20

                                                                                         20

                                                                                               20

                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                                        20

                                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                        Year


                                                                                                    (b) Youth

                                                                   .08                                                                       .08
                  Difference in cigarette use (packs/day)




                                                                   .06                                                                       .06

                                                                                                                                                           Substitutes | Complements 
                                                                   .04                                                                       .04


                                                                   .02                                                                       .02


                                                                    0                                                                        0
                                                                                Perfect complement/substitute bounds

                                                                  -.02                                                                       -.02
                                                                                Differences fit on pre-2013 data

                                                                  -.04          Differences fit on post-2013 data
                                                                                                                                             -.04


                                                                  -.06                                                                       -.06
                                                                    20 4
                                                                    20 5
                                                                    20 6
                                                                    20 7
                                                                    20 8
                                                                    20 9
                                                                    20 0
                                                                    20 1
                                                                    20 2
                                                                    20 3
                                                                    20 4
                                                                    20 5
                                                                    20 6
                                                                    20 7
                                                                      18
                                                                      0
                                                                      0
                                                                      0
                                                                      0
                                                                      0
                                                                      0
                                                                      1
                                                                      1
                                                                      1
                                                                      1
                                                                      1
                                                                      1
                                                                      1
                                                                      1
                                                                    20




                                                                                                        Year



Notes: These figures present the difference in cigarette use for whites and other races versus non-whites (for
adults) and whites versus non-whites (for youth). Average cigarette use for each group is residual of dataset
controls, which address the 2011 BRFSS sampling frame change and rescale cigarette use to levels in the
NSDUH. The perfect complement (substitute) bounds show the difference in cigarette use that would be
expected if daily vaping were a perfect complement (substitute) for smoking one pack of cigarettes per day.
To construct perfect complement (substitute) bounds,  24 we predict the difference in cigarette use using the
pre-2013 time trend, then add (subtract) the difference in share of days vaped.
Online Appendix                                                                              Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


                               Figure A12: Difference in Smoking Trends by Age/Grade
                                                                                                    (a) Adults

                                                             .08                                                                                     .08
                  Difference in cigarette use (packs/day)

                                                             .06                                                                                     .06




                                                                                                                                                             Substitutes | Complements 
                                                             .04                                                                                     .04


                                                             .02                                                                                     .02

                                                                           Perfect complement/substitute bounds
                                                              0                                                                                      0
                                                                           Differences fit on pre-2013 data

                                                            -.02                                                                                     -.02
                                                                           Differences fit on post-2013 data


                                                            -.04                                                                                     -.04
                                                               04
                                                                      05
                                                                            06
                                                                                  07
                                                                                       08
                                                                                             09
                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                     13
                                                                                                                          14
                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                    16
                                                                                                                                         17
                                                                                                                                              18
                                                              20
                                                                    20
                                                                          20
                                                                                20
                                                                                     20
                                                                                           20
                                                                                                20
                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                         Year


                                                                                                     (b) Youth

                                                                     .1                                                                       .1

                                                                    .08                                                                       .08
                  Difference in cigarette use (packs/day)




                                                                                                                                                             Substitutes | Complements 
                                                                    .06                                                                       .06

                                                                    .04                                                                       .04

                                                                    .02                                                                       .02

                                                                     0                                                                        0

                                                                   -.02          Perfect complement/substitute bounds
                                                                                                                                              -.02

                                                                   -.04                                                                       -.04
                                                                                 Differences fit on pre-2013 data
                                                                   -.06                                                                       -.06
                                                                                 Differences fit on post-2013 data
                                                                   -.08                                                                       -.08

                                                                    -.1                                                                       -.1
                                                                     20 4
                                                                     20 5
                                                                     20 6
                                                                     20 7
                                                                     20 8
                                                                     20 9
                                                                     20 0
                                                                     20 1
                                                                     20 2
                                                                     20 3
                                                                     20 4
                                                                     20 5
                                                                     20 6
                                                                     20 7
                                                                       18
                                                                       0
                                                                       0
                                                                       0
                                                                       0
                                                                       0
                                                                       0
                                                                       1
                                                                       1
                                                                       1
                                                                       1
                                                                       1
                                                                       1
                                                                       1
                                                                       1
                                                                     20




                                                                                                         Year



Notes: These figures present the difference in cigarette use by year for age  49 versus age  50 (for adults)
and for grades  11 versus grades  10 (for youth). Average cigarette use for each group is residual of
dataset controls, which address the 2011 BRFSS sampling frame change and rescale cigarette use to levels
in the NSDUH. The perfect complement (substitute) bounds show the difference in cigarette use that would
be expected if daily vaping were a perfect complement (substitute) for smoking one pack of cigarettes per
day. To construct perfect complement (substitute) bounds,
                                                      25      we predict the difference in cigarette use using
the pre-2013 time trend, then add (subtract) the difference in share of days vaped.
Online Appendix                                                                           Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


    Figure A13: Difference in Smoking Trends by Education and Income, for Adults
                                                                                               (a) Education

                                                            .18                                                                                .18
                  Difference in cigarette use (packs/day)

                                                            .16                                                                                .16




                                                                                                                                                      Substitutes | Complements 
                                                            .14                                                                                .14


                                                            .12                                                                                .12

                                                                       Perfect complement/substitute bounds
                                                             .1                                                                                .1
                                                                       Differences fit on pre-2013 data

                                                            .08                                                                                .08
                                                                       Differences fit on post-2013 data


                                                            .06                                                                                .06
                                                              04

                                                                   05

                                                                        06

                                                                              07

                                                                                    08

                                                                                          09

                                                                                               10

                                                                                                     11

                                                                                                            12

                                                                                                                 13

                                                                                                                      14

                                                                                                                           15

                                                                                                                                16

                                                                                                                                     17

                                                                                                                                          18
                                                             20

                                                                  20

                                                                       20

                                                                            20

                                                                                  20

                                                                                       20

                                                                                             20

                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                20

                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                      Year


                                                                                                 (b) Income

                                                            .14                                                                                .14
                  Difference in cigarette use (packs/day)




                                                            .12                                                                                .12

                                                                                                                                                      Substitutes | Complements 
                                                                       Perfect complement/substitute bounds

                                                             .1                                                                                .1
                                                                       Differences fit on pre-2013 data

                                                            .08        Differences fit on post-2013 data
                                                                                                                                               .08


                                                            .06                                                                                .06


                                                            .04                                                                                .04


                                                            .02                                                                                .02


                                                             0                                                                                 0
                                                               04

                                                               05

                                                               06

                                                               07

                                                               08

                                                               09

                                                               10

                                                               11

                                                               12

                                                               13

                                                               14

                                                               15

                                                               16

                                                               17

                                                               18
                                                             20

                                                             20

                                                             20

                                                             20

                                                             20

                                                             20

                                                             20

                                                             20

                                                             20

                                                             20

                                                             20

                                                             20

                                                             20

                                                             20

                                                             20




                                                                                                      Year



Notes: These figures present the difference in cigarette use by year for adults without versus with college
degrees (Panel (a)) and adults in the bottom three versus top two income quintiles (Panel (b)). Average
cigarette use for each group is residual of dataset controls, which address the 2011 BRFSS sampling frame
change and rescale cigarette use to levels in the NSDUH. The perfect complement (substitute) bounds show
the difference in cigarette use that would be expected if daily vaping were a perfect complement (substitute)
for smoking one pack of cigarettes per day. To construct
                                                      26 perfect complement (substitute) bounds, we predict
the difference in cigarette use using the pre-2013 time trend, then add (subtract) the difference in share of
days vaped.
Online Appendix                            Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


D.1     Combined Substitution Estimates
In this appendix, we describe how we form combined estimates of the substitution parameter 
using both the RMS estimates from Section 4 and the sample surveys from Section 5.  is in units
of packs of cigarettes per day vaped. Define

                                                       e p
                                                         ~e 
                                               1 :=          ,                                (36)
                                                        p ~c
                                       ~e to units of dollars per day vaped. Further define
where  (ml/average day vaped) converts p
                                                               c
                                                            c q
                                                2 :=           e                              (37)
                                                             q

and note that ^2 is already in units of packs per day. The empirical estimates are the respective
plug-in estimators using ^e , ^c , and                            ^j , p
                                       ^ from Table 2 and A2, and q    ^
                                                                       ~j and ^ from Table 4 for
                                                                                    
j  {c, e}. We form one estimate of ^1 using the primary estimate from Table (2) (Panel B, Column
1), and a second estimate of ^1 using the estimates of ^e and ^ estimated without cluster-specific
linear trends (Column 5). We form standard errors on ^1 and ^2 using the delta method; the
variance-covariance matrix is diagonal except for the covariance term between ^ and e .
      We combine ^1 and ^2 using Classical Minimum Distance (CMD) using:
                                          [ ]          [        ]
                                           1                1
                                                 -                  =0 ,                      (38)
                                           1             2
noting that                       [        ]       ( [                     ])
                                      1                      s2      s12
                                               N       0,     1
                                                                                .             (39)
                                       2                     s12     s2
                                                                      1

       ^2
We use s      ^2
        1 and s2 from the initial delta method estimation. We estimate s12 as follows:
                                                   (  c        )
                                                  c q    e p~e
                                  s12   := Cov        e,  p                                   (40)
                                                    q       ~c
                                               c e       (      )
                                            c q p
                                                ~          1 e
                                        =  e c Cov           ,                                (41)
                                              q p
                                                ~           
                                                         ( )
                                                qc p
                                                   ~e      1
                                         e c     ep    V                                      (42)
                                                q  ~c      

where the second line follows since the parameters taken outside the covariance are all estimated
from separate
          ( ) datasets, and we assume that the covariance between e and 1/ is small. We
            1
estimate V     from the delta method, and form s
                                               ^12 using a plug-in estimator.
      We also combine ^1 and ^2 with our estimates from Section 5 using CMD. Table A5 presents
our results.


                                                       27
Online Appendix                              Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


                       Table A5: Estimates of Substitution Parameter 

                    (1)                    (2)                      (3)             (4)      (5)            (6)
            E-cig cross-price      E-cig cross-price          Cig cross-price   Combined    Demo.       Combined
                elasticity      elasticity (no trends)           elasticity        RMS     analysis   RMS and demo.
 Adult            -0.059                 -0.191                    0.144          -0.056    0.035         -0.020
                 (0.091)                (0.113)                   (0.766)        (0.090)   (0.112)       (0.070)
 Youth            -0.059                 -0.191                    0.005          -0.000    0.013          0.007
                 (0.091)                (0.113)                   (0.027)        (0.026)   (0.022)       (0.017)
Notes: This table presents estimates of the substitution parameter  for youth and adults. Column 1 presents
^ from Equation (36) using our primary 
                                           ^ and  ^e from Table 2 (Panel (b), column 1). Column 2 presents
                                      e
^ from Equation (36) using 
                              ^ and  ^ estimated without cluster-specific linear trends (Table 2, panel (b),
column 5). Column 3 presents    ^ from Equation (37) using   ^c from Appendix Table A2 (Panel (b), column
1). Column 4 combines the estimates in columns 1 and 3 using Equation (38). Column 5 re-states estimates
from the demographic shift-share analysis in Section 5. Column 6 combined estimates from columns 4 and
5 using Classical Minimum Distance.


D.2     Marijuana Use
We study the time series of teen marijuana use during the period that e-cigarettes use became
common among teens using the MTF. A concern about our welfare analysis is that we do not account
for substitution from e-cigarettes into possibly harmful drugs like marijuana; there is a particular
concern that vaping technologies make it easier to vape marijuana. In this section, we provide
evidence against this concern by documenting no change in aggregate marijuana consumption over
this time period; while vaping marijuana becomes more popular, total marijuana use exhibits a
small decline.
      Marijuana use in the MTF. We focus on youth vaping, for whom the concerns about
substitution into marijuana products are most salient. The MTF provides several measures of
marijuana use. First, beginning in 2014, the MTF asks respondents the number of times they
consumed marijuana last year in any form. Second, beginning in 2017, the MTF asks respondents
the number of times that they consumed marijuana last month in any form. Third, beginning
in 2017, the MTF asks respondents the number of times that they vaped marijuana last month.
We standardize these variables to construct the number of times the respondent consumed vaped
marijuana each day. Due to interval censoring and top coding, the marijuana consumption measures
do not align perfectly. In particular, both the monthly and annual marijuana measures are subject
to significant top coding; the participant cannot report consuming marijuana more than 40 times in
the past month or year. As a result, the annual measure naturally lies below the monthly estimate.
However, we are concerned with trends in marijuana use as e-cigarette use becomes popular and
simply discuss changes in marijuana use, comparing each measure over time.
      Results. In Appendix Figure A14, panel (a), we present the time series of e-cigarette use
against the time series of our three measures of marijuana use; panel (b) focuses on grades 11­12,


                                                         28
Online Appendix                           Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


which has higher rates of both e-cigarette use and marijuana consumption. This figure illustates
that while vaping marijuana does become more popular in 2018 (as e-cigarette use grew), the
time series of aggregate marijuana use exhibits no change over this period. In fact, the monthly
measure of marijuana consumption shows a small decline from 2017­2018 in both the full sample
and grades 11­12. While we do not conduct a full substitution analysis, these figures suggest that
the aggregate data are inconsistent with the concern that our welfare analysis neglects important
distortions induced by e-cigarette use.




                                                 29
Online Appendix                                                  Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


                                                    Figure A14: Trends in Youth Marijuana Use
                                                                         (a) All

                                             .1
                 Prevalence (daily units)




                                            .05




                                             0
                                                  2014       2015             2016             2017       2018
                                                                              Year

                                                              Daily vaping
                                                              Daily vaping marijuana
                                                              Daily any marijuana use (monthly measure)
                                                              Daily any marijuana use (annual measure)



                                                                    (b) Grades 11­12

                                             .1
                 Prevalence (daily units)




                                            .05




                                             0
                                                  2014       2015             2016             2017       2018
                                                                              Year

                                                              Daily vaping
                                                              Daily vaping marijuana
                                                              Daily any marijuana use (monthly measure)
                                                              Daily any marijuana use (annual measure)



Notes: This figure presents trends in marijuana and e-cigarette use in the Monitoring the Future (MTF)
survey. Panel (a) presents the full sample, while panel (b) focuses on grades 11 and 12. The black lines
present our daily vaping measure. The gray lines present the average daily vaping marijuana use, constructed
from an MTF question that asks about the number of times the respondent vaped in the past month. The
blue line presents the average daily marijuana consumption of any form, constructed from an MTF question
that asks about the number of times the respondent 30consumed marijuana in the past month. The green line
presents the same measure, but from an MTF question that asks about the number of times the respondent
consumed marijuana in the past year . The green line lies below the blue line due to top-coding.
Online Appendix                                Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


E    Expert Survey Appendix

                              Table A6: Expert Survey Response Rates

                                                                        (1)               (2)
                                                               Public health experts   Economists
                  Invited to participate                                432                50
                  Have valid email                                      417                50
                  Did not unsubscribe due to expertise                  400                47
                  Opened survey                                         175                27
                  Consented                                             165                25
                  Finished reading RCT description                      134                22
                  Finished survey                                       115                22
Notes: This table presents the number of experts at each point in the survey response funnel.


    Figure A15: Expert Survey: Graphical Illustration of Relative Harms Elicitation




                   E-cigarettes have                    E-cigarettes have larger
                   smaller health harms                 health harms than
                   than cigarettes (< 100)              cigarettes (> 100)




              0              50              100            150            200           250



                                                   E-cigarettes and
                                                   cigarettes have equal
                                                   health harms (= 100)


Notes: Our expert survey included this graphical illustration when eliciting experts' beliefs about the relative
health harms from vaping compared to smoking cigarettes.




                                                          31
Online Appendix                                       Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


            Figure A16: Expert Survey: Effects of Vaping on Life Expectancy

                            .15




                             .1
                 Fraction




                            .05




                             0
                                  0   .1   .2   .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
                                                Health harms from vaping relative to smoking


Notes: Our expert survey asked, "If smoking one pack per day reduces life expectancy (compared to Control)
by 100 units, by how many units do you think vaping every day would reduce life expectancy (compared to
Control)?" This figure presents the distribution of responses across experts, after dividing by 100.




                                                                32
Online Appendix                                                       Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


      Figure A17: Expert Survey: Effects of Vaping on Specific Health Conditions

                                                        .6


                                                        .5
                 Effect of vaping relative to smoking




                                                        .4


                                                        .3


                                                        .2


                                                        .1


                                                        0
                                                         Cancer   Cardiovascular      Respiratory          Other


Notes: Our expert survey asked, "For each type of disease below, if smoking one pack per day increases
lifetime prevalence by 100 units (compared to Control), by how many units do you think vaping every day
would increase lifetime prevalence (compared to Control)?" This figure presents the mean and 95 percent
confidence interval of the estimate of the mean for each of the four health conditions the survey asked about.




                                                                               33
Online Appendix                             Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


Table A7: Expert Survey: Effects on Individual Diseases Predict Effects on Morbidity
and Mortality

                                                    (1)              (2)
                                            Quality-adjusted
                                             life expectancy   Life expectancy
                           Cardiovascular          0.222             0.309
                                                 (0.0908)          (0.0780)

                           Respiratory            0.321             0.195
                                                 (0.146)           (0.103)

                           Cancer                 0.337             0.369
                                                 (0.122)           (0.0982)

                           Other                 0.0390             0.0643
                                                (0.0853)           (0.0930)
                           Observations            134                138
                           R2                     0.800              0.811

Notes: This table presents regressions of experts' predictions of the relative effects of vaping (compared
to smoking) on life expectancy and quality-adjusted life expectancy on cardiovascular disease, respiratory
disease, cancer, other health conditions. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                   34
Online Appendix                                                                     Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


 Figure A18: Expert Survey: Beliefs about Health Harms by Number of Publications


                                                                .5

                 Health harms from vaping relative to smoking

                                                                .4



                                                                .3



                                                                .2



                                                                .1



                                                                0
                                                                     0     1-2       3-5         6-10      11-19        20+
                                                                         Number of publications in past 5 years (self-reported)


Notes: Our expert survey asked, "Over the past five years, approximately how many peer-reviewed research
papers have you published on the health effects of e-cigarettes or combustible cigarettes?" This figure
presents experts' average belief about the relative effect of vaping on quality-adjusted life expectancy after
grouping experts by number of publications. There is no statistically significant relationship.




                                                                                              35
Online Appendix                                                                                 Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


Figure A19: Expert Survey: Responses from Public Health Researchers and Economists

                                                 2.4
  Health harms from vaping relative to smoking




                                                 2.2
                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                         1.75
                                                 1.8
                                                 1.6
                                                                                                                             1.42
                                                 1.4
                                                 1.2
                                                  1
                                                  .8
                                                  .6
                                                                0.41
                                                  .4
                                                                                         0.18
                                                  .2
                                                  0
                                                            Public health            Economists                          Public health               Economists
                                                       Health harms from vaping relative to smoking ()                 Internalities for youth relative to adults ()


Notes: This figure presents the average belief about the relative effects of vaping on quality-adjusted life
expectancy and the misperceived harms from vaping for youth relative to adults, separately for public health
researchers and economists.




                                                                                                         36
Online Appendix                             Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


Figure A20: Expert Survey: Distribution of Perceived Disagreement with the Average
Expert

                   .5

                  .45

                   .4

                  .35

                   .3

                  .25

                   .2

                  .15

                   .1

                  .05

                    0
                        -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5 0          5 10 15 20 25 30
                              Difference between own and average health harm estimate
                                         more optimistic | more pessimistic 


Notes: Our expert survey asked, "You predicted that the relative effect of vaping onr quality-adjusted life
expectancy was [ × 100] units, i.e. [ × 100] percent of the effect of smoking. What do you think the average
expert would report?" This figure presents the distribution of the difference between each expert's own 
and his or her response to that question.




                                                    37
Online Appendix                                                                  Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


Figure A21: Expert Survey: Average Reported Relative Health Harms by Response
Time



                                                                  .6
                   Health harms from vaping relative to smoking




                                                                       Mean across waves
                                                                  .4




                                                                  .2

                                             August 19-24                                  August 25-30           August 31
                                                                                                                  and after




Notes: We sent three survey invite emails spaced six days apart, and almost all responses came within two
days of an email being sent. This figure reports the average belief about the effect of vaping relative to
smoking on quality-adjusted life years for responses in different time windows. The spikes are 95 percent
confidence intervals on the estimate of the mean.




                                                                                            38
Online Appendix                                 Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


Figure A22: Expert Survey: Personal Change in Beliefs about Health Effects of Vaping
in Past Five Years



                        Much more optimistic


                   Somewhat more optimistic


                                       Same


                  Somewhat more pessimistic


                      Much more pessimistic


                      Did not have an opinion


                                                 0    .05   .1      .15     .2    .25   .3
                                                                 Share of experts


Notes: Our expert survey asked, "How optimistic or pessimistic are you about the health effects of vaping
now, compared to five years ago?" This figure presents the distribution of responses to that question.




                                                       39
Online Appendix                                Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


Figure A23: Expert Survey: Reasons for Changes in Beliefs about the Health Effects of
Vaping




                   New research evidence




                         Devices changed




                  Usage patterns changed




                                   Other



                                           0         .2         .4        .6         .8        1
                                                Share (of experts who report views changing)


Notes: For experts who reported being more optimistic or pessimistic about the health effects of vaping now,
compared to five years ago, our expert survey asked, "Why have your views changed?" This figure presents
the distribution of responses to that question.




                                                       40
Online Appendix                                      Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence


Figure A24: Expert Survey: Uninternalized Harms from Vaping for Youth Relative to
Adults

                            .4
                 Fraction




                            .2




                             0
                                  0   .25   .5  .75 1 1.25 1.5 1.75 2 2.25 2.5 2.75  3
                                                 Internalities for youth relative to adults
                                       lower internalities for youth | higher internalities for youth 


Notes: Our expert survey asked, "Imagine that vaping every day causes 100 units of actual harms on adults.
How many units do you think the average adult perceives?" and "Now imagine that vaping every day causes
100 units of actual harms on youth. How many units do you think the average youth perceives?" This figure
presents the distribution of 1 (youth perceived harms ­ adult perceived harms)/100.


F    Welfare Analysis Appendix
The version of Equation (14) for empirical implementation is
                                                 
                                                             + ( /) ( -  )]
                                                        e
                                                     s q   [e        c  c

                                          e =    
                                                                                         ,                     (43)
                                                                       s qe

                                                                  

where   e
        a   =    
                 a
                            · c   +  
                                     a
                                         · c   and   e
                                                     y   =   e
                                                             a.   Vaping quantity qe is in units of share of days, 
                                                                                                                   
is in units of packs of cigarettes per day vaped, and  is in units of ml fluid/day vaped.  e and
e
 are in units of $/ml.
    The version of Equation (15) for empirical implementation is




                                                                  41
Online Appendix                          Optimal Regulation of E-cigarettes: Theory and Evidence



                                                                                                                   
                                    ~e                                                                    
                                    p                                                                     
  W = 365 ×             s    qe
                                               -      (-qe
                                                               - )
                                                           ) (e e
                                                                                   - qe
                                                                                         · (- /) (c -  c ) ,
                                   -2                                                                     
               {a,y }                              e-cigarette distortion change     cigarette distortion change
                         perceived CS change
                                                                                                                   (44)

where W is in units of dollars per person-year.




                                                      42
