                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?

                                        Marco Del Negro
                                         Michele Lenza
                                       Giorgio E. Primiceri
                                       Andrea Tambalotti

                                       Working Paper 27003
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27003


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




Prepared for the 2020 Spring Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. We thank Ethan Matlin
and especially William Chen for excellent research assistance, our discussants, Olivier Blanchard
and Chris Sims, as well as Richard Crump, Keshav Dogra, Simon Gilchrist, Pierre-Olivier
Gourinchas, Rick Mishkin, Argia Sbordone, and the conference participants for useful comments
and suggestions. Jim Stock provided much appreciated guidance during the research and writing
process. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent those of the European Central Bank, the Eurosystem, the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27003.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Marco Del Negro, Michele Lenza, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What's up with the Phillips Curve?
Marco Del Negro, Michele Lenza, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti
NBER Working Paper No. 27003
April 2020
JEL No. E31,E32,E37,E52

                                          ABSTRACT

The business cycle is alive and well, and real variables respond to it more or less as they always
did. Witness the Great Recession. Inflation, in contrast, has gone quiescent. This paper studies the
sources of this disconnect using VARs and an estimated DSGE model. It finds that the disconnect
is due primarily to the muted reaction of inflation to cost pressures, regardless of how they are
measured--a flat aggregate supply curve. A shift in policy towards more forceful inflation
stabilization also appears to have played some role by reducing the impact of demand shocks on
the real economy. The evidence rules out stories centered around changes in the structure of the
labor market or in how we should measure its tightness.

Marco Del Negro                                  Giorgio E. Primiceri
Federal Reserve Bank of New York                 Department of Economics
Research and Statistics Group                    Northwestern University
33 Liberty Street, 4th Floor                     318 Andersen Hall
New York, NY 10045                               2001 Sheridan Road
marco.delnegro@ny.frb.org                        Evanston, IL 60208-2600
                                                 and NBER
Michele Lenza                                    g-primiceri@northwestern.edu
European Central Bank
Kaiserstrasse 29                                 Andrea Tambalotti
60311 Frankfurt An Main                          Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Germany                                          Research and Statistics Group
michele.lenza@ecb.int                            33 Liberty Street, 3rd Floor
                                                 New York, NY 10045
                                                 a.tambalotti@gmail.com
                   WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?

MARCO DEL NEGRO, MICHELE LENZA, GIORGIO E. PRIMICERI, AND ANDREA TAMBALOTTI


        Abstract. The business cycle is alive and well, and real variables respond to it more
        or less as they always did. Witness the Great Recession. Inflation, in contrast, has gone
        quiescent. This paper studies the sources of this disconnect using VARs and an estimated
        DSGE model. It finds that the disconnect is due primarily to the muted reaction of
        inflation to cost pressures, regardless of how they are measured--a flat aggregate supply
        curve. A shift in policy towards more forceful inflation stabilization also appears to have
        played some role by reducing the impact of demand shocks on the real economy. The
        evidence rules out stories centered around changes in the structure of the labor market
        or in how we should measure its tightness.


        Key words and phrases: Inflation, unemployment, monetary policy trade-off, VARs,
        DSGE models




                                          1. introduction

  The recent history of inflation and unemployment is a puzzle. The unemployment rate
has gone from below 5 percent in 2006-07 to 10 percent at the end of 2009, and back
down below 4 percent over the past couple of years. These fluctuations are as wide as any
experienced by the U.S. economy in the post-war period. In contrast, inflation has been
as stable as ever, with core inflation almost always between 1 and 2.5 percent, except for
short bouts below 1 percent in the darkest hours of the Great Recession.
  Much has been written about this disconnect between inflation and unemployment. In
the early phase of the expansion, when unemployment was close to 10 percent and inflation
barely dipped below 1 percent, the search was for the "missing deflation" (e.g. Hall, 2011,
Ball and Mazumder, 2011, Coibion and Gorodnichenko, 2015, Del Negro et al., 2015b, Linde
Date : April 2020.
Prepared for the 2020 Spring Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. We thank Ethan Matlin and espe-
cially William Chen for excellent research assistance, our discussants, Olivier Blanchard and Chris Sims,
as well as Richard Crump, Keshav Dogra, Simon Gilchrist, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Rick Mishkin, Argia
Sbordone, and the conference participants for useful comments and suggestions. Jim Stock provided much
appreciated guidance during the research and writing process. The views expressed in this paper are those
of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the European Central Bank, the Eurosystem, the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or the Federal Reserve System.
                                                     1
                           WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                  2

and Trabandt, 2019). More recently, with unemployment below 5 percent for almost four
years and inflation persistently under 2 percent, attention has turned to factors that may
explain why inflation is not coming back (e.g. Powell, 2019, Yellen, 2019). Beyond this
recent episode, a reduction in the cyclical correlation between inflation and real activity
has been evident at least since the 1990s (e.g. Atkeson and Ohanian, 2001, Stock and
Watson, 2008, Stock and Watson, 2007, Zhang et al., 2018 and Stock and Watson, 2019).
The literature, which we review in more detail below, has focused on four main classes of
explanations for this puzzle: (i) mis-measurement of either inflation or economic slack; (ii)
a flatter wage Phillips curve; (iii) a flatter price Phillips curve; and (iv) a flatter aggre-
gate demand relationship, induced by an improvement in the ability of policy to stabilize
inflation.
  This paper tries to distinguish among these four competing hypotheses using a variety
of time-series methods. We find overwhelming evidence in favor of a flatter price Phillips
curve. Some of the evidence is also consistent with a change in policy that has led to a
flatter aggregate demand relationship.
  The analysis starts by illustrating a set of empirical facts regarding the dynamics of in-
flation in relation to other macroeconomic variables, using a vector autoregression (VAR).
Many of these facts are already known, but the dynamic, multivariate perspective offered
by the VAR makes it easier to consider them jointly, enhancing our ability to point towards
promising explanations for the phenomenon of interest. First, goods inflation has become
much less sensitive to the business cycle after 1990, consistent with most of the literature
on the severe illness of the Phillips curve. Second, this is true to a lesser extent for nominal
wage inflation: the wage Phillips curve is in better health than its price counterpart, as
also found by Coibion et al. (2013), Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015), Gali and Gambetti
(2018), Hooper et al. (2019) and Rognlie (2019). Third, there is little change before and
after 1990 in the business cycle dynamics of the most popular indicators of inflationary
pressures relative to each other, especially when compared to the pronounced reduction in
the responsiveness of inflation. These indicators include measures of labor market activ-
ity, such as the unemployment rate and its deviations from the natural rate, hours, the
employment-to-population ratio and unit labor costs, as well as broader notions of resource
utilization, such as GDP and its deviation from measures of potential. Fourth, the decline
in the sensitivity of inflation to the business cycle is heterogenous across goods and services.
                                WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                             3

In particular, Stock and Watson (2019) document that the relationship between cyclical
unemployment and inflation has changed very little over time for certain categories of goods
and services that are better measured and less exposed to international competition. Our
VAR analysis produces results that are consistent with these findings, but we do not report
them here since they are not necessary to draw our main conclusions.1
    Together, the first three facts listed above lead us to reject mis-measurement of economic
slack, as well as a significant flattening of the wage Phillips curve, as the main causes of
the emergence of the inflation-real activity disconnect since 1990. We draw this conclusion
because those two explanations are inconsistent with the small change in the dynamic
relationship between the most common indicators of cost pressures before and after 1990,
at the same time as inflation became much more stable.2 A further implication of this
finding is that we can focus the rest of the investigation on the bi-variate relationship
between inflation and real activity, without having to take a stance on the most appropriate
measure of the latter. Any indicator commonly used in the literature will do.3
    This conclusion marks the boundary to which we can push the VAR for purely descrip-
tive purposes. As illustrated in a recent influential paper by McLeay and Tenreyro (2019),
the observed relationship between inflation and real activity is the result of the interaction
between aggregate demand and supply. The latter captures the positive relationship be-
tween inflation and real activity, usually associated with the price Phillips curve. Higher
inflation is connected with higher marginal costs, which in turn tend to rise in expansions,
when demand is high, the labor market is tight, and wages are under pressure. On the con-
trary, the economy's aggregate demand captures a negative relationship between inflation

1
  Some recent papers have also explored the behavior of inflation across geographic areas in the United States
and across countries (e.g. Fitzgerald and Nicolini, 2014, Mavroeidis et al. 2014, McLeay and Tenreyro 2019,
Hooper et al. 2019, and Geerolf, 2019). They generally find that the correlation between inflation and
unemployment in the cross-section is stronger and more stable than in the time-series. Hazell et al. (2020)
provide a guide to translate this cross-sectional evidence into the time-series elasticity that is of interest to
most of the macroeconomics literature. Using data on U.S. states, they recover a flat Phillips curve once
the estimates are properly re-scaled, with some evidence of a further reduction in the slope coefficient after
1990. Fully reconciling this evidence across geographies and exchange rate regimes with our conclusion
requires more work.
2
 We cannot rule out that all the indicators of cost pressures that we include in our analysis have become a
poorer proxy for the "true" real marginal costs that drive firms' pricing decisions after 1990. However, it is
unlikely that an unobserved change in the dynamics of those costs could have left almost no trace on the
joint dynamics of all those indicators.
3
 In practice, we focus primarily on the relationship between inflation and unemployment, but continue to do
so in the context of a VAR that also includes other macroeconomic variables. We focus on unemployment
because it is arguably the most straightforward and widely-discussed measure of the health of the real
economy, as well as the most commonly used independent variable in Phillips curve regressions.
                            WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                4

and real activity, which reflects the endogenous response of monetary policy to inflationary
pressures. When inflation is high, the central bank tightens monetary policy, thus slowing
the real economy. Therefore, the observed cyclical disconnect between inflation and real
activity might be the result of either a flat Phillips curve--the slope hypothesis --or a flat
aggregate demand, generated by a forceful response of monetary policy to inflation. In the
limit in which the central bank pursues perfect inflation stability, inflation is observed to
be insensitive to the cycle, regardless of the slope of the Phillips curve. We refer to this
second possible explanation for the stability of inflation as the policy hypothesis.
  Distinguishing between these two hypotheses is a classic identification problem that re-
quires economic assumptions that were not needed for the data description exercise in
the first part of the paper. We impose those restrictions through two complementary
approaches, a structural VAR (SVAR) and an estimated dynamic stochastic general equi-
librium (DSGE) model. In the SVAR, we identify cyclical fluctuations that can be plausibly
attributed to a demand disturbance. To do so, we follow Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012) and
use their data on the excess bond premium (EBP) to identify a financial shock that prop-
agates through the economy like a typical demand shock, by depressing both real activity
and inflation. We choose this shock as a proxy for demand disturbances because it accounts
for a significant fraction of the business cycle fluctuations behind the facts described in the
first part of the paper. In response to this demand shock, inflation barely reacts in the post-
1990 sample, while it used to fall significantly before. This result indicates that the slope
of the aggregate supply relationship must have fallen since 1990. Intuitively, the demand
shock acts as an instrument for cost pressures in the Phillips curve, identifying its slope. If
real activity declines in response to an EBP shock, as it clearly does in both samples, and
this lowers cost pressures (i.e. if the instrument is not weak), a muted response of inflation
implies a flat Phillips curve.
  Although this evidence clearly points in the direction of a very flat aggregate supply
curve after 1990, it does not rule out the possibility that monetary policy might have also
contributed to the observed stability of inflation. In fact, the main implication of this
hypothesis is that monetary policy should lean more heavily against inflation by limiting
the impact of demand shocks on the real fluctuations. In the limit in which inflation
is perfectly stable, demand shocks should leave no footprint on the real variables. The
impulse responses to the EBP shock are far from implying no reaction of the real variables
                            WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                5

to the demand disturbance, as we would expect if the stability of inflation were due to
monetary policy, although they do point to some stabilization, at least in the short run.
  The SVAR evidence that we just described helps narrow down the relative contribution
of the slope and policy hypotheses for the stability of inflation. To provide an even sharper
quantification of their respective roles, we turn to an estimated DSGE model. This exercise
is subject to the typical trade-off associated with imposing tighter economic restrictions
on the data. On the one hand, we can map the slope and policy hypotheses directly into
parameters of the model that we can estimate on data before and after 1990. On the other
hand, the results of this exercise hinge on the entire structure of the model, rather than
on a looser set of identifying assumptions as in the SVAR. Therefore, they stand or fall
together with the observer's believes on the validity of that structure as a representation
of the data. To support the case in favor of the model's validity for our purposes, we show
that it reproduces the facts generated by the reduced-form VAR used for data description
in the first part of the paper. In terms of the two hypotheses, the DSGE estimates point
in the direction of a much flatter Phillips curve in the second sample. If we assume that
the slope of the Phillips curve is the only parameter that changes after 1990, the estimated
model still broadly reproduces the empirical facts. If we only allow policy to change, the
estimated model falls short.
  Together, the results of the SVAR and DSGE produce two conclusions. First, there is
strong support for the slope hypothesis: the slope of the Phillips curve has fallen very
substantially after 1990, although it has not gone all the way to zero. Second, there is also
some evidence that the policy hypothesis--or other structural changes contributing to a
flatter aggregate demand curve--might have contributed to reduce the cyclical sensitivity
of inflation, bit this evidence is weaker.
  The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. The remainder of this section reviews the
literature. Section 2 describes the VAR that we use for data description, whose results are
then described in section 3. Section 4 introduces a stylized aggregate demand and supply
framework inspired by McLeay and Tenreyro (2019), which illustrates the fundamental
identification problem underlying the interpretation of the observed relationship between
inflation and real activity. This model also guides the interpretation of the impulse responses
to the EBP shock presented in section 5. Section 6 revisits the same facts presented in
section 3 from the perspective of an estimated DSGE model, and uses that model to further
                           WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                6

explore the relative contribution of the slope and policy hypothesis to the observed stability
of inflation. Section 7 elaborates on some policy implications of our main findings, before
offering some concluding remarks in section 8.

The literature. The literature has explored four main classes of explanations for the
reduction in the observed correlation between inflation and real activity.
  The first set of explanations is related to mis-measurement of either inflation or economic
slack. In the inflation dimension, much of the debate has focused on the role of new products
and quality adjustment in the construction of price indexes and in the measurement of
output and productivity, especially following the introduction of technologies with a very
visible impact on everyday life, such as the internet and smart phones (e.g. Moulton, 2018).
This branch of the literature has also explored the recent emergence of online retailing
as a source of transformation in firms' pricing practices (e.g. Cavallo, 2018, Goolsbee
and Klenow, 2018). By focusing on cyclical fluctuations, our analysis mostly bypasses
these considerations, since they primarily pertain to the level of measured inflation. In
addition, the inflation-real activity disconnect predates the potential effect of information
technology on price mis-measurement, further reducing the potential explanatory power of
this hypothesis for our phenomenon of interest.
  On the real activity front, the definition and measurement of economic slack have been the
subject of a vast literature. Abraham et al. (2020) in this volume is a very recent example.
Much of this work has focused on the estimation of potential output and the natural rate
of unemployment as reference points to assess the cyclical position of the economy and
its influence on inflation. Crump et al. (2019) provide a comprehensive discussion of this
literature, which features many prominent contributions in the Brookings papers. Our
results on the stability of the co-movement of various measures of cost pressures should
reduce the weight put on explanations of the inflation disconnect based on the idea that
any one measure of slack might be less representative of underlying inflationary pressures
after 1990, for instance due to changes in the relationship between measured unemployment
and the overall health of the labor market (e.g. Stock, 2011, Gordon, 2013, Hong et al.,
2018, Ball and Mazumder, 2019).
  A second set of explanations for the emergence of the inflation-real activity disconnect
focuses on a flatter wage Phillips curve and, more in general, on structural transformations
in the labor market and its connection with the goods market (e.g. Daly and Hobijn, 2014,
                           WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                   7

Stansbury and Summers, 2020, Faccini and Melosi, 2020). Taken together, our results sug-
gest that whatever structural change might have occurred in the labor market, it is unlikely
to be the leading cause of inflation stability. In a recent Brookings paper, Crump et al.
(2019) capture some of these structural transformations in their Phillips curve estimates by
anchoring the inference on the natural rate of unemployment to disaggregated data on labor
market flows. This procedure produces a model of inflation that accounts for its dynamics
throughout the sample. However, doing so requires a low slope coefficient, as stressed by
Davis (2019) and Primiceri (2019) in their discussions.
  A third set of explanations focuses on the role of policy in delivering stable inflation.
The idea is that a stronger response of monetary policy to inflation flattens the aggregate
demand curve, weakening the connection between inflation and real fluctuations, even if the
aggregate supply relationship is unchanged (e.g. Fitzgerald and Nicolini, 2014, Barnichon
and Mesters, 2019a, Hooper et al. 2019, and McLeay and Tenreyro, 2019, echoing older
work by Kareken and Solow, 1963 and Goldfeld and Blinder, 1972). An implication of
this hypothesis is that the Phillips curve is hibernating: a stronger correlation between
inflation and business cycles would re-emerge if monetary policy reacted less to inflation,
as it probably did before the 1990s. Consistent with this view, we also find that monetary
policy played some role in stabilizing inflation over the cycle. However, our evidence suggests
that policy did not entirely succeed in eliminating demand-driven real fluctuations, implying
that it cannot be the dominant driver of the inflation-real activity disconnect. This result,
however, leaves open the possibility that changes in monetary (and perhaps fiscal) policy
were behind the low frequency fluctuations in inflation related to its slow rise between the
mid 1960s and 1979 and its return to 2 percent over the subsequent two decades, as argued
for instance by Primiceri (2006).
  Related to this policy hypothesis is the large literature on the role of inflation expectations
and their anchoring (e.g. Orphanides and Williams, 2005, Bernanke, 2007, Stock, 2011,
Blanchard et al., 2015, Blanchard, 2016, Ball and Mazumder, 2019, Carvalho et al., 2019,
Jorgensen and Lansing, 2019, and Barnichon and Mesters, 2019c). Empirically, expectations
are now less volatile than they were before 1990, as we also find in our VAR. However,
this observation does not establish that changes in their formation, perhaps in response
to shifts in the conduct or communication of policy, represent an autonomous source of
inflation stability. Rather, our evidence suggests that the behavior of inflation expectations
                              WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                       8

mostly reflects the inflation stability induced by the flattening of the aggregate supply curve,
instead of being its primary source.
    In conclusion, our results support a fourth set of explanations that attribute the inflation-
real activity disconnect to forces that reduce the response of goods prices to the cost pres-
sures faced by firms, lowering the slope of the "structural" price Phillips curve. This is
the slope hypothesis, which takes several variants. The most prominent is the one that
attributes a reduction in the response of prices to marginal costs to the increased relevance
of global supply chains, heightened international competition, and other effects of globaliza-
tion (e.g. Sbordone, 2007, Auer and Fischer, 2010, Rich et al., 2013, Tallman and Zaman,
2017, Forbes, 2019a, Forbes, 2019b, Obstfeld, 2019 and Forbes et al., 2020). In a simi-
lar vein, Rubbo (2020) points to changes in the network structure of the U.S. production
sector.4
    Compared to this literature that concentrates on estimating "the" slope of the Phillips
curve as a summary statistic of the connection between inflation and real activity, our
VAR approach explores more broadly the dynamic relationships among real and nominal
variables to draw conclusions on the mechanisms that drive them, and how they have
changed since 1990. Another advantage of our approach is that it focuses on business cycle
dynamics, abstracting from lower-frequency trends and other developments that might be
less informative about the Phillips curve relationship. As a result, we do not address the
reasons why inflation has been stubbornly below most central banks' targets for the better
part of the last decade.



                                  2. Methodology and Data

    The objective of this paper is to shed light on the possible causes of the widely acknowl-
edged attenuation of the response of inflation to labor market slack over the past three
decades. This section illustrates the methodology and the data that we use to document
this fact, and its relationship with the behavior of a broad set of macroeconomic variables,
whose joint dynamics might help to discriminate among alternative explanations.


4
 Afrouzi and Yang (2019) connect changes in the conduct of monetary policy directly to the slope of the
Phillips curve, straddling the two strands of the literature that we just discussed. They present a model
in which rationally inattentive price setters respond less to aggregate shocks when monetary policy is
committed to inflation stabilization.
                            WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                  9

2.1. Methodology. To study macroeconomic dynamics and their change over time, we
begin by adopting the following Vector-Autoregression (VAR) model:

(2.1)                        yt = c + B1 yt-1 + ... + Bp yt-p + ut .

In this expression, yt is an n × 1 vector of macroeconomic variables, which is modeled as
a function of its own past values, a constant term, and an n × 1 vector of forecast errors
(ut ) with covariance matrix . The reduced-form shocks (ut ) are a linear combinations of
n orthogonal structural disturbances (t ), which we write as ut = t .
  VARs are flexible multivariate time-series models, which provide a rich account of the
complex forms of autocorrelation and cross-correlation that are typical of macroeconomic
variables. To synthesize and illustrate these relationships, we study the dynamic response
of the variables of interest to a typical unemployment shock. We identify this "U shock"
using a Cholesky scheme with unemployment ordered first. This shock corresponds to the
linear combination of structural disturbances that drives the one-step-ahead forecast error
in unemployment. The impulse responses to this shock tell us how the system evolves in
the future if next quarter's unemployment rate turns out to be higher than expected.
  The specific combination of shocks responsible for the one-step ahead forecast error in
unemployment accounts for the bulk of business cycle fluctuations in real activity, but it ig-
nores other sources of macroeconomic variation. As a consequence, this part of the analysis
has little to say about the substantial share of inflation variability that is independent of the
U shocks. Instead, it focuses on the component of inflation that responds to real business
cycle impulses, which is the essence of the Phillips curve. Moreover, this approach does
not attempt to pin down the precise identity of the structural disturbances driving fluctu-
ations, as in more typical structural VARs. Doing so would require additional economic
assumptions, which are not necessary to document many of the empirical facts regarding
the attenuated response of inflation to labor market slack that have been discussed in the
literature. The advantage of this methodology is that we can illustrate these facts in the
context of a unified, dynamic, multivariate statistical framework, without imposing any
theoretical restriction. A limitation of our method is that, without economic restrictions,
the facts that it uncovers can be mapped into more than one hypothesis on the sources
of the increased disconnect between inflation and real activity. Therefore, section 5 and 6
                              WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                     10

will also explore more economically-demanding approaches--SVARs and DSGE models--in
order to further pinpoint the source of the empirical observations illustrated below.
   The VAR approach to data description that we pursue in this section has also some
advantages over the much more popular direct estimation of a Phillips curve, defined as the
relationship between inflation (and its lags) and some measure of slack. First, such an in-
flation equation is embedded in the VAR, which therefore encompasses the single-equation
approaches as long as the same variables used in them are included in yt . Second, embed-
ding such an equation into a multivariate framework explicitly recognizes the challenging
identification problem of distinguishing a Phillips curve, which represents the economy's
aggregate supply, from its aggregate demand. We illustrate this challenge in the context of
a stylized New Keynesian model in section 4. Third, looking at the response of inflation and
the other variables to the combination of shocks responsible for the one-step-ahead forecast
error of unemployment produces more flexible measures of economic slack than those based
on specific indicators of potential output or natural unemployment--two notoriously elusive
concepts. Fourth, we do not need explicit measures, or a model, of inflation expectations,
as long as the variables included in the VAR approximately span the information set used
by agents to form those expectations. This aspect of the analysis is especially important,
since inflation expectations are a key ingredient in most formulations of the Phillips curve.
At the same time, given their relevance, we also consider VAR specifications that include a
direct measure of expectations in the vector yt .



2.2. Data. What variables should the VAR include to provide a comprehensive view of
the forces shaping the connection between inflation and the labor market? To answer this
question, we refer to an intuitive description of that connection, which is embedded in most
formal and informal frameworks built around a price and/or wage Phillips curve.5 When
firms try to hire more workers to satisfy higher demand for their output, wages tend to
rise. Given labor productivity, this increase in wages is associated with higher marginal
costs and inflation. Therefore, a tight labor market, rising wages, costs and inflation tend
to occur together in response to demand shocks.


5A simple example of such a framework is the New-Keynesian model with sticky wages and prices in Chapter
6 of Galí (2015).
                                WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                            11

   To characterize these channels, data on inflation and unemployment are not enough. In
addition, we need measures of wages, labor productivity, and firms' costs to capture the in-
termediate steps of the transmission. Therefore, we propose a baseline VAR that includes 8
macroeconomic variables: (i) unemployment, measured by the civilian unemployment rate;
(ii) natural unemployment, measured by the CBO estimate; (iii) core inflation, measured by
the annualized quarterly growth rate of the Personal Consumption Expenditures price in-
dex, excluding food and energy; (iv) inflation, measured by the annualized quarterly growth
rate of the GDP deflator; (v) GDP, measured by the logarithm of per-capita real GDP; (vi)
hours, measured by the logarithm of per-capita hours worked in the total economy; (vii)
wage inflation, measured by the annualized quarterly growth rate of the average hourly
earnings of production and nonsupervisory employees (PNSE); and (viii) the labor share,
measured by the logarithm of the share of labor compensation in GDP.
   Besides unemployment, this VAR includes a block of variables referring to the total
economy: GDP, hours, the labor share, and the GDP deflator. These variables can be
combined to compute a measure of hourly nominal compensation in the total economy. The
growth rate of this measure of nominal wages closely tracks compensation per hour in the
nonfarm business sector, a commonly used indicator of labor costs. The problem with both
these series is that they are extremely volatile at high frequencies, obscuring the underlying
wage dynamics over the business cycle. For this reason, the baseline VAR also includes the
PNSE wage inflation series. This series only covers 80 percent of private industries, but it
is substantially less noisy than the more comprehensive ones that we mentioned. Finally, in
addition to GDP inflation, our model also includes core PCE inflation, given its importance
as a gauge of underlying inflationary pressures.
   We estimate this 8-variable VAR over two non-overlapping samples, to investigate pos-
sible changes in the typical co-movement pattern of these variables in response to the BC
shock described in section 2.1. The first sample ranges from 1964:II to 1989:IV, and the
second from 1989:I to 2019:III.6 The analysis starts in 1964:II, when the PNSE wage in-
flation series first becomes available. The date at which we split the sample is the result
of a compromise. On the one hand, there is some evidence that macroeconomic dynamics
might have changed around 1984, after the first phase of the so-called Volcker disinflation.

6The first four observations are used as initial conditions, since our VAR has four lags. Therefore, effectively,
the estimation starts in 1965:II in the first sample and in 1990:I in the second one.
                           WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                12

On the other hand, a simple inspection of the data suggests that inflation has been most
stable starting around the mid 1990s, after the opportunistic disinflation engineered by the
Federal Reserve under Alan Greenspan following the 1990-91 recession. As a compromise
between these two alternatives, we split the sample in 1990. This choice also has the ad-
vantage of creating two samples of fairly similar lengths. Section A shows that this choice
is immaterial for the results.
  The data are quarterly and the VAR includes 4 lags. It is estimated with Bayesian
methods and a standard Minnesota prior, given the relatively high number of variables and
short sample sizes. The tightness of the prior is chosen based on the data-driven method
described in Giannone et al. (2015).

                                          3. Facts

  This section documents a number of known and new facts concerning the relationship
between unemployment, inflation, and some other key macroeconomic variables. These em-
pirical findings lead us to two main conclusions: (i) the attenuation of inflation fluctuations
over the business cycle before and after 1990 is striking; (ii) in comparison, the co-movement
of all real variables and indicators of firms' cost pressures has been remarkably stable.

3.1. Fact 1: Unemployment and price inflation. We begin by presenting the impulse
responses of unemployment and inflation to a U shock in the two samples. Figure 3.1
shows that inflation falls significantly as unemployment rises in the first sample. This
finding suggests that the U shock is characterized by a strong demand component, which
explains why traditional Phillips curves estimated over this sample have a negative slope.
In the second sample, instead, unemployment increases by a roughly similar amount, but
the responses of both inflation measures are muted. In fact, the response of core inflation is
statistically indistinguishable from zero throughout the horizon, while that of GDP inflation
is a bit more negative and borderline significant after about one year. In addition, the very
flat response of natural unemployment indicates that the shock only captures business cycle
variation. Therefore, looking at the reaction of unemployment or the unemployment gap
to this shock would produce identical results.
  Appendix A shows that the responses of figure 3.1 are nearly identical to those to a
typical business cycle shock, obtained as the linear combination of structural disturbances
that drives the largest share of unemployment variation at business cycle frequencies, as
                             WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                     13




       Figure 3.1. Impulse responses of unemployment and price inflation to a shock to the
       unemployment equation. The impulse responses are from the baseline VAR described
       in section 2.2. The shock is identified using a Cholesky strategy, with unemployment
       ordered first. The solid lines are posterior medians, while the shaded areas correspond to
       68- and 95-percent posterior credible regions. The pre- and post-1990 samples consist of
       data from 1964:II to 1989:IV, and from 1989:I to 2019:III, respectively.




in Giannone et al. (2019) and Angeletos et al. (2019). This result suggests that the com-
bination of shocks associated with the one-step-ahead forecast error in unemployment and
the one responsible for the bulk of business cycle fluctuations are virtually the same. Our
finding also casts some doubt on the interpretation of the muted response of inflation to
business cycle shocks proposed by Angeletos et al. (2019), since they do not explain why
such response was much more vigorous before 1990.
                               WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                          14

   The response of unemployment to a U shock in figure 3.1 is more persistent in the second
sample. This feature of economic fluctuations is evident even from the raw data, and it is
consistent with the lengthening of expansions in the last thirty years. However, this change
in the profile of unemployment fluctuations does not play much of a role in accounting for
the attenuated response of inflation in the second sample. We illustrate this point with
an exercise that forces the response of unemployment to be identical in the two samples.
Specifically, we compute the responses of all variables as the difference between their forecast
conditional on a specific path of unemployment and their unconditional forecast, following
the methodology of Banbura et al. (2015). As this common path in both samples, we choose
the median response of unemployment to a U shock in the first sample.7 Figure 3.2 plots
the dynamics of all the VAR variables in this conditional forecast exercise. As in figure 3.1,
the response of inflation in the second sample is much attenuated, although it now remains
negative. Appendix A shows that this change in inflation dynamics over the two samples
is not limited to the two measures of inflation included in the baseline VAR, but it extends
to a number of other commonly used inflation series.
   These findings can be summarized into a first key stylized fact: The sensitivity of goods
price inflation to labor market slack has decreased dramatically after 1990. This fact pro-
vides a complementary, more dynamic, characterization of many findings in the literature
regarding the stability of inflation. Interpreting this fact is the main task of the rest of the
paper.

3.2. Fact 2: Unemployment and wage inflation. A substantial body of recent work
finds that the connection of wage inflation to labor market slack remains stronger than
that of goods inflation (Gali and Gambetti, 2018, Hooper et al., 2019, Rognlie, 2019). This
section presents VAR results broadly consistent with these findings. The second row of
figure 3.2 plots the response of two measures of nominal wage inflation using the conditional
forecast approach described in the previous subsection. The first measure (PNSE) is the
one used directly for the estimation of the baseline VAR. The second (total economy)
is that implied by the data on the labor share, hours, output and GDP inflation.8 The
7This conditional forecast approach recovers the most likely sequence of shocks to guarantee that unemploy-
ment follows a given path. In this respect, it has a slightly different interpretation relative to the impulse
responses, because the latter are based on a single shock perturbing the economy at horizon zero.
8In logs, the labor share (ls) is defined as the sum of the nominal wage (w ) and hours (h), minus real GDP
(gdp) and the price level (p), or ls  w + h - gdp - p. Therefore, this measure of the (log) nominal wage is
constructed as w = ls - h + gdp + p.
                             WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                    15




       Figure 3.2. Response of all variables, conditional on unemployment following the path
       in the first subplot. These responses are computed by applying the methodology described
       in section 3.1 to the baseline VAR of section 2.2. The solid lines are posterior medians,
       while the shaded areas correspond to 68- and 95-percent posterior credible regions. The
       pre- and post-1990 samples consist of data from 1964:II to 1989:IV, and from 1989:I to
       2019:III, respectively.



reaction of the PNSE series is attenuated in the post-1990 period, while the response of
the total-economy measure shows more similarities in the two samples. Therefore, we take
the balance of the evidence as consistent with the view that the connection between wage
inflation and unemployment remains alive, although it is weaker in the more recent period.
As shown in appendix A, the sensitivity of wage inflation to unemployment after 1990 is
even stronger when wages are measured with the employment cost index (ECI), which is
arguably a better measure of the cyclicality of wages than the ones used in this section.
                               WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                         16

Unfortunately, the ECI is only available starting in 1980, preventing a full comparison of its
behavior pre and post 1990. We summarize these findings in the form of a second stylized
fact: The sensitivity of nominal wage inflation to labor market slack has diminished after
1990, but less than that of price inflation.
    One implication of this fact is that explanations of the unemployment-inflation disconnect
involving a much reduced responsiveness of wage inflation to labor market slack are not
very plausible. For example, a popular narrative attributes the stability of inflation during
the Great Recession to the existence of downward nominal wage rigidities: If firms are
reluctant or unable to lower nominal wages, their marginal costs should remain relatively
high, putting upward pressure on prices and inflation. Such a story, however, would imply
a substantial weakening of the comovement between unemployment and wage inflation,
which seems at odds with the data. In addition, as we demonstrate in appendix A, this
co-movement is approximately equally strong after 1990 regardless of whether we include
or exclude the Great Recession period.

3.3. Fact 3: Unemployment and unit labor costs. One obvious difficulty in inter-
preting the evidence on the connection between nominal wage inflation and unemployment
presented in the previous section is that it also partly reflects a weaker response of goods
inflation. Mechanically, nominal wage inflation is the sum of real wage inflation and goods
inflation. Therefore, the former will appear less responsive to the cycle if the latter is,
given the dynamics of the real wage. A more helpful approach to evaluate the implications
of wage dynamics for inflation, therefore, is to study more direct measures of how wages
contribute to firms' marginal costs.9 The most popular proxy for aggregate real marginal
costs are unit labor costs, (or, equivalently, the labor share). With constant returns in
production, (log) unit labor costs are proportional to (log) marginal costs. Under more
general assumptions, this proportionality no longer holds, but unit labor costs are likely
to remain a more accurate gauge of the cost pressures faced by firms than nominal wage
inflation.10

9
 In pricing problems based on cost minimization, firms' marginal costs are the key driver of their pricing
decisions. As a result, the evolution of aggregate marginal costs is the fundamental source of inflation in a
large class of models with nominal rigidities. These models include those with staggered price setting, as
in Calvo (1983) and Taylor (1980), as well as those with sticky information or rational inattention, as in
Mankiw and Reis (2002) or Mackowiak and Wiederholt (2009).
10
  With constant returns to scale production, a firm's log marginal cost is proportional to its log unit
labor cost, defined as ulc = w - (gdp - h). With homogeneous factor markets, marginal cost is equalized
                               WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                          17

   Figure 3.2 shows that the forecast of the labor share conditional on the usual path of
unemployment is very similar in the two samples. This observation leads to the third
stylized fact: The co-movement of unemployment and the labor share over the business
cycle is stable over time. This fact supports and further refines the view according to which
labor market developments are unlikely to be the main source of the change in inflation
dynamics over the past thirty years. The claim is not that labor market dynamics have not
changed since 1990. More narrowly, the statement is that, whatever those changes might
have been, they did not have a significant impact on the dynamics of firms' marginal costs,
at least as seen through the lens of a proxy such as the labor share. The next section adds
one further dimension to this claim, by showing that the same can be said of other well
known aggregate proxies for firms' cost pressures.


3.4. Fact 4: Unemployment and other measures of real activity. The previous
subsection argued that unit labor costs are likely to be the most informative variable on
the extent to which cost pressures originating in the labor market are transmitted to goods
prices.11 Next, we show that the dynamics of many other variables used in the literature to
capture real sources of inflationary pressure, from the labor market or otherwise, are also
relatively stable over time. The third row of figure 3.2 reports the conditional forecasts of
hours and output. These responses are essentially identical over time, implying a fourth
stylized fact: the business cycle correlation among several indicators of real activity has
not changed in the two samples. Appendix A further shows that these empirical patterns
also hold for the output gap and the employment-to-population ratio, when we add these
variables to the baseline VAR.
   The important conclusion that we draw from these results is that the severe illness of the
reduced-form relationship between inflation and real activity cannot be cured by picking a
different indicator of either labor or goods market slack among those commonly used in the
literature. In fact, the remarkable stability in the dynamic relationships between all the real

across firms, so that the aggregate log labor share (ls = w + h - gdp - p) is proportional to the average real
marginal cost.
11
  A key implication of firms' cost minimization is that marginal cost is equalized across all inputs. As
a result, marginal cost pressures--measured by comparing wages to labor productivity--provide a com-
prehensive view of the cost pressures faced by firms, even if the input whose direct cost is rising is not
labor. The main difficulty in operationalizing this observation is the measurement of the marginal cost and
marginal benefit of labor, i.e. the "wage" and the marginal product of labor. Available measures of wages
and (average) labor productivity capture those marginal concepts only under restrictive assumptions.
                             WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                     18

variables that we have considered suggests that the diagnosis of what ails inflation should
be independent of one's view on the the best proxy for underlying inflationary pressures.

3.5. Adding interest rates and expected inflation. In this subsection, we augment
the model with data on the federal funds rate and on long-term inflation expectations from
the survey of professional forecasters (SPF).12 The former was not included in the baseline
VAR because it was at the zero lower bound for many years in the second sample. To
avoid that period, this larger VAR is estimated excluding data after 2007. Figure 3.3 plots
the conditional forecast of all the variables in the model. Compared to the baseline, the
conditioning path of unemployment, which is, as usual, the median response of unemploy-
ment to the U shock in the pre-1990 sample, returns to zero faster, although its inverted
S shape is otherwise similar. Moreover, the estimated responses are more uncertain in the
second sample, since it is shorter by about 12 years. However, the main empirical facts
documented so far are robust to these changes.
     Focusing on the newly added variables, the response of the federal funds rate in the
two samples has a similar shape, but it is less persistent after 1990. That of inflation
expectations is more muted in the second sample, similar to inflation. At the same time,
the gap between the two variables falls significantly in the first sample, while it is more
stable in the second, just as inflation itself. This observation suggests that the reduction in
the sensitivity of inflation to business cycles goes beyond what can be explained through the
increased stability of long-run inflation expectations. The extent to which more anchored
expectations simply reflect the increased stability of inflation, as opposed to being one of
its independent sources, remains an open question. We will return to this issue in section
5.

3.6. Summary of the key facts. The four stylized facts documented above lead us to
two important conclusions, which crucially inform the rest of the analysis. First, the change
in the business cycle dynamics of inflation before and after 1990 stands out compared to
that of all the real variables that we have considered. Second, the co-movement of these
real variables is remarkably similar before and after 1990. Together, these two observations
suggest that we can focus the rest of the analysis on the bi-variate relationship between

12
  The data on long-term inflation expectations are constructed as in Clark and Doh (2014) and Del Negro
et al. (2017).
                              WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                    19




        Figure 3.3. Responses of all variables, conditional on unemployment following the
        path in the first subplot. These responses are computed by applying the methodology
        described in section 3.1 to the baseline VAR of section 2.2, augmented with long-term
        inflation expectations and the federal funds rate. The solid lines are posterior medians,
        while the shaded areas correspond to 68- and 95-percent posterior credible regions. The
        pre- and post-1990 samples consist of data from 1964:II to 1989:IV, and from 1989:I to
        2019:III, respectively.




inflation and real activity, with no need to be more specific on its measurement. As illus-
trated in section 4, however, this significant narrowing of the scope of the inquiry is not
sufficient to conclude that the anemic response of inflation to the cycle is due to a flattening
of the structural Phillips curve. The reason is that a flattening of the aggregate demand
relationship, perhaps induced by a more forceful reaction of monetary policy to inflation,
could in principle result in more stable inflation. Further distinguishing between these two
                           WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                20

possibilities requires putting more structure on the problem, as we will then do in sections
5 and 6.



                          4. Lessons from a Stylized Model

  To aid in the interpretation of the empirical facts described in section 3, we now introduce
a stylized model of the joint determination of inflation and real activity. This model,
which is directly inspired by McLeay and Tenreyro (2019), is based on the textbook New-
Keynesian framework of Woodford (2003) and Galí (2015). However, its implications for
the nature of business cycles under alternative hypotheses regarding the possible sources of
inflation stability are quite general, as we argue below. We use this simple model to make
three essential points: (i) the empirical facts of section 3 are consistent with two possible
explanations of the stability of inflation after 1990: either a reduction in the sensitivity
of pricing decisions to marginal cost pressures, or a change in the conduct of monetary
policy; (ii) the key implication that differs across these two hypotheses is that real activity
is driven predominantly by demand-type shocks in the first case, and supply-type (or cost-
push) disturbances in the second; (iii) unfortunately, it is difficult to empirically verify
which shocks--demand or supply--are prevalent in the post-1990 period based on the co-
movement pattern between inflation and real activity, because the variation of inflation is
minimal. Therefore, in the next sections we will introduce more information and structure
to further sharpen our inference.


4.1. A simple model of aggregate demand and supply. The stylized model we con-
sider consists of the following three familiar equations:

(4.1)                            t = Et t+1 +  (xt + st )


(4.2)                        xt = Et xt+1 -  (it - Et t+1 - t )


(4.3)                            it = Et t+1 +  t +  t ,

                                              n is the output gap (defined as the log
where t represents price inflation, xt  yt - yt
deviation of output from a measure of potential), it is the nominal interest rate, and st
                                WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                          21

and t are exogenous disturbances. In this formulation, Et t+1 and Et xt+1 denote rational
expectations of next period's inflation and output gap.13
   Equation (4.1) is the model's structural Phillips curve, an aggregate supply relationship
that maps higher output gaps into higher inflation. It is based on the dependence of
inflation on firms' marginal costs--a fairly general feature of optimal pricing problems
(Sbordone, 2002)--in combination with some simplifying assumptions that make marginal
costs proportional to the output gap. These simplifying assumptions, however, are not
restrictive for our analysis, given that facts 3 and 4 in section 3 document a stable dynamic
relationship between many real activity variables usually employed to measure slack, such
as unemployment, hours, GDP and unit labor costs. Therefore, given this stability, we do
not need to take a strong stance on what xt precisely represents in our stylized model, and
will simply refer to it generically as real activity, or the output gap. Finally, the supply, or
cost-push shock (st ) in equation (4.1) stems from fluctuations in desired markups, which
explains why it is scaled by the slope .14
   The other two equations constitute the demand block of the model. In particular, equa-
tion (4.2) is an Euler equation, or dynamic IS equation, which connects the nominal interest
rate to real activity. The strength of this negative relationship is governed by the parameter
 > 0. In addition, the equation is perturbed by the shock t , which can be interpreted
as capturing fluctuations in the Wicksellian natural rate of interest, due to technology or
demand disturbances. We will refer to it as a demand shock, for short. Equation (4.3) is
a simple interest rate rule that represents the response of the monetary policy authority to
economic developments. This specification allows for a direct response of the policy rate
to the IS shock--for reasons that will become clear shortly--and to inflation, where the
Taylor principle requires  > 0. Adding a term in the output gap, as in Taylor (1993), or
a monetary policy shock would not change the model's key qualitative implications.



13Lowercase letters denote logs, so that, for instance, y  log Y , where Y is the level of output. Y n is
                                                           t        t         t                           t
natural output, the level of output that would be observed in the absence of nominal rigidities.
14Under Calvo pricing, fluctuations in desired markups have the same effect on inflation as those in real
marginal costs. Therefore, in the limit in which prices never change, the sensitivity of inflation to both real
activity and desired markups captured by the parameter  goes to zero and inflation becomes perfectly
stable. More generally, we could allow for other sources of exogenous supply shocks, which might include, for
instance, exogenous shifts in inflation expectations that are not fully captured by the rational expectations
term Et t+1 . In the presence of such shocks, the variability of inflation is not zero even when  = 0, but
the qualitative implications of the model described below do not change.
                           WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                 22

  Plugging the policy rule into the IS equation produces a negative relationship between
inflation and real activity of the form

                                 t = - (xt - Et xt+1 - dt ) ,

where   ( )-1  0 and dt   ( - 1) t is a simple re-scaling of the demand shock.
If the demand disturbance is observable, monetary policy can perfectly offset it by setting
 = 1. More generally, demand shocks are likely to be transmitted to the economy at
least partially, either because the monetary authority observes them with noise, or because
it chooses not to react to them fully, or because it is prevented from doing so by the zero
lower bound. All of these scenarios are captured in this model by  < 1, which implies
some pass-through of these shocks into inflation.
  The negative slope of this aggregate demand equation reflects the fact that monetary
policy leans against inflation by raising the real interest rate, which in turns lowers real
activity. This feature of aggregate demand does not depend on the exact specification of the
interest rate rule, as long as the real interest rate responds positively to inflation. As shown
by McLeay and Tenreyro (2019), this is also a feature of aggregate demand under optimal
monetary policy. In this respect, our approach to modeling monetary policy and that of
McLeay and Tenreyro (2019) are isomorphic, even if they derive the aggregate demand
equation directly from an optimal policy problem, without relying on the IS equation. In
comparison, our setup with an IS equation and a policy rule is more explicit about some
potential sources of demand shocks, but its key implications are the same.
  In sum, at a high level of generality, the model is just an aggregate supply (AS) and ag-
gregate demand (AD) framework, similar to those typically found in intermediate macroe-
conomics textbooks, such as Jones, 2020. In fact, most of the intuition that we derive
from this framework stems exactly from this underlying demand and supply structure, as
in McLeay and Tenreyro (2019).



4.2. Two alternative sources of inflation stabilization. Given the structure of the
model, it is immediate to see that stable inflation can be the result of at least two changes
in the economy. First, a flat structural Phillips curve, which corresponds to   0. Second,
a very elastic aggregate demand curve, which corresponds to   0 or, in terms of the
interest rate rule, to   . In what follows, we will take these two extreme parametric
                                WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                            23

restrictions as stylized representations of the two alternative hypotheses on the ultimate
source of the observed inflation stability that have been most discussed in the literature.15, 16
   The first hypotheses--the (Phillips curve) slope hypothesis, for short--is that inflation
is stable because changes in the structure of goods markets or in firms' pricing practices
have produced a structural disconnect between inflation and marginal cost pressures. The
literature has explored many mechanisms that might lead to such a disconnect, as reviewed
in the introduction. Distinguishing among them is beyond the scope of this paper.
   The second hypothesis that we focus on--the policy hypothesis, for short--is that inflation
is stable because monetary policy now leans more heavily against inflation than it did in the
first part of the sample, thus reducing its variability in equilibrium. This is the hypothesis
favored by McLeay and Tenreyro (2019). In our stylized model, this hypothesis amounts to
assuming that  has increased in the second part of the sample. In the limit with   ,
inflation becomes perfectly stable. In practice, there are many channels through which a
change in the actual conduct of monetary policy and in the communication and public
understanding of its objectives can affect inflation dynamics and inflation expectations,
without going to the extreme of promising a very large increase in policy rates in reaction
to even small changes in inflation.17
   The rest of this section derives some basic implications of these two alternative hypotheses
in the context of our stylized model, and discusses the extent to which they are consistent
with the evidence in section 3.



15In our stylized model, a flat aggregate demand curve could also result from   , although its intercept
(and thus inflation) would still depend on the demand shock in this case. We do not focus on this possibility
because there is not much evidence that the responsiveness of the real economy to interest rates has increased
since 1990. If anything, there is some discussion of a reduced pass-through of interest rates, and of financial
conditions more generally, onto real variables, especially since the financial crisis.
16Another obvious possibility is that the volatilities of both shocks have fallen dramatically. Although the
large literature on the Great Moderation indeed suggests that the volatility of (at least some) shocks did
fall in the mid 1990s, we do not focus on this possible explanation because the volatility of real variables has
not fallen nearly as much as that of inflation, at least in response to business cycle shocks. In this respect,
our main object of inquiry is the reduction in the volatility of inflation relative to that of its plausible real
drivers, conditional on business cycle shocks.
17Inflation expectations do not play a crucial independent role in our model because under rational ex-
pectations they are a function of the same shocks that drive inflation. In this respect, stable inflation and
inflation expectations are two manifestations of the same phenomenon. Carvalho et al., 2019 discuss the
notion of expectation anchoring theoretically and empirically in the context of a model with learning, in
which expectations are not as tightly linked to actual inflation as under rational expectations. Jorgensen
and Lansing, 2019 also study the implications of a learning model for the observed connection between
inflation and real activity.
                           WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                24

4.3. Model solution. This section presents the solution of the simple model described
above under the assumption of i.i.d. shocks. With this simplifying assumption, expectations
are zero and the model reduces to a static demand and supply framework with stochastic
shocks,

                                     t =  (xt + st )

                                     t = - (xt - dt ) ,

whose solution is

                                             
                                  xt =  dt -   st
                                      +      +
                                             
                                  t =   dt +   st .
                                      +      +

  The particular form of this solution is of course model specific, but its economics is simple
and quite general. Demand shocks induce a positive correlation between inflation and the
output gap. With direct observations on dt , or an instrument for it, it would be possible
to estimate the slope of the Phillips curve  by comparing the response of xt and t to the
shock dt , as in Barnichon and Mesters (2019b) and Barnichon and Mesters (2019d). On the
contrary, supply shocks induce a negative correlation between inflation and the output gap,
from whose strength we could infer the demand parameter . When demand and supply
shocks cannot be directly observed, the correlation between inflation and the output gap is
not informative on either  or , as in the classic identification problem. This is the basic
point nicely illustrated by McLeay and Tenreyro (2019).
  To further clarify this identification challenge, and to shed light on how to potentially
overcome it, consider the solution of the model under the two alternative sources of inflation
stabilization that we discussed above,   0 or   0. Inflation is zero in both cases, but
xt = dt under the slope hypothesis, while xt = -st under the policy hypothesis. In other
words, when the slope of the structural Phillips curve is zero--for example because prices
are insensitive to marginal cost pressures--the economy becomes more "Keynesian," and
demand shocks are the predominant drivers of output fluctuations. On the contrary, when
policy leans very heavily against inflation, the economy tracks the flexible price equilibrium,
it becomes more "neoclassical," and economic fluctuations are driven by supply or cost-push
                            WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                  25

disturbances. In sum, which hypothesis--slope or policy--is a better explanation of post-
1990 inflation stability simply depends on whether post-1990 business cycles were mainly
driven by supply or demand disturbances.
  A popular approach to distinguish between demand- and supply-driven fluctuations is
to exploit the co-movement pattern of real activity and inflation. A strongly positive
correlation would signal the prevalence of demand shocks, while a negative one would favor
the predominance of supply innovations. Unfortunately, this strategy is not effective in our
case, given the observed stability of inflation: if inflation varies very little over the business
cycle--as it has since the 1990s--it also carries limited information to help us separate
demand from supply shocks based on the sign of its co-movement with real activity. This is
why, in the next sections, we will attempt to tackle this identification challenge by bringing
either more information to the table, or more theoretical restrictions on the impact matrix,
of the form provided for instance by full-blown DSGE models.


                5. Interpreting the Facts with a Structural VAR

  The U shock employed in section 3 is a useful descriptive tool, which helps to focus the
empirical analysis on the dynamics of inflation and real activity occurring over the cycle.
This exercise focuses on the frequencies at which the connection between the nominal
and real side of the economy is usually thought to be most evident, as well as those at
which monetary policy might have the most significant impact on these dynamics. But
most business cycle models with multiple shocks suggest that these dynamics reflect the
responses of the economy to a mixture of structural shocks, even if one of them might be
preponderant (e.g. Smets and Wouters, 2007 or Justiniano et al., 2010). In terms of the
stylized model presented above, the U shock would be a combination of demand and supply
disturbances, with weights that depend on the relative variance of those shocks, as well as
the structural parameters of the economy, including the slope of the aggregate demand and
supply equations. As argued in section 4, it is therefore impossible to determine the main
source of inflation stability--a flat aggregate supply or demand--unless we can distinguish
the two kinds of shocks more precisely. This is the task of this section.
  More specifically, we use data on the excess bond premium (EBP) constructed by Gilchrist
and Zakrajsek (2012) to identify a credit market disturbance, which we interpret as a proxy
for demand shocks. To do so, we add the EBP to the baseline VAR of section 2 and study
                               WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                          26

the impulse responses to innovations to the EBP that are orthogonal to the other variables
in the system.18 The idea is that innovations to the EBP capture disruptions in credit
markets that propagate through the rest of the economy largely as demand shocks. When
credit is tight, as signaled by a high EBP, investment falls, reducing aggregate demand and
generating further reactions in the economy that also lead to lower labor demand, lower
wages, lower income, and ultimately lower inflation.19
   This strategy does not hinge on the identification of genuinely exogenous "credit supply"
shocks, which can be hard to disentangle from other disturbances affecting financial markets,
such as uncertainty shocks or even monetary policy shocks (e.g. Caldara et al., 2016). All
we need is that these innovations to the EBP propagate through the economy by shifting
primarily the demand for labor and goods, regardless of their ultimate origin, and that this
is true to roughly the same extent before and after 1990. This is the maintained assumption
in the rest of this analysis.
   Figure 5.1 presents the impulse responses to the EBP innovation described above (to
save space, we omit the response of natural unemployment, given that it is flat). The EBP
shocks are more volatile in the second sample, mostly reflecting the sharp spike in credit
spreads during the financial crisis. Their standard deviation is approximately 60 percent
higher after 1990 than before. Therefore, we normalize the size of the shock in both samples
so that it increases the EBP by 1 percentage point on impact at the median draw. After
this normalization, the response of the EBP to its innovation has the same shape in the
two samples, which simplifies the evaluation of the changes in the reaction of the other
variables.
   Among these variables, the inflation rates barely react in the second sample, consistent
with the findings in section 3. According to the intuition developed within the stylized
model presented above, most of the information to distinguish between the slope and pol-
icy hypotheses should come from the responses of the real variables. Under the policy
18In practice, we order the EBP last in the VAR, and use a recursive scheme to identify the shock to the
EBP equation. The results are similar if we order the EBP first in the Cholesky ordering, or if we compute
impulse responses to the combination of shocks with the highest contribution to the EBP's variance at
business cycle frequencies. This identification strategy is similar to that pursued by Gilchrist et al. (2009)
and Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012). Their dynamic systems, a FAVAR and a VAR respectively, also include
"fast moving" variables, such as asset prices, which they place below the EBP in the Cholesky ordering. We
do not have such variables in our system, so we order the EBP last.
19This is how marginal efficiency of investment shocks in Justiniano et al., 2011, risk shocks in Christiano
et al., 2014 and spread shocks in Cai et al., 2019 propagate. All these shocks are identified mostly through
their effect on credit spreads.
                             WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                     27




       Figure 5.1. Impulse responses to an EBP shock, identified by assuming that it affects
       the excess bond premium contemporaneously, but all other variables with a lag. The
       impulse responses are from the baseline VAR of section 2.2, augmented with data on
       the excess bond premium. The solid lines are posterior medians, while the shaded areas
       correspond to 68- and 95-percent posterior credible regions. The pre- and post-1990
       samples consist of data from 1973:I to 1989:IV, and from 1989:I to 2019:III, respectively.



hypothesis, the economy should become more "neoclassical," with demand shocks having
smaller effects on the real variables. On the contrary, under the slope hypothesis the econ-
omy should become more "Keynesian," with demand shocks becoming more destabilizing.
Comparing the second sample to the first, there is evidence of an attenuated response of
unemployment, GDP and hours in the first few quarters after the shock. This piece of evi-
dence is consistent with the policy hypothesis, especially considering that this is the horizon
at which monetary policy has arguably the most bite on the real economy. However, the
                              WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                     28

response of all the real variables is much more persistent in the second sample. For instance,
the post-1990 response of unemployment remains statistically and economically positive for
a substantially longer period of time. As a consequence, the effect of the EBP shock on
unemployment, cumulated over a five year horizon, is actually overall larger in the second
sample than in the first. Similar considerations hold for GDP, hours and the labor share.
  On balance, this exercise provides fairly strong evidence in favor of the slope hypothesis,
given that the response of inflation has become much more muted than that of the real
variables. However, the experiment does not completely rule out an important contribu-
tion of monetary policy in better insulating the economy from demand shocks, and hence
delivering more stable inflation. Parsing this evidence into sharper conclusions on the rel-
ative contribution of these two developments to the stability of inflation since 1990 is very
difficult to do without putting more structure on the identification problem. This is what
we do in the next section.
  An alternative, perhaps more intuitive way of presenting these results is to retell them
through the perspective of the Great Recession. Most observers agree that the Great
Recession originated from the financial crisis that preceded it. Although that shock had a
complex origin and it affected the economy through many channels, it had the hallmarks
of a typical demand shock. In our VAR, one of the main manifestations of this shock is a
massive increase in the EBP. If this shock was indeed primarily a demand shock, the fact
that inflation fell by a very limited amount is a strong indication that that the slope of the
Phillips curve must be very low, at least relative to what it used to be before the 1990s.
  At the same time, the fact that the economy weathered the storm without a collapse more
akin to that experienced during the Great Depression is consistent with monetary policy
(arguably with some fiscal help) having been able to limit the impact of the shock to the
real economy. And perhaps the real effects of the shock could have been counteracted even
more effectively had it not been for the limits imposed by the zero lower bound on nominal
interest rates.20 Therefore, the evidence might also be consistent with an improvement
in the ability of policymakers to limit the damage caused by demand shocks on the real
economy. This second conclusion, however, requires taking a stance on the size of the shock
that hit the economy, in comparison for instance to the one that occurred in the early 1930s.

20The extent to which the ZLB was binding during the Great Recession and its aftermath is much debated
in the literature (e.g. Swanson and Williams, 2014, Gali and Gambetti, 2019, Eggertsson and Egiev, 2020)
                               WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                             29

Although many commentators have compared the extent of the financial disruption during
the financial crisis to that associated with the Great Depression, it is difficult to make such
a comparison formally. Therefore, we consider this second conclusion more tentative than
the one regarding the reduction in the slope of the Phillips curve, which is more directly
supported by the evidence.
   An important caveat to the line of reasoning pursued in this section is that it is predicated
on the assumption that EBP shocks, and the Great Recession, were both primarily demand
disturbances. More precisely, the requirement is that they should affect inflation through
their impact on the conventional measures of cost pressures that we have analyzed in section
3. If, on the contrary, these disturbances reflect an important cost-push component, the
evidence shown above is harder to interpret. Suppose that an increase in the EBP shock, by
raising financing costs, induces firms to charge higher prices, through channels that are not
manifested in changes in the labor share or other standard measures of slack, and that this
occurs to a greater extent in the second part of the sample than in the first. In this case,
inflation might end up being flat in response to that shock, as in the post-1990 evidence
above, since the impulse would act as a positive cost-push shock in the Phillips curve, at the
same time as it depresses other sources of cost pressure through the conventional demand
channels.21


5.1. The role of inflation expectations. Our SVAR analysis so far has focused on the
direct relationship between inflation and unemployment, conditional on demand shocks.
This conditional correlation is informative on the slope of the aggregate supply curve,
helping to distinguish it from that of aggregate demand. However, to translate our findings
on this conditional correlation into statements about the sensitivity of prices to costs, or
equivalently into the slope of the expectations-augmented Phillips curve of Friedman and
Phelps, we must take a stance on the dynamics of inflation expectations. The concern,
as articulated by Stock (2011) and Barnichon and Mesters (2019d) for instance, is that
anchored expectations produce a flatter aggregate supply curve, potentially confounding
changes in the coefficient on real activity in the "structural" Phillips curve. In fact, many
observers refer to the expectations-augmented Phillips curve in attributing the transition to
stable inflation since the 1990s to a change in the dynamics of inflation expectations, rather

21Christiano et al. (2015) and Gilchrist et al. (2017) develop models of this kind.
                            WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                30

than to a change in the responsiveness of prices to costs (e.g. Bernanke, 2007, Blanchard,
2016, Gordon, 2018 and Ball and Mazumder, 2019 among many others).
  One approach to addressing this concern is to be specific about the microfoundations of
firms' pricing decision, as we do in the DSGE model of the next section. In this section,
we take an intermediate step in evaluating the potential of a change in the dynamics of
expectations to be behind the finding of a flatter Phillips curve after 1990. This step is
based on the impulse responses to the EBP shock derived above. This approach is very
similar to that pursued by Barnichon and Mesters (2019d), but in contrast to their claim, it
confirms our main finding of a large decline in the slope of the structural Phillips curve over
the past three decades. This result is also consistent with the DSGE analysis of Section 6.
  Consider the following Phillips curve

                              e
(5.1)                     t = t +1|t + (1 - ) t-1 +  (xt + st ) ,


which generalizes (4.1) by allowing for inflation inertia and potentially non-rational inflation
expectations. This expression also imposes that inflation has no permanent effect on real
activity, consistent with many empirical versions of the Phillips curve, which are vertical in
the long run. By replacing the time index t with t + h, taking an expectation conditional
on time-t information and a "derivative" with respect to a demand shock at time t on both
sides, we obtain

                                        e                 x
(5.2)                           Rh = Rh + (1 - ) Rh -1 + Rh ,

       z      Et zt+h
where Rh       dt       is the impulse response at horizon h of a generic variable z to the
demand shock. In deriving (5.2), we used the fact that st is independent from the demand
disturbance. This equation says that, if (5.1) holds, the impulse responses of inflation,
expected inflation and the gap to a demand shock should satisfy (5.2) at every horizon h.
Therefore, if we observed the true impulse responses of these variables, we would be able
to infer the values of  and  that satisfy (5.2).
  In practice, the Phillips curve (5.1) does not hold exactly in the data. In addition, we
                            e
                    , R and Rx , as opposed to observing their population value. De-
can only estimate Rh   h     h

spite these difficulties, we can still compute a value for  and  by minimizing the distance
between our estimates of the right- and the left-hand-side of (5.2). To operationalize this
                              WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                     31




        Figure 5.2. Histogram of inferred values of  and  across posterior draws. These
        values are obtained as described in section 5.1, using the impulse responses of inflation,
        expected inflation and unemployment to an EBP shock, identified by assuming that it
        affects the excess bond premium contemporaneously, but all other variables with a lag.
        The impulse responses are from the baseline VAR of section 2.2, augmented with data
        on 1-quarter-ahead inflation expectations and the excess bond premium. The pre- and
        post-1990 samples consist of data from 1973:I to 1989:IV, and from 1989:I to 2019:III,
        respectively.




strategy, we augment the structural VAR of the previous section with a measure of one-
quarter-ahead inflation expectations from the Survey of Professional Forecasters. This VAR
produces impulse responses that are nearly identical to those of figure 5.1. In addition, the
reaction of expected inflation is similar to that of actual inflation, although more muted.
For each posterior draw of the impulse responses of inflation, expected inflation and un-
employment (which proxies for the gap) to the EBP shock, we compute a value of  and
 using a linear projection. Figure 5.2 summarizes the outcome of this procedure. The
right panel displays the histogram of the inferred value of  in the pre- and post-1990 sam-
ple. This value clearly shifts towards zero in the second sample, consistent with the slope
hypothesis. The estimate of  also declines, indicating a more inertial inflation process.
  Accounting for inflation inertia in equation (5.1), which is important to fit the behavior of
inflation as demonstrated by Fuhrer and Moore (1995), Galí and Gertler (1999) and Fuhrer
(2010), is also crucial to the inference on the slope of the Phillips curve. If we restrict
 = 1, as in Barnichon and Mesters (2019d), our results are more consistent with theirs: 
still declines after 1990, but less than in figure 5.2.
                             WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                      32




       Figure 5.3. Histogram of inferred values of  and  across posterior draws in the post-
       1990 sample (1989:I­2019:III). These values are obtained as described in section 5.1, using
       the impulse responses of inflation, expected inflation and unemployment to an EBP shock,
       identified by assuming that it affects the excess bond premium contemporaneously, but
       all other variables with a lag. The impulse responses are from the baseline VAR of section
       2.2, augmented with data on inflation expectations and the excess bond premium. The
       "Michigan survey" and "SPF" histograms are obtained using data on 1-year-ahead inflation
       expectations from the Michigan Survey and 1-quarter ahead inflation expectations from
       the Survey of Professional Forecasters, respectively.


  Another difference from Barnichon and Mesters (2019d) is that their analysis is based
on 1-year-ahead inflation expectations from the Michigan Survey, as in Coibion and Gorod-
nichenko (2015). Unfortunately, this series is only available starting in 1978, which does
not give us enough observations for a reliable estimation before 1990. However, figure 5.3
shows that the results for the post-1990 sample with the Michigan data are similar to our
baseline with SPF data, confirming the robustness of our findings.


          6. Interpreting the Facts with an Estimated DSGE Model

  As argued above, interpreting the facts of section 3 only through the lens of the VAR is
challenging, as one can only speculate on the mechanisms behind them. For instance, the
reduced sensitivity of inflation to labor market conditions in the second part of the sample
could be due to differences in monetary policy, or in other aspects of the economy. In the
previous section, we made progress on this issue by identifying a demand disturbance in a
structural VAR. In this section, instead, we interpret these facts through the lens of a fully
specified DSGE model.
                               WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                        33

     In such a structural model, interpreting the evidence is straightforward, since the mech-
anism is identified as part of the estimation. Of course, using structural models comes with
its own challenges, most notably the fact that the model may be misspecified. From the
perspective of the question at hand, such misspecification may imply that the DSGE cannot
reproduce the same facts as the VAR. The first part of this section addresses this concern.
It shows that the NY Fed DSGE model, when estimated over the same subsamples as the
VAR, reproduces the VAR facts both qualitatively and by and large quantitatively. In
particular, a shock that impacts the labor market in ways comparable to those described in
section 3 produces a muted response of inflation after 1990. The second part of the section
investigates what changes in the model's structural parameters deliver these much attenu-
ated responses. As in section 5, we focus on two explanations: changes in the conduct of
monetary policy and changes in the slope of the structural price Phillips curve. We begin
with a very brief description of the DSGE model.


6.1. The DSGE Model. The NY Fed DSGE model is a medium-scale New-Keynesian
model. In broad strokes, the model can be described as Smets and Wouters (2007) plus
financial frictions as in Bernanke et al. (1999) and Christiano et al. (2014). Variations of
this model have been used in Del Negro and Schorfheide (2013), Del Negro et al. (2015b)
and Del Negro et al. (2017).22 Cai et al. (2019) document the model's real time forecasting
performance over the past ten years. The model is estimated using multiple measures of
output growth (both GDP and GDI), the growth in consumption, investment, the real wage,
hours worked, two measures of inflation (both core PCE and the GDP deflator), long-run
inflation expectations, the federal funds rate, the ten-year Treasury yield, the Baa-Treasury
spread, and the series of total-factor-productivity growth constructed by Fernald (2012).
We also allow for anticipated policy shocks as in Del Negro et al. (2015a) and Laseen
and Svensson (2011), to account for the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates and
forward guidance. Therefore, we augment the set of observables to incorporate interest rate
expectations during the ZLB period. Appendix B provides all the equilibrium conditions,
the definition of the observables, and the specification of the priors, which are the same as
in Smets and Wouters (2007) for all parameters common to the two models.

22
  More specifically, the model is the same as that in Del Negro et al. (2017), except that the processes for
productivity growth and the safety premium were assumed to be more persistent in that paper.
                               WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                        34

   Here we only report two of the model's equations because their parameters are mentioned
in the analysis that follows. The first equation is the price Phillips curve

                                           p               ¯
                                                           
(6.1)                  t = p mct +            ¯ t - 1 +       ¯ Et [t+1 ] + f,t ,
                                        1 + p           1 + p 

where t is inflation, mct is marginal cost, and f,t captures exogenous fluctuations in
desired mark-ups. The slope of the Phillips curve is

                                             (1 - p ¯)(1 - p )
                                 p =           ¯)p ((p - 1) p + 1) .
                                        (1 + p 

Its key determinant is the Calvo parameter p , which represents the fraction of firms that do
not adjust their price in every period. Therefore, a higher p means that prices are stickier,
which makes the Phillips curve flatter. The other parameters entering the slope are the
degree of indexation p , the curvature parameter in the Kimball aggregator for prices                     p,

the size of fixed costs in production p , and ¯, the discount rate "adjusted" for steady state

growth.
   The second important equation is the interest rate rule followed by the monetary author-
ity

                                                                 
(6.2)               Rt = R Rt-1 + (1 - R ) ( (t - t ) + y (yt - yt ))
                                                                        m
                              +     y   (yt - yt ) - (yt-1 - yt -1 ) + rt .

                                are actual and "natural" output, so that their difference is a
where Rt is inflation, yt and yt
                            is a time-varying inflation target, and r m captures exogenous
measure of the output gap, t                                         t

departures from the policy rule.23


6.2. Can the DSGE replicate the VAR facts? To assess whether the estimated DSGE
model can reproduce the VAR facts of section 3, we compute the impulse responses to the
U shock in the VAR implied by the estimated DSGE model. Del Negro and Schorfheide
(2004) show how to construct the VAR approximation of the DSGE model, which they
call DSGEVAR(). We refer to this approximation as DSGEVAR in the remainder of the

23The time-varying inflation target   , which was not present in the original Smets and Wouters (2007)
                                    t
specification, is a very persistent process that captures the secular rise and fall of inflation and nominal
interest rates in the estimation sample. As in Del Negro and Eusepi (2011), we use data on long-run
inflation expectations as an observable in the estimation, which help the model to account for those low
frequency movements.
                              WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                       35

paper.24 The NY Fed DSGE model does not feature all the variables included in the VARs
of section 3, most notably unemployment. Therefore, the results in this section are based
on a DSGEVAR with slightly fewer observables. They are: hours worked per capita in log
levels, a measure of price inflation, the labor share, and wage inflation.25 This information
is enough to capture the dynamics of the key economic variables involved in the connection
between inflation and real activity.
  Figure 6.1 shows the impulse responses of these variables to a U shock in two DS-
GEVARs. The blue responses are based on the DSGEVAR implied by the pre-1990 DSGE
estimates; the red responses reflect the estimation on the post-1990 sample. The U shock
is identified using the methodology described in section 2.1, applied to hours rather than
to unemployment. As in section 3, the response of the labor market to a U shock is similar
in the two samples, although it is slightly smaller on impact and more persistent in the
second sample.26 The response of the labor share is also similar in the two samples and,
if anything, stronger in the post-1990 estimation. Qualitatively and quantitatively, these
responses are also very similar to those in section 3. The DSGE model therefore confirms
that the transmission of U shocks to marginal costs is very similar across the two samples.
On the contrary, the response of inflation is notably different: it is very muted in the sec-
ond sample, as in the VAR. Finally, the responses of nominal wage inflation are somewhat
weaker in the second sample, but not as weak as that of inflation, also consistent with the
results of section 3.
  What changes in the estimated DSGE parameters are responsible for the differences in
the DSGEVAR responses before and after 1990? To answer this question, we concentrate
on the parameters that map more directly into the alternative explanations of the muted
response of inflation to the business cycle that we are comparing: the slope of the price
and wage Phillips curve, and the parameters describing monetary policy. The first row of
figure 6.2 focuses on the former. The upper left panel shows the posterior distribution of the

24For any given vector of DSGE model parameters, the VAR approximation of the DSGE model is what
would be obtained by generating artificial data from the DSGE model and estimating a VAR on such
generated data. Del Negro and Schorfheide (2004) show how to compute the matrices of this VAR in
population, without actually generating any artificial data.
25The VARs used in section 3 also include the log-level of per-capita GDP. This variable is not stationary
in the NY Fed DSGE model. Therefore we cannot include it in the DSGEVAR.
26The DSGE model, and therefore the DSGEVAR, use a slightly different measure of hours worked than
the VAR of section 6.1. This is because the variable definitions in the NY Fed DSGE model are the same
as in Smets and Wouters (2007).
                                            WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                                                36

                                   hours                                                                 inflation
              -0.5                                                                           0.2

                                                       Pre 1990                                                              Pre 1990
                                                       Post 1990                                                             Post 1990
              -1.0
                                                                                             0.0




                                                                        percentage points
    percent




              -1.5
                                                                                            -0.2



              -2.0

                                                                                            -0.4


              -2.5

                                                                                            -0.6
                            5          10         15               20                              5          10        15               20
                                      horizon                                                                horizon


                                labor share                                                            wage inflation
                                                       Pre 1990                                                              Pre 1990
              0.00                                     Post 1990                                                             Post 1990
                                                                                             0.0




                                                                        percentage points
            -0.25                                                                           -0.3
  percent




                                                                                            -0.6
            -0.50



                                                                                            -0.9
            -0.75


                                                                                            -1.2
            -1.00
                            5          10         15               20                              5          10        15               20
                                      horizon                                                                horizon




                     Figure 6.1. Impulse responses of hours worked, price inflation, the labor share, and
                     wage inflation to a shock to the unemployment equation. The impulse responses are from
                     the VAR approximation of the NY Fed DSGE model described in section 6 and appendix
                     B.4. The shock is identified using a Cholesky strategy, with unemployment ordered first.
                     The solid lines are posterior medians, while the shaded areas correspond to 95-percent
                     posterior credible regions. The pre- and post-1990 samples consist of data from 1964:II
                     to 1989:IV, and from 1990:I to 2019:III, respectively.


slope of the price Phillips curve p in the two samples, which has declined substantially over
time.27 In contrast, the upper right panel of figure 6.2 shows that the posterior distribution
of the slope of the wage Phillips curve (w ) is quite similar across samples, although it also
shifts somewhat to the right.

27We focus on the slope of the price Phillips curve  , rather than on the underlying structural parameters,
                                                    p
for two reasons. First, the aggregate data used in the estimation of the DSGE model identify the slope, not
the underlying structural parameters. For example, the price stickiness parameter p and Kimball aggregator
parameter p are not separately identified, as they only affect the slope and do not enter anywhere else
in the model. We follow Smets and Wouters (2007) in estimating the former and calibrating the latter,
but this is an arbitrary choice. Therefore, we cannot interpret the change in the slope reliably in terms of
the underlying structural parameters. Second, only the slope, and not the underlying parameters, matters
for the dynamics of the system and for the outcome of the counterfactuals presented below. With these
caveats, figure C.1 in the appendix reports the posterior estimates of the price stickiness parameter p ,
which, according to our estimation, is the key driver of the change in the slope.
                            WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                 37

                      p                                                 w




                                                                        y




                        y                                               R




       Figure 6.2. Prior and posterior distributions for selected parameters of the NY Fed
       DSGE model described in section 6 and appendix B.4. The pre- and post-1990 samples
       consist of data from 1964:II to 1989:IV, and from 1990:I to 2019:III, respectively.



  The remaining two rows of figure 6.2 focus on the parameters of the monetary policy
rule, which capture the inertia of the interest rate (R ) and its response to inflation ( ),
the output gap level (y ) and its growth (      y ).   The posterior distribution of the response
to inflation does not change much across samples. The response to the output gap increases
after 1990, while that to its growth rate falls. Interest-rate persistence is notably higher
                                WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                            38

after 1990.28 The implications of the estimated decline in the slope of the price Phillips
curve p for the dynamics of inflation are clear, at least qualitatively: they make inflation
less responsive to real activity, as in the data. In contrast, the combined implications of
the changes in the policy rule parameters are less obvious. Therefore, we now move to
investigate which of these changes in estimated parameters might explain the observed
changes in the response of inflation to U shocks.

6.3. Explaining the facts. Can the changes in the estimates of the slope of the price
Phillips curve and/or the policy parameters quantitatively explain the facts of figure 6.1?
Figure 6.3 answers this question. The blue and red solid lines show the impulse responses
to a business cycle shock in the DSGEVAR implied by the posterior mode of the DSGE
parameters before and after 1990.29 The black lines show the counterfactual impulse re-
sponses obtained using the pre-1990 parameters, except for the slope of the Phillips curve
(solid), and the policy-rule parameters (dashed). For these parameters, we use the pos-
terior mode of the post-1990 estimates. We refer to the solid and dashed black lines as
the "slope counterfactual" and the "policy counterfactual," respectively. The point of this
exercise is the following: if changes in the slope (policy) fully account for the differences
in the impulse responses across samples, than the solid (dashed) black line should be as
close as possible to the solid red line. In terms of the responses of hours and the labor
share, both counterfactuals are close to the red line, which represents the actual post-1990
responses. However, this is not the case for the responses of price and wage inflation. For
inflation, the slope counterfactual is essentially on top of the actual post-1990 response. In
contrast, the policy counterfactual produces an even stronger reaction than before 1990.
Finally, both counterfactuals tend to overestimate the response of wage inflation, with the
policy counterfactual again fairing worse than the slope one.
   Figure 6.3 indicates that changes in the slope of the price Phillips curve alone can explain
the muted response of inflation to U shocks. Together with the fact that the policy rule is
not very different before and after 1990, except for the estimate of R , this result suggests
that a change in the policy rule is not necessary to account for the behavior of inflation
28During the recent ZLB episode, the model accounts for the forced deviations of the interest rate from the
estimated policy rule, as well as for forward guidance, using anticipated monetary policy shocks.
29These responses are essentially the same as those in figure 6.1. The difference is that, there, the solid lines
are the medians of the posterior distribution of the impulse responses. Here, the solid lines are the impulse
responses at the mode of the posterior distribution of the parameters. We use the posterior mode of the
parameters here because this approach makes it easier to conduct the counterfactual described below.
                                              WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                                                      39

                                    hours                                                                     inflation
               -0.5                                                                               0.2



               -1.0
                                                                                                  0.0




                                                                             percentage points
     percent




               -1.5
                                                                                                 -0.2


               -2.0
                                                    Pre 1990                                                                 Pre 1990
                                                    Post 1990                                    -0.4                        Post 1990
                                                    Counterfactual Slope                                                     Counterfactual Slope
                                                    Counterfactual Policy                                                    Counterfactual Policy
               -2.5

                                                                                                 -0.6
                              5         10         15                   20                              5          10        15                  20
                                        horizon                                                                   horizon


                                  labor share                                                               wage inflation

               0.00                                                                               0.0




                                                                             percentage points
           -0.25                                                                                 -0.3
 percent




           -0.50                                                                                 -0.6

                                                    Pre 1990                                                                 Pre 1990
                                                    Post 1990                                    -0.9                        Post 1990
           -0.75                                    Counterfactual Slope                                                     Counterfactual Slope
                                                    Counterfactual Policy                                                    Counterfactual Policy

                                                                                                 -1.2
           -1.00
                              5         10         15                   20                              5          10        15                  20
                                        horizon                                                                   horizon




                      Figure 6.3. Impulse responses of hours worked, price inflation, the labor share, and
                      wage inflation to a shock to the unemployment equation. The impulse responses are
                      from the VAR approximation of the NY Fed DSGE model described in section 6 and
                      appendix B.4. The shock is identified using a Cholesky strategy, with unemployment
                      ordered first. The "pre-1990" and "post-1990" lines are impulse responses constructed
                      using the modal posterior estimates in the pre-and post-1990 samples, respectively. The
                      "counterfactual slope" responses are obtained using the pre-1990 modal posterior estimates
                      for all parameters except the slope of the Phillips curve, for which we use the post-1990
                      posterior mode. The "counterfactual policy" responses are obtained using the pre-1990
                      modal posterior estimates for all parameters except the policy rule ones, for which we use
                      the post-1990 posterior mode.


after 1990. But could there still be a role for policy if we took a change in the slope of the
Phillips curve off the table?
       To answer this question, we estimate the DSGE model before and after 1990 allowing
only the policy rule parameters to change. The other parameters are assumed to be constant
over the entire sample. The purpose of this exercise is to give the policy hypothesis the best
shot at explaining the facts. The policy rule parameters estimated as part of this exercise
are reported in figure 6.4. They are different from those in figure 6.2, which are based on
an estimation in which all parameters can change before and after 1990 to best fit the data.
                               WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                 40

First, the distribution of the response to inflation ( ) is skewed to the right after 1990,
relative to the pre-1990 estimates. Second, the differences in the response to the output
gap (y ) before and after 1990 are larger than in figure 6.2. Third, the response to the
output gap growth (       y)   is now also stronger in the second sample, rather than weaker.
Finally, the persistence in interest rates (R ) remains much higher post 1990, which implies
that monetary policy has stronger control of inflation, as shown for instance by Woodford,
2003.
                                                                           y




                          y                                                R




        Figure 6.4. Prior and posterior distributions for selected parameters of the NY Fed
        DSGE model described in section 6 and appendix B.4. In this experiment, the model
        is estimated allowing for two distinct monetary policy regimes, pre- and post-1990, but
        assuming that all other coefficients are constant for the entire sample from 1964:II to
        2019:III.


  Together, these changes in the policy rule parameters do result in a more muted response
of inflation to the U shock in the second sample, as shown in figure 6.5. This is not too
surprising, since this version of the model must account for the stability of inflation after
1990 only using changes in the policy parameters. The conclusion is that it is possible to
find changes in the policy rule parameters that stabilize inflation as in the data. However,
                               WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                         41

this success in the inflation dimension comes at the cost of also muting the responses of
hours and the labor share after 1990. This is in contrast with the empirical facts highlighted
in section 3 and in figure 6.1, in which hours and the labor share are, if anything, more
responsive after 1990. These results can be interpreted in light of the discussion in section
4: to the extent that the main shocks hitting the economy are demand shocks, policy can
effectively control inflation by neutralizing their real effects. But the evidence that this has
occurred is weak.30
   These results stand in contrast to those of figure 6.6, where we repeat the same exercise
imposing that only the slope of the price Phillips curve has changed between the two
samples. The responses in figure 6.6 are in line with those in figure 6.1: the reaction of
hours and the labor share is very similar across samples, but that of inflation is much more
muted after 1990.31

                                      7. Policy Implications

   To understand the policy implications of our findings, a useful starting point is the simple
model of section 4. In that framework, both real activity and inflation increase in response
to a positive shift in aggregate demand. With a flatter aggregate supply curve, however, any
given shift in demand has a larger impact on real activity and a smaller effect on inflation.
As it turns out, this simple "static" intuition also holds in the quantitative DSGE model of
section 6: in response to a monetary policy shock, either a short-lived or a very persistent
one, inflation reacts less and real activity reacts more when the Phillips-curve slope is low.
In essence, with a flatter Phillips curve, it is more difficult for monetary authorities to steer
inflation in any particular direction using unsystematic policy measures.
   The fact that monetary policy cannot as easily control inflation by engineering isolated,
unexpected shifts in aggregate demand should not be surprising. After all, a flatter Phillips
30The exercise that we just described might not in fact be the best shot for the policy hypothesis because
the post-1990 sample includes a long period at the ZLB, when monetary policy could not react as much to
U shocks. Figures C.2 and C.3 in the Appendix reproduce the results in figures 6.4 and 6.5 using a sample
ending in 2008:III, before the onset of the ZLB period and the Great Recession. These parameter estimates
indicate an even stronger response to inflation in the post-1990 period, but the impulse responses in figure
C.3 do not suggest any attenuation in the response of inflation to a U shock after 1990, contrary to the
evidence.
31The corresponding posterior distributions of the slope of the price Phillips curve  pre- and post-1990
                                                                                        p
are shown in figure C.4 in the appendix. They are are very similar to those in figure 6.2. In this exercise
the slope of the price Phillips curve changes across samples due to changes in the price stickiness parameter
p . Results are similar when both the slope of the price Phillips curve p and the indexation parameter p
are allowed to change.
                                            WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                                                42

                                  hours                                                                  inflation
             -0.5                                                                            0.2

                                                       Pre 1990                                                              Pre 1990
                                                       Post 1990                                                             Post 1990
             -1.0
                                                                                             0.0




                                                                        percentage points
   percent




             -1.5
                                                                                            -0.2



             -2.0

                                                                                            -0.4


             -2.5

                                                                                            -0.6
                           5          10         15                20                              5          10        15               20
                                      horizon                                                                horizon


                               labor share                                                             wage inflation
                                                       Pre 1990                                                              Pre 1990
             0.00                                      Post 1990                                                             Post 1990
                                                                                             0.0




                                                                        percentage points
           -0.25                                                                            -0.3
 percent




                                                                                            -0.6
           -0.50



                                                                                            -0.9
           -0.75


                                                                                            -1.2
           -1.00
                           5          10         15                20                              5          10        15               20
                                      horizon                                                                horizon




                    Figure 6.5. Impulse responses of hours worked, price inflation, the labor share, and
                    wage inflation to a shock to the unemployment equation. The impulse responses are
                    from the VAR approximation of the NY Fed DSGE model described in section 6 and
                    appendix B.4. The shock is identified using a Cholesky strategy, with unemployment
                    ordered first. The solid lines are posterior medians, while the shaded areas correspond to
                    95-percent posterior credible regions. In this experiment, the model is estimated allowing
                    for two distinct monetary policy regimes, pre- and post-1990, but assuming that all other
                    coefficients are constant for the entire sample from 1964:II to 2019:III.




curve corresponds to a structural change in the economy. As a consequence, the best way
for monetary policy to re-establish its control of inflation should be to change its systematic
reaction to the state of the economy, as opposed to through a series of policy shocks. In
addition, intuitively, the value of adopting such a policy rule should be higher exactly when
the slope of the Phillips curve is low and the trade-off implied by a "business-as-usual"
policy is unfavorable.
     We illustrate this principle quantitatively using the DSGE model discussed in the pre-
vious section. We begin by showing that our main explanation for the muted response of
inflation to real activity--a lower slope of the Phillips curve--is also consistent with the
                                            WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                                                 43

                                   hours                                                                  inflation
             -0.5                                                                             0.2

                                                        Pre 1990                                                              Pre 1990
                                                        Post 1990                                                             Post 1990
             -1.0
                                                                                              0.0




                                                                         percentage points
   percent




             -1.5
                                                                                             -0.2



             -2.0

                                                                                             -0.4


             -2.5

                                                                                             -0.6
                            5          10         15                20                              5          10        15               20
                                      horizon                                                                 horizon


                                labor share                                                             wage inflation
                                                        Pre 1990                                                              Pre 1990
             0.00                                       Post 1990                                                             Post 1990
                                                                                              0.0




                                                                         percentage points
           -0.25                                                                             -0.3
 percent




                                                                                             -0.6
           -0.50



                                                                                             -0.9
           -0.75


                                                                                             -1.2
           -1.00
                            5          10         15                20                              5          10        15               20
                                      horizon                                                                 horizon




                    Figure 6.6. Impulse responses of hours worked, price inflation, the labor share, and
                    wage inflation to a shock to the unemployment equation. The impulse responses are from
                    the VAR approximation of the NY Fed DSGE model described in section 6 and appendix
                    B.4. The shock is identified using a Cholesky strategy, with unemployment ordered first.
                    The solid lines are posterior medians, while the shaded areas correspond to 95-percent
                    posterior credible regions. In this experiment, the model is estimated allowing for two
                    distinct regimes for the slope of the price Phillips curve, pre- and post-1990, but assuming
                    that all other coefficients are constant for the entire sample from 1964:II to 2019:III.




persistent weakness of inflation since the Great Recession. We then demonstrate that alter-
native policy rules--such as average inflation targeting--can be as effective at stabilizing
inflation with a flat Phillips curve as it would have been with a steeper one.
     The solid lines in figure 7.1 show the model's forecasts of inflation and marginal costs
starting in 2020Q1 under the estimated policy rule and two alternative settings for the
slope of the price Phillips curve p : post-1990 (in red) and pre-1990 (in blue). As shown
in figure 6.2 both the pre- and post-1990 values of p are quite low in absolute terms. For
                                   WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                                           44

ease of exposition, and to emphasize the relative differences, we will refer to the pre-1990
p as "high" and to the post-1990 p as "low" in the remainder of the section.32

                     core inflation                                                  marginal costs
     3

                                                                                                         Post 1990 Slope
                                                                                                         Pre 1990 Slope
                                                                                                         Pre 1990 Slope, AIT
                                                                      2                                  Post 1990 Slope, AIT

     2


                                                                      0




     1
                                                                     -2
                                              Pre 1990 Slope
                                              Pre 1990 Slope, AIT
                                              Post 1990 Slope
                                              Post 1990 Slope, AIT
                                                                     -4
     0
     2007-Q1   2012-Q1   2017-Q1    2022-Q1         2027-Q1           2007-Q1   2012-Q1   2017-Q1   2022-Q1           2027-Q1




         Figure 7.1. Forecasts of core PCE inflation and marginal costs obtained from the
         NY Fed DSGE model, using the modal estimate of p in the pre- and post-1990 period,
         under the estimated policy rule and a counterfactual policy of average inflation targeting
         (AIT). The lines going back to 2007 represent data for inflation and the smoothed values
         of marginal costs, which are not observed. The two values for p , as well as the values
         of the other DSGE parameters used to generate the forecasts, are the modal estimates of
         the two-regime estimation where only the slope of the price Phillips curve is allowed to
         be different across the pre- and post-1990 regimes.


  When p is high, inflation falls more initially but then it reverts relatively quickly to the
FOMC's long run goal. When p is low, the shortfall of inflation is much more persistent,
to the point that it is not closed even by the end of the forecast horizon (left panel). The
differences in the inflation forecasts can be explained in terms of those for real marginal
costs (right panel). When p is high, marginal costs revert more quickly to the steady state,
while they remain persistently depressed with a low p . Intuitively, a high p brings the
economy closer to one with flexible prices, in which real marginal costs never deviate from
their desired level. With a low p , on the contrary, the deviations of marginal costs from
their desired level is more persistent, due to a stronger endogenous propagation.33 In the
current situation, this means that the drag on marginal costs brought about by the Great
32The two values for  , as well as the values of the other DSGE model parameters used to generate the
                     p
forecasts, are the modal estimates of the two-regime estimation where only the slope of the price Phillips
curve is allowed to be different across the two regimes. The blue forecast is computed under the assumption
that p returns to its pre-1990 value starting in 2020Q1.
33In his discussion, Olivier Blanchard makes the point that markups, which are the inverse of the real
marginal costs shown in figure 7.1, are more countercyclical in recent decades than they had been before.
His evidence is consistent with figure 7.1: after 1990 the economy has become more "Keynesian" and real
marginal costs fall more, and more persistently, following a recession.
                               WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                        45

Recession and by the other negative shocks that followed continues to exert a negative
impact on inflation. Therefore, a flat estimated Phillips curve in the New York Fed DSGE
model contributes to explain why inflation has been persistently below target over the past
decade.
   We now repeat the same exercise, but under the alternative policy rule of "average infla-
tion targeting" (AIT). We focus on this specific rule because it is a much discussed monetary
policy strategy in the current debate (e.g. Mertens and Williams, 2019). The exact AIT
rule used in the counterfactual simulations is

                                                  0.25
(7.1)                                      Rt =        gapt ,
                                                  1-

where the inflation gap is computed as

                                        gapt =  t + gapt-1

and all the variables are in deviation from their steady state. For inflation, this is 2 per-
cent--the FOMC's long-run goal.34
   The dashed lines in figure 7.1 show that switching to AIT has a more significant effect
on the dynamics of marginal costs in the low p economy: the gap between the solid and
dashed red lines is larger and more persistent than that for the blue lines, which represent
the high p economy. As a consequence, marginal costs quickly revert to steady state,
leading to nearly identical paths of inflation in the high and low p economies.
   In sum, a flat Phillips curve requires the monetary authority to work harder to stabilize
inflation: unemployment needs to get lower to bring inflation back to target after a recession,
everything else being equal. In equilibrium, however, a flat Phillips curve also makes the
economy more "Keynesian," implying that systematic monetary policy can persistently
affect the dynamics of marginal costs (Del Negro et al., 2015b). As a result, the ability of
policy to achieve its objectives is not compromised. A corollary of this general principle
is that systematic policies like average inflation targeting could be especially effective in
bringing inflation back to 2 percent in the current environment, as shown by the simulations
above. An important caveat to this sanguine conclusion is that we obtained it in a rational

34The AIT gap gap is the discounted average of past inflation rates, where we set  = 0.93 to produce a
                 t
half life of 10 quarters. In this example, we set gapt = 0 at the beginning of the forecast, resulting in no
overshooting. Lower initial values of the gap, reflecting the accumulated shortfall of inflation from target
over the past few years, would generate an overshoot of inflation over 2 percent.
                                WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                          46

expectations New Keynesian model where private agents perfectly understand the monetary
policy strategy in place.35 However, the idea that monetary policy has a tighter grip on the
real economy when aggregate supply is flatter goes beyond the confines of this specific class
of models. We conclude that, even in the current environment, monetary policy can be as
effective as it ever was in achieving price stability, as long as it pursues the appropriate
strategy.


                                      8. Concluding Remarks

   How do inflation and unemployment co-move over the business cycle? This paper ex-
plored how the answer to this question changed over the past few decades, and why. Unlike
much of the existing Phillips curve literature, we address this question in a multivariate,
dynamic context--studying impulse responses to typical unemployment shocks in a VAR,
rather than regression coefficients in a Phillips curve--because the persistence of the busi-
ness cycle impulses matters, and because looking jointly at several variables provides more
clues on possible mechanisms and explanations.
   We find that the persistence of unemployment fluctuations has increased somewhat after
1990, consistent with longer but shallower recoveries. The same is true of many other
measures of labor and goods market activity that are commonly employed as proxies for
cost pressures, including real wages and unit labor costs. The exception to this picture of
relative stability over time is inflation, which has become far less sensitive to business cycle
shocks.
   Who is the culprit? Together, our findings rule out explanations that hinge on unem-
ployment having become less relevant as an indicator of wage and price pressures, or on
the demise of the wage Phillips curve. We are left to consider two main possibilities, which
have potentially very different implications for monetary policy. One is a lower slope of
the price Phillips curve, leading to a more "Keynesian economy," in which demand shocks
dominate business cycles. The other is that policy is better able and/or willing to stabilize
inflation, making the economy more "neo-classical," with fluctuations dominated by supply
shocks instead.

35One relevant feature of this class of models is the so-called forward guidance puzzle (e.g. Del Negro et al.,
2015a) according to which policies based on promises of future actions are too successful in stabilizing the
economy. This is one of the channels through which AIT works well to stabilize inflation in our simulations.
For an assessment of the effectiveness of AIT under bounded rationality, see Budianto et al. (2020).
                           WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                               47

  The casual observation that inflation and unemployment were on the same side of the
Federal Reserve's dual mandate for many years after the Great Recession casts some doubt
on the policy hypothesis. To support this observation more formally, we use a structural
VAR and the NY Fed DSGE model to identify shocks and mechanisms. The SVAR suggests
that inflation has become less responsive to shocks to credit spreads that have a large impact
on real activity. If these shocks mostly shift aggregate demand, this evidence supports the
slope hypothesis. This is the same conclusion reached by the DSGE model. Although
it imposes more restrictions than the VAR, the DSGE can replicate the VAR impulse
responses, and it attributes the reduction in the sensitivity of inflation to business cycle
shocks to a reduction in the slope of the structural Phillips curve. Changes in the policy
parameters, alone, are less successful at explaining the facts.
  Although our analysis points more decisively in the direction of the slope than of the
policy hypothesis, it does not imply that monetary policy did not play a role in stabilizing
inflation. By most accounts, it was the Federal Reserve under Chair Volcker that brought
inflation under control in the early eighties, when our estimates find that the price Phillips
curve was still alive and well. Moreover, our study leaves a number of important questions
unanswered. First among them are what structural forces underlie the reduced sensitivity
of inflation to cost pressures. We leave this question for future research.




                                       References

Abraham, K. G., J. C. Haltiwanger, and L. E. Rendell (2020): "How Tight is the
  U.S. Labor Market?" Prepared for the Spring 2020 Brookings Papers.
Afrouzi, H. and C. Yang (2019): "Dynamic Rational Inattention and the Phillips
  Curve," Available at SSRN 3465793.
Angeletos, G.-M., F. Collard, and H. Dellas (2019): "Business Cycle Anatomy,"
  MIT, mimeo.
Aruoba, S. B. and F. Schorfheide (2010): "Sticky Prices versus Monetary Frictions:
  An Estimation of Policy Trade-offs," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
  forthcoming.
Atkeson, A. and L. E. Ohanian (2001): "Are Phillips Curves Useful for Forecasting
  Inflation?" Federal Reserve of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 25(1), 2­11.
                          WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                            48

Auer, R. and A. M. Fischer (2010): "The effect of low-wage import competition on
  U.S. inflationary pressure," Journal of Monetary Economics, 57, 491­503.
Ball, L. and S. Mazumder (2011): "Inflation Dynamics and the Great Recession,"
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 42, 337­405.
------ (2019): "A Phillips Curve with Anchored Expectations and Short-Term Unemploy-
  ment," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 51, 111­137.
Banbura, M., D. Giannone, and M. Lenza (2015): "Conditional forecasts and scenario
  analysis with vector autoregressions for large cross-sections," International Journal of
  Forecasting, 31, 739­756.
Barnichon, R. and G. Mesters (2019a): "Identifying modern macro equations with old
  shocks," .
------ (2019b): "Identifying Modern Macro Equations with Old Shocks," CEPR Discussion
  Papers 13765, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.
------ (2019c): "The Phillips Multiplier," .
------ (2019d): "The Phillips Multiplier," CEPR Discussion Papers 13480, C.E.P.R. Dis-
  cussion Papers.
Bernanke, B. (2007): "Inflation expectations and inflation forecasting," in Speech given
  at the Monetary Economics Workshop of the NBER Summer Institute, Cambridge, Mas-
  sachussets.
Bernanke, B. S., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist (1999): "The financial accelerator in
  a quantitative business cycle framework," in Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B.
  Taylor and M. Woodford, Elsevier, vol. 1 of Handbook of Macroeconomics, chap. 21,
  1341­1393.
Blanchard, O. (2016): "The Phillips Curve: Back to the '60s?" American Economic
  Review, 106, 31­34.
Blanchard, O., E. Cerutti, and L. Summers (2015): "Inflation and Activity â Two
  Explorations and their Monetary Policy Implications," NBER Working Papers 21726,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Boivin, J. and M. P. Giannoni (2006): "DSGE Models in a Data Rich Enviroment,"
  NBER Working Paper, 12772.
Budianto, F., T. Nakata, and S. Schmidt (2020): "Average Inflation Targeting and
  the Interest Rate Lower Bound," BIS Working Papers no. 852.
                          WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                             49

Cai, M., M. Del Negro, M. P. Giannoni, A. Gupta, P. Li, and E. Moszkowski
  (2019): "DSGE Forecasts of the Lost Recovery," International Journal of Forecasting.
Caldara, D., C. Fuentes-Albero, S. Gilchrist, and E. Zakrajsek (2016): "The
  macroeconomic impact of financial and uncertainty shocks," European Economic Review,
  88, 185­207.
Calvo, G. A. (1983): "Staggered prices in a utility-maximizing framework," Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 12, 383­398.
Carvalho, C., S. Eusepi, E. Moench, and B. Preston (2019): "Anchored Inflation
  Expectations," .
Cavallo, A. (2018): "More Amazon Effects: Online Competition and Pricing Behaviors,"
  NBER Working Papers 25138, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): "Nominal Rigidities and
  the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy," Journal of Political Economy, 113,
  1­45.
Christiano, L. J., M. S. Eichenbaum, and M. Trabandt (2015): "Understanding
  the Great Recession," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7, 110­167.
Christiano, L. J., R. Motto, and M. Rostagno (2003): "The Great Depression and
  the Friedman-Schwartz Hypothesis," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 35, 1119­
  1197.
------ (2014): "Risk Shocks," American Economic Review, 104, 27­65.
Clark, T. E. and T. Doh (2014): "Evaluating alternative models of trend inflation,"
  International Journal of Forecasting, 30, 426­448.
Coibion, O. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2015): "Is the Phillips Curve Alive and Well after
  All? Inflation Expectations and the Missing Disinflation," American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics, 7, 197­232.
Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, and D. Koustas (2013): "Amerisclerosis? The Puz-
  zle of Rising U.S. Unemployment Persistence," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
  44, 193­260.
Crump, R. K., S. Eusepi, M. Giannoni, and A. Sahin (2019): "A Unified Approach
  to Measuring u*," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2019, 143­238.
Daly, M. C. and B. Hobijn (2014): "Downward Nominal Wage Rigidities Bend the
  Phillips Curve," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 46, 51­93.
                         WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                           50

Davis, S. J. (2019): "Comments on "A Unified Approach to Measuring u*"," Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity, 223­230.
De Graeve, F. (2008): "The External Finance Premium and the Macroeconomy: US
  Post-WWII Evidence," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 32, 3415 ­ 3440.
Del Negro, M. and S. Eusepi (2011): "Fitting Observed Inflation Expectations," Jour-
  nal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 35, 2105­2131.
Del Negro, M., D. Giannone, M. P. Giannoni, and A. Tambalotti (2017): "Safety,
  liquidity, and the natural rate of interest," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
  Spring.
Del Negro, M., M. P. Giannoni, and C. Patterson (2015a): "The Forward Guidance
  Puzzle," FRBNY Staff report.
Del Negro, M., M. P. Giannoni, and F. Schorfheide (2015b): "Inflation in the Great
  Recession and New Keynesian Models," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
  7, 168­196.
Del Negro, M. and F. Schorfheide (2004): "Priors from General Equilibrium Models
  for VARs," International Economic Review, 45, 643 ­ 673.
------ (2013): "DSGE Model-Based Forecasting," in Handbook of Economic Forecasting,
  Volume 2, ed. by G. Elliott and A. Timmermann, Elsevier.
Eggertsson, G. and S. K. Egiev (2020): "A Unified Theory of the Great Depression
  and the Great Recession ," Mimeo, Brown University.
Faccini, R. and L. Melosi (2020): "Bad Jobs and Low Inflation," Mimeo, Federal Reserve
  Bank of Chicago.
Fernald, J. G. (2012): "A quarterly, utilization-adjusted series on total factor produc-
  tivity," Working Paper Series 2012-19, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Fitzgerald, T. J. and J. P. Nicolini (2014): "Is There a Stable Relationship between
  Unemployment and Future Inflation? Evidence from U.S. Cities," Working Papers 713,
  Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Forbes, K. (2019a): "Inflation Dynamics: Dead, Dormant, or Determined Abroad?"
  NBER Working Papers 26496, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Forbes, K. J. (2019b): "How Have Shanghai, Saudi Arabia, and Supply Chains Affected
  U.S. Inflation Dynamics?" Review, 27­44.
                         WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                            51

Forbes, K. J., J. E. Gagnon, and C. G. Collins (2020): "Low Inflation Bends the
  Phillips Curve around the World," Peterson Institute for International Economics, Work-
  ing Paper 20-06.
Fuhrer, J. and G. Moore (1995): "Inflation Persistence," The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 110, 127­159.
Fuhrer, J. C. (2010): "Inflation Persistence," in Handbook of Monetary Economics, ed. by
  B. M. Friedman and M. Woodford, Elsevier, vol. 3 of Handbook of Monetary Economics,
  chap. 9, 423­486.
Galí, J. (2015): Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to
  the New Keynesian Framework and Its Applications Second edition, no. 10495 in Eco-
  nomics Books, Princeton University Press.
Gali, J. and L. Gambetti (2018): "Has the U.S. Wage Phillips Curve Flattened? A
  Semi-Structural Exploration," Mimeo, CREI.
------ (2019): "On the Empricial (Ir)Relevance of the Zero Lower Bound Constraint," in
  NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
Galí, J. and M. Gertler (1999): "Inflation dynamics: A structural econometric analy-
  sis," Journal of Monetary Economics, 44, 195­222.
Geerolf, F. (2019): "The Phillips Curve: a Relation between Real Exchange Rate Growth
  and Unemployment," 2018 Meeting Papers 1187, UCLA.
Giannone, D., M. Lenza, and G. E. Primiceri (2015): "Prior Selection for Vector
  Autoregressions," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 97, 436­451.
Giannone, D., M. Lenza, and L. Reichlin (2019): "Money, Credit, Monetary Pol-
  icy, and the Business Cycle in the Euro Area: What Has Changed Since the Crisis?"
  International Journal of Central Banking, 15, 137­173.
Gilchrist, S., R. Schoenle, J. Sim, and E. Zakraj?ek (2017): "Inflation Dynamics
  during the Financial Crisis," American Economic Review, 107, 785­823.
Gilchrist, S., V. Yankov, and E. Zakrajsek (2009): "Credit market shocks and
  economic fluctuations: Evidence from corporate bond and stock markets," Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 56, 471­493.
Gilchrist, S. and E. Zakrajsek (2012): "Credit Spreads and Business Cycle Fluctua-
  tions," American Economic Review, 102, 1692­1720.
                         WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                          52

Goldfeld, S. M. and A. S. Blinder (1972): "Some Implications of Endogenous Stabi-
  lization Policy," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 3, 585­644.
Goolsbee, A. D. and P. J. Klenow (2018): "Internet Rising, Prices Falling: Measuring
  Inflation in a World of E-Commerce," AEA Papers and Proceedings, 108, 488­92.
Gordon, R. J. (2013): "The Phillips Curve is Alive and Well: Inflation and the NAIRU
  During the Slow Recovery," NBER Working Papers 19390, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc.
------ (2018): "Friedman and Phelps on the Phillips Curve Viewed from a Half Century's
  Perspective," NBER Working Papers 24891, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and P. Krusell (1998): "Long-Run Implications of
  Investment-Specific Technological Change," American Economic Review, 87, 342­36.
Hall, R. E. (2011): "The Long Slump," American Economic Review, 101, 431­69.
Hazell, J., J. Herreno, E. Nakamura, and J. Steinsson (2020): "The slope of the
  Phillips Curve: evidence from US states," .
Hong, G. H., Z. Koczan, W. Lian, and M. Nabar (2018): "More Slack than Meets
  the Eye? Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies," Tech. rep., IMF Working
  Paper 18/50.
Hooper, P., F. S. Mishkin, and A. Sufi (2019): "Prospects for Inflation in a High
  Pressure Economy: Is the Phillips Curve Dead or is It Just Hibernating?" NBER Working
  Papers 25792, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Jones, C. I. (2020): Macroeconomics, W.W. Norton.
Jorgensen, P. and K. J. Lansing (2019): "Anchored Inflation Expectations and the
  Flatter Phillips Curve," Working Paper Series 2019-27, Federal Reserve Bank of San
  Francisco.
Justiniano, A., G. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2011): "Investment Shocks and
  the Relative Price of Investment," Review of Economic Dynamics, 14, 101­121.
Justiniano, A., G. E. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2010): "Investment shocks
  and business cycles," Journal of Monetary Economics, 57, 132­145.
Kareken, J. H. and R. M. Solow (1963): Lags in Monetary Policy, New York: Prentice
  Hall, 14­96.
Laseen, S. and L. E. Svensson (2011): "Anticipated Alternative Policy-Rate Paths in
  Policy Simulations," International Journal of Central Banking, 7, 1­35.
                          WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                             53

Linde, J. and M. Trabandt (2019): "Resolving the Missing Deflation Puzzle," CEPR
  Discussion Papers 13690, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.
Mackowiak, B. and M. Wiederholt (2009): "Optimal Sticky Prices under Rational
  Inattention," American Economic Review, 99, 769­803.
Mankiw, N. G. and R. Reis (2002): "Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A Proposal
  to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117,
  1295­1328.
Mavroeidis, S., M. Plagborg-MÃzller, and J. H. Stock (2014): "Empirical Evi-
  dence on Inflation Expectations in the New Keynesian Phillips Curve," Journal of Eco-
  nomic Literature, 52, 124­188.
McLeay, M. and S. Tenreyro (2019): "Optimal Inflation and the Identification of the
  Phillips Curve," in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2019, volume 34, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, Inc, NBER Chapters.
Mertens, T. M. and J. C. Williams (2019): "Monetary policy frameworks and the
  effective lower bound on interest rates," Staff Reports 877, Federal Reserve Bank of New
  York.
Moulton, B. R. (2018): "The Measurement Of Output, Prices, And Productivity: Whatâs
  Changed Since The Boskin Commission?" Tech. rep., The Brookings Institution.
Obstfeld, M. (2019): "Global Dimensions of U.S. Monetary Policy," NBER Working
  Papers 26039, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Orphanides, A. and J. C. Williams (2005): "Inflation scares and forecast-based mon-
  etary policy," Review of Economic Dynamics, 8, 498­527.
Powell, J. H. (2019): "Challenges for Monetary Policy," Speech delivered at the "Chal-
  lenges for Monetary Policy" symposium, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of
  Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming.
Primiceri, G. E. (2006): "Why Inflation Rose and Fell: Policy-Makers' Beliefs and U. S.
  Postwar Stabilization Policy," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, 867­901.
------ (2019): "Comments on "A Unified Approach to Measuring u*"," Brookings Papers
  on Economic Activity, 215­223.
Rich, R. W., M. H. Linder, and R. Peach (2013): "The parts are more than the whole:
  separating goods and services to predict core inflation," Current Issues in Economics and
  Finance.
                          WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                             54

Rognlie, M. (2019): "Comment on &quot;Optimal Inflation and the Identification of the
  Phillips Curve," in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2019, volume 34, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, Inc, NBER Chapters.
Rubbo, E. (2020): "Networks, Phillips Curves and Monetary Policy," .
Sbordone, A. M. (2002): "Prices and unit labor costs: a new test of price stickiness,"
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 49, 265­292.
------ (2007): "Globalization and Inflation Dynamics: The Impact of Increased Compe-
  tition," in International Dimensions of Monetary Policy, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc, NBER Chapters, 547­579.
Sims, C. A. (2002): "Solving Linear Rational Expectations Models," Computational Eco-
  nomics, 20, 1­20.
Smets, F. and R. Wouters (2007): "Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
  Bayesian DSGE Approach," American Economic Review, 97, 586 ­ 606.
Solon, G., R. Barsky, and J. A. Parker (1994): "Measuring the Cyclicality of Real
  Wages: How Important is Composition Bias?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109,
  1­25.
Stansbury, A. and L. H. Summers (2020): "More Rents, Or Less Rent-sharing? The
  Role Of Declining Worker Power In Recent Macro Trends," Manuscript prepared for the
  Spring 2020 Brookings Papers.
Stock, J. (2011): "Discussion of Ball and Mazumder, âInflation Dynamics and the Great
  Recessionâ." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 42, 387­402.
Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson (1999): "Business cycle fluctuations in US macroeco-
  nomic time series," Elsevier, vol. 1 of Handbook of Macroeconomics, chap. 1, 3 ­ 64.
------ (2007): "Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?" Journal of Money,
  Credit and Banking, 39, 3­33.
------ (2008): "Phillips Curve Inflation Forecasts," NBER Working Papers 14322, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
------ (2019): "Slack and Cyclically Sensitive Inflation," NBER Working Papers 25987,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Swanson, E. T. and J. C. Williams (2014): "Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower
  Bound on Medium- and Longer-Term Interest Rates," American Economic Review, 104,
  3154­3185.
                          WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                             55

Tallman, E. W. and S. Zaman (2017): "Forecasting inflation: Phillips curve effects on
  services price measures," International Journal of Forecasting, 33, 442­457.
Taylor, J. B. (1980): "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts," Journal of Political
  Economy, 88, 1­23.
------ (1993): "Discretion versus policy rules in practice," Carnegie-Rochester Conference
  Series on Public Policy, 39, 195­214.
Woodford, M. (2003): Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
  Princeton University Press.
Yellen, J. (2019): "Remark delivered at a public event, "What's (not) up with inflation?"
  hosted by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal & Monetary Policy at Brookings," available
  online at https://www.brookings.edu/research/former-fed-chair-janet-yellen-on-why-the-
  answer-to-the-inflation-puzzle-matters/.
Zhang, B., J. C. Chan, and J. L. Cross (2018): "Stochastic volatility models with
  ARMA innovations: An application to G7 inflation forecasts," CAMA Working Papers
  2018-32, Centre for Applied Macroeconomic Analysis, Crawford School of Public Policy,
  The Australian National University.




                 Appendix A. Facts: Robustness and Extensions

  This appendix shows that the key facts described in section 3 are robust to many obvious
deviations from the baseline setup. To conduct these robustness checks and extensions we
add variables to the baseline VAR, which in some case also results in shorter samples.
Therefore, we perform these checks using the conditional forecasts introduced in section
3.1, since this technique typically leads to narrower posterior credible sets and sharper
inference.
  More measures of price inflation. The first robustness check consists of extending
the baseline VAR specification to include three additional inflation measures, based on the
Consumer Price Index (CPI), core CPI and the headline PCE price index. Figure A.1 shows
that the attenuation in the response of these measures of inflation in the second sample is
similar to that of the two inflation variables included in the baseline model. We conclude
that the marked decrease in the association of price inflation to labor market slack does
not depend on how we measure goods prices.
                            WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                   56




       Figure A.1. Responses of alternative measures of price inflation, conditional on un-
       employment following the path in the first subplot. These responses are computed by
       applying the methodology described in section 3.1 to the baseline VAR of section 2.2,
       augmented with data on PCE, CPI and core CPI inflation. The solid lines are posterior
       medians, while the shaded areas correspond to 68- and 95-percent posterior credible re-
       gions. The pre- and post-1990 samples consist of data from 1964:II to 1989:IV, and from
       1989:I to 2019:III, respectively.


  More wage measures. Measuring wages and especially their cyclicality is notoriously
difficult. For example, standard wage series like those used in the baseline VAR do not
account for changes in the mix of workers over the business cycle, which makes them
appear less cyclical (e.g. Solon et al., 1994). A better wage indicator in this respect is the
employment cost index (ECI), which focuses on pay rates for specific types of work, thus
controlling for these composition effects. These data, however, are only available since 1980
(or 1975, but without seasonal adjustment). Therefore, using them in the first sample is
                             WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                     57




       Figure A.2. Responses of alternative measures of wage inflation, conditional on un-
       employment following the path in the first subplot. These responses are computed by
       applying the methodology described in section 3.1 to the baseline VAR of section 2.2, aug-
       mented with the annualized quarterly growth rate of the employment cost index (wages
       and salaries of all workers in private industries). The solid lines are posterior medians,
       while the shaded areas correspond to 68- and 95-percent posterior credible regions. The
       pre- and post-1990 samples consist of data from 1964:II to 1989:IV, and from 1989:I to
       2019:III, respectively.




problematic. But we can add a wage inflation measure from the ECI (wages and salaries of
all workers in private industries) to the VAR in the second sample. Figure A.2 compares
the response of the ECI wage measure to the ones in the baseline VAR. As expected, the
ECI is more clearly cyclical than the other wage measures, falling by a larger amount than
the PNSE on impact. Moreover, its response is much more sharply estimated than that of
the wage measure for the total economy, confirming that nominal wages remain sensitive
to business cycle shocks after 1990.
  Figure A.3 presents another interesting piece of evidence on the behavior of wages. It
compares the conditional forecasts of wage inflation, as measured by the ECI, when the VAR
is estimated with and without data after 2007. The purpose of this exercise is to verify
the extent to which the Great Recession and the subsequent period of slow recovery might
have impacted wage dynamics. In particular, one hypothesis often mentioned to explain the
missing disinflation over the Great Recession is that downward nominal wage rigidity might
have limited the fall in wages, and hence in costs and inflation. The conditional forecasts
in the figure suggest that this factor is unlikely to be a major driver of the reduced cyclical
sensitivity of inflation since 1990, given that the dynamics of wage inflation are similar
regardless of whether we include post-2007 data.
                             WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                     58




       Figure A.3. Responses of alternative measures of wage inflation, conditional on un-
       employment following the path in the first subplot. These responses are computed by
       applying the methodology described in section 3.1 to the baseline VAR of section 2.2, aug-
       mented with the annualized quarterly growth rate of the employment cost index (wages
       and salaries of all workers in private industries). The solid lines are posterior medians,
       while the shaded areas correspond to 68- and 95-percent posterior credible regions. The
       1990-2007 and 1990-2019 samples consist of data from 1989:I to 2007:IV and from from
       1989:I to 2019:III, respectively.


  More measures of the labor share. To further probe the stability of the business
cycle correlation between unemployment and unit labor costs, we also extend the baseline
VAR to include two additional commonly used measures of the labor share. These are the
logarithm of the labor share in the nonfarm business sector (NFBS) and in the nonfinancial
corporate sector (NFCS), from the productivity and costs release. Figure A.4 plots the
behavior of these two variables, which is similar to that of the labor share in the total
economy included in the baseline VAR.
  More measures of employment and real activity. We now augment the baseline
VAR with the logarithm of the employment-to-population ratio and of the ratio between
GDP and the CBO estimate of potential GDP. Figure A.5 illustrates that the responses of
these additional variables are almost exactly the same in the two samples, confirming the
results based on hours and GDP of the previous subsections.
  Alternative ways of splitting the sample. As mentioned in section 2.2, there are at
least two other dates in which we could have reasonably split the sample: 1984--right after
the Volcker disinflation--and 1994--when inflation was more clearly stabilized around 2%.
Figures A.6 and A.7 show that splitting the sample at these two alternative dates has little
                             WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                      59




       Figure A.4. Responses of alternative measures of the labor share, conditional on
       unemployment following the path in the first subplot. These responses are computed by
       applying the methodology described in section 3.1 to the baseline VAR of section 2.2,
       augmented with the logarithm of the labor share in the nonfarm business sector and in
       the nonfinancial corporate sector. The solid lines are posterior medians, while the shaded
       areas correspond to 68- and 95-percent posterior credible regions. The pre- and post-1990
       samples consist of data from 1964:II to 1989:IV, and from 1989:I to 2019:III, respectively.




       Figure A.5. Responses of the employment-to-population ratio and the output gap,
       conditional on unemployment following the path in the first subplot. These responses are
       computed by applying the methodology described in section 3.1 to the baseline VAR of
       section 2.2, augmented with the logarithm of the employment-to-population ratio and of
       the ratio between GDP and potential GDP from the Congressional Budget Office (CBO).
       The solid lines are posterior medians, while the shaded areas correspond to 68- and 95-
       percent posterior credible regions. The pre- and post-1990 samples consist of data from
       1964:II to 1989:IV, and from 1989:I to 2019:III, respectively.



impact on the main results. Inflation is much more stable in the second sample, while the
dynamics of the real variables change little.
  Impulse responses to a typical business cycle shock. Finally, as a complemen-
tary exercise, figure A.8 presents the impulse responses of unemployment and inflation to
a typical business cycle shock. We define this shock as the linear combination of structural
                              WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                     60




        Figure A.6. Responses of all variables, conditional on unemployment following the
        path in the first subplot. These responses are computed by applying the methodology
        described in section 3.1 to the baseline VAR of section 2.2. The solid lines are posterior
        medians, while the shaded areas correspond to 68- and 95-percent posterior credible re-
        gions. The pre- and post-1984 samples consist of data from 1964:II to 1983:IV, and from
        1983:I to 2019:III, respectively.



disturbances that drives the largest share of unemployment variation at business cycle fre-
quencies, as in Giannone et al. (2019) and Angeletos et al. (2019).36 The impulse responses


36More precisely, we compute the spectral density of y implied by the VAR representation (2.1). We use
                                                      t
this spectrum to evaluate the variance of unemployment at business cycle frequencies (those related to
periods of length between 6 and 32 quarters, as in Stock and Watson, 1999), as a function of the columns
                  1
of all possible  2 matrices. The BC shock is pinned down by the column associated with the maximal
variance of unemployment at these frequencies. For technical details and the specific implementation of
this idea, see Giannone et al. (2019) and Angeletos et al. (2019).
                             WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                     61




       Figure A.7. Responses of all variables, conditional on unemployment following the
       path in the first subplot. These responses are computed by applying the methodology
       described in section 3.1 to the baseline VAR of section 2.2. The solid lines are posterior
       medians, while the shaded areas correspond to 68- and 95-percent posterior credible re-
       gions. The pre- and post-1994 samples consist of data from 1964:II to 1993:IV, and from
       1993:I to 2019:III, respectively.


computed following this approach are essentially identical to those of figure 3.1, suggest-
ing that the two combinations of structural shocks--the one responsible for the bulk of
business cycle fluctuations and the one associated with the one-step-ahead forecast error in
unemployment--are virtually the same.


                      Appendix B. Details on the DSGE Model

  This appendix provides some details of the DSGE model used in section 6.
                             WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                     62




       Figure A.8. Impulse responses of unemployment and price inflation to a business
       cycle shock. The impulse responses are from the baseline VAR described in section
       2.2. The business cycle shock is the linear combination of structural disturbances that
       drives the highest share of unemployment variation at business cycle frequencies, and it
       is identified using the methodology of Giannone et al. (2019) and Angeletos et al. (2019).
       The solid lines are posterior medians, while the shaded areas correspond to 68- and 95-
       percent posterior credible regions. The pre- and post-1990 samples consist of data from
       1964:II to 1989:IV, and from 1989:I to 2019:III, respectively.


B.1. Equilibrium conditions. The model economy is populated by eight classes of agents:
1) a continuum of households, who consume and supply differentiated labor; 2) competitive
labor aggregators that combine labor supplied by individual households; 3) competitive
final good-producing firms that aggregate the intermediate goods into a final product; 4) a
continuum of monopolistically competitive intermediate good producing firms; 5) competi-
tive capital producers that convert final goods into capital; 6) a continuum of entrepreneurs
                            WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                   63

who purchase capital using both internal and borrowed funds and rent it to intermediate
good producing firms; 7) a representative bank collecting deposits from the households and
lending funds to the entrepreneurs; and finally 8) a government, composed of a monetary
authority that sets short-term interest rates and a fiscal authority that sets public spending
and collects taxes. We solve each agent's problem, and derive the resulting equilibrium con-
ditions, which we approximate around the non-stochastic steady state. Since the derivation
follows closely the literature (e.g.Christiano et al., 2005), we describe here the log-linearized
conditions.
                                                                                     1
                                                                      ~t p t
                                                               = e 1- z
  Growth in the economy is driven by technological progress, Zt         Zt e , which is
                                                                     p
assumed to include a deterministic trend (et ), a stochastic trend (Zt ), and a stationary
component (z
           ~t ), where  is the income share of capital (after paying mark-ups and fixed
                                                          to express the model's equi-
costs in production). Trending variables are divided by Zt
librium conditions in terms of the stationary variables. In what follows, all variables are
expressed in log deviations from their steady state, and steady-state values are denoted by
-subscripts.
  The stationary component of productivity z
                                           ~t and the growth rate of the stochastic trend
 p         p   p
zt = log (Zt /Zt -1 ) are assumed to follow AR(1) processes:


(B.1)                         z      ~t-1 + z z,t , z,t  N (0, 1).
                              ~t = z z


                             p         p
(B.2)                       zt = z p z t -1 + z p   z p ,t ,   z p ,t    N (0, 1).

The growth rate of technology evolves thus according to

                                                        1                 p
(B.3)                  zt  log (Zt /Zt -1 ) -  =           zt - z
                                                          (~    ~t-1 ) + zt ,
                                                       1-

where  is the steady-state growth rate of the economy.
  The optimal allocation of consumption satisfies the following Euler equation:

                1-h  ¯                                  ¯
                                                        h
(B.4) ct = -          ¯) ( Rt - Et [  t +1 ] + cyt ) +    ¯ (ct-1 - zt )
               c (1 + h                                1+h
                                      1                       (c - 1) w L
                                 +
                                     1+h                             ¯ ) c (Lt - Et [Lt+1 ]) ,
                                        ¯ Et [ct+1 + zt+1 ] + c (1 + h

where ct is consumption, Lt denotes hours worked, Rt is the nominal interest rate, and t
                                                                                  ¯  he-
is inflation. The parameter c captures the degree of relative risk aversion while h
                              WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                             64

depends on the degree of habit persistence in consumption, h, and steady-state growth.
This equation includes hours worked because utility is non-separable in consumption and
leisure.
                                                                  l and a safety component
  The convenience yield cyt contains both a liquidity component cyt
  s
cyt

                                                  l     s
(B.5)                                     cyt = cyt + cyt ,

where we let each premium be given by the sum of two AR(1) processes, one that captures
                               P,l       P,s
highly persistent movements (cyt   and cyt   ) with autoregressive coefficients fixed at .99,
                                                ~ P,l
and one that captures transitory fluctuations (cy        ~ P,s
                                                  t and cy t ).

  The optimal investment decision satisfies the following relationship between the level of
investment it , measured in terms of consumption goods, and the value of capital in terms
                k:
of consumption qt

                        qtk        1                        ¯
                                                            
(B.6)        it =               +
                              ¯) 1 + ¯ ( i t - 1 - z t ) +    ¯ Et [it+1 + zt+1 ] + µt .
                    S e2 (1 +                              1+

This relationship shows that investment is affected by investment adjustment costs (S is
the second derivative of the adjustment cost function) and by an exogenous process µt ,
which we call "marginal efficiency of investment", that alters the rate of transformation
between consumption and installed capital (see Greenwood et al. (1998)). The shock µt
follows an AR(1) process with parameters µ and µ . The parameter ¯  e(1-c ) depends

on the intertemporal discount rate in the household utility function,  , on the degree of
relative risk aversion c , and on the steady-state growth rate  .
                     ¯t , which we refer to as "installed capital", evolves as
  The capital stock, k

                     ¯t =      i       ¯t-1 - zt + i it + i S e2 (1 + ¯)µt ,
(B.7)                k      1- ¯       k           ¯      ¯
                               k                   k      k
         ¯ is the steady state investment to capital ratio. Capital is subject to variable
where i /k
                                                                                    ¯t by:
capacity utilization ut ; effective capital rented out to firms, kt , is related to k

(B.8)                                                 ¯t-1 .
                                       kt = ut - zt + k

The optimality condition determining the rate of capital utilization is given by

                                           1- k
(B.9)                                        r = ut ,
                                             t
                           WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                65

       k is the rental rate of capital and  captures the utilization costs in terms of foregone
where rt
consumption.
  Real marginal costs for firms are given by

(B.10)                             mct = wt + Lt - kt ,

where wt is the real wage. From the optimality conditions of goods producers it follows
that all firms have the same capital-labor ratio :

                                                k
(B.11)                               kt = wt - rt + Lt .

  We include financial frictions in the model, building on the work of ?, Christiano et al.
(2003), De Graeve (2008), and ?. We assume that banks collect deposits from households
and lend to entrepreneurs who use these funds as well as their own wealth to acquire physical
capital, which is rented to intermediate goods producers. Entrepreneurs are subject to
idiosyncratic disturbances that affect their ability to manage capital. Their revenue may
thus turn out to be too low to pay back the loans received by the banks. The banks therefore
protect themselves against default risk by pooling all loans and charging a spread over the
deposit rate. This spread may vary as a function of entrepreneurs' leverage and riskiness.
  The realized return on capital is given by

                                     rk             (1 -  )
(B.12)               ~t
                     R k
                         - t =                k
                                             rt + k                k
                                                            q k - qt -1 ,
                                  k
                                 r + (1 -  )     r + (1 -  ) t
      ~t
where R k is the gross nominal return on capital for entrepreneurs, r k is the steady state
                                                                     
                                     k , and  is the depreciation rate.
value of the rental rate of capital rt
  The excess return on capital (the spread between the expected return on capital and the
riskless rate) can be expressed as a function of the convenience yield cyt , the entrepreneurs'
leverage (i.e. the ratio of the value of capital to net worth), and "risk shocks" ~,t capturing
mean-preserving changes in the cross-sectional dispersion of ability across entrepreneurs
(see ?):

(B.13)                                              ¯t - nt + 
                        ~ k - Rt = cyt + sp,b q k + k
                     Et R                                     ~,t ,
                          t+1                  t


where nt is entrepreneurs' net worth, sp,b is the elasticity of the credit spread to the
                             ¯t - nt ). 
                          k +k
entrepreneurs' leverage (qt             ~,t follows an AR(1) process with parameters 
                               WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                 66

and  . Entrepreneurs' net worth nt evolves in turn according to
(B.14)
              ~k                                       k     ¯
          ~ k Rt - t - n,R (Rt-1 - t + cyt-1 ) + n,qK qt-1 + kt-1 + n,n nt-1
   nt = n,R
                v            n,
              - n
                  zt -       sp,   ~,t-1 ,

where the  's denote elasticities, that depend among others on the entrepreneurs' steady-
state default probability F (¯
                              ), where  is the fraction of entrepreneurs that survive and
continue operating for another period, and where v is the entrepreneurs' real equity divided
     , in steady state.
by Zt
  The production function is

(B.15)                                 yt = p (kt + (1 - ) Lt ) ,

where p = 1 + /y , and  measures the size of fixed costs in production. The resource
constraint is:

                                                 c     i    rk k
(B.16)                             yt = g gt +     ct + it +  ut .
                                                 y     y     y

where gt = log ( Z G
                   y g ) and g = 1 -
                     t                       c +i
                                              y .   Government spending gt is assumed to follow
                      t

the exogenous process:
                                    gt = g gt-1 + g g,t + gz z z,t .

  Optimal decisions for price and wage setting deliver the price and wage Phillips curves,
which are respectively:

                                           p               ¯
                                                           
(B.17)                    t = p mct +         ¯ t - 1 +       ¯ Et [t+1 ] + f,t ,
                                        1 + p           1 + p 

and

(B.18)
             (1 - w ¯)(1 - w )                1 + w ¯         1
                                    h
  wt =        ¯                   w t - w t -      ¯  t +       ¯ (wt-1 - zt + w t-1 )
         (1 +  )w ((w - 1) w + 1)              1+           1+
                                                    ¯
                                               +      ¯ Et [wt+1 + zt+1 + t+1 ] + w,t ,
                                                  1+
               (1-p   ¯)(1-p )
where  =    (1+p ¯)p ((p -1) p +1) ,   the parameters p , p , and   p   are the Calvo parameter, the
degree of indexation, and the curvature parameter in the Kimball aggregator for prices, and
w , w , and                                                       h measures the household's
                     are the corresponding parameters for wages. wt
                 w
                              WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                      67

marginal rate of substitution between consumption and labor, and is given by:

                               h        1        ¯       ¯
(B.19)                        wt =
                                       1-h¯ ct - hct-1 + hzt + l Lt ,

where l characterizes the curvature of the disutility of labor (and would equal the inverse
of the Frisch elasticity in the absence of wage rigidities). The mark-ups f,t and w,t follow
the exogenous ARMA(1,1) processes:

                           f,t = f f,t-1 + f f ,t - f f f ,t-1 ,

and
                          w,t = w w,t-1 + w w ,t - w w w ,t-1 .

  Finally, the monetary authority follows a policy feedback rule :

                                                                  
(B.20)              Rt = R Rt-1 + (1 - R ) (1 (t - t ) + 2 (yt - yt ))
                                                                 m
                              +3 (yt - yt ) - (yt-1 - yt -1 ) + rt .

       is a time-varying inflation target, y  is a measure of the "full-employment level of
where t                                     t
              m captures exogenous departures from the policy rule.
output," and rt
                                     is meant to capture the rise and fall of inflation and
  The time-varying inflation target t
interest rates in the estimation sample.37 As in Aruoba and Schorfheide (2010) and Del
Negro and Eusepi (2011), we use data on long-run inflation expectations in the estimation
of the model. This allows us to pin down the target inflation rate to the extent that long-
run inflation expectations contain information about the central bank's objective. The
time-varying inflation target evolves according to

                                              
(B.21)                                 t =    t -1 +            ,t ,


where 0 <  < 1 and                                            as a stationary process, although
                                   is an iid shock. We model t
                              ,t

our prior for  will force this process to be highly persistent.
                                          represents the level of output that would obtain
  The "full-employment level of output" yt
if prices and wages were fully flexible and if there were no markup shocks. This variable
                                          are obtained by solving the model without nominal
along with the natural rate of interest rt

37The assumption that the inflation target moves exogenously is of course a simplification. A more real-
istic model would for instance relate movements in trend inflation to the evolution of the policy makers'
understanding of the output-inflation trade-of, as in ? or ?.
                              WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                               68

rigidities and markup shocks (that is, equations (B.4) through (B.19) with p = w = 0,
and f,t = w,t = 0).
                                              m evolves according to the following process
  The exogenous component of the policy rule rt
                                                                  K
                                   m           m          R             R
(B.22)                            rt   =   rm rt -1   +   t   +         k,t-k ,
                                                                  k=1

where    R   is the usual contemporaneous policy shock, and                   R       is a policy shock that is
         t                                                                    k,t-k

known to agents at time t - k , but affects the policy rule k periods later, that is, at time t.
We assume that      R              2 ), i.i.d. As argued in Laseen and Svensson (2011), such
                             N (0, k,r
                    k,t-k

anticipated policy shocks allow us to capture the effects of the zero lower bound on nominal
interest rates, as well as the effects of forward guidance in monetary policy.




B.2. State Space Representation and Data. We use the method in Sims (2002) to
solve the system of log-linear approximate equilibrium conditions and obtain the transition
equation, which summarizes the evolution of the vector of state variables st :

(B.23)                                 st = T ()st-1 + R() t .

where  is a vector collecting all the DSGE model parameters and                            t   is a vector of all
structural shocks. The state-space representation of our model is composed of the transition
equation (B.23), and a system of measurement equations:

(B.24)                                     Yt = D() + Z ()st ,

mapping the states into the observable variables Yt , which we describe in detail next.
  The estimation of the model is based on data on real output growth (including both
GDP and GDI measures), consumption growth, investment growth, real wage growth, hours
worked, inflation (measured by core PCE and GDP deflators), short- and long- term interest
rates, 10-year inflation expectations, market expectations for the federal funds rate up
to 6 quarters ahead, Aaa and Baa credit spreads, and total factor productivity growth
unadjusted for variable utilization. Measurement equations (B.24) relate these observables
to the model variables as follows:
                               WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                          69




(B.25)
 GDP growth                              = 100 + (yt - yt-1 + zt ) + egdp
                                                                      t   - egdp
                                                                             t-1

 GDI growth                              = 100 + (yt - yt-1 + zt ) + egdi  gdi
                                                                      t - et-1

 Consumption growth                      = 100 + (ct - ct-1 + zt )
 Investment growth                       = 100 + (it - it-1 + zt )
 Real Wage growth                        = 100 + (wt - wt-1 + zt )
 Hours                                     ¯ + Lt
                                         = L
 Core PCE Inflation                      =  + t + epce
                                                   t

 GDP Deflator Inflation                  =  + gdpdef + gdpdef  t + egdpdef
                                                                    t

 FFR                                     = R + Rt
 FFRe
    t,t+j                                = R + Et [Rt+j ] , j = 1, ..., 6
 10y Nominal Bond Yield                  = R + Et         1
                                                          40
                                                                   39
                                                                   j =0 Rt+j   + e10
                                                                                  t
                                                                                     y

                                                          1       39
 10y Infl. Expectations                  =  + Et          40      j =0 t+j
                                   l + cy s + SP + E 1                           79      ~k                Baa
 Baa - 10-year Treasury Spread = cy                 t 80                         j =0    Rt+j +1 - Rt+j + et

 TFP growth, demeaned                    = zt +     
                                                   1-    (ut - ut-1 ) + etf
                                                                         t .
                                                                            p


All variables are measured in percent. The terms  and R measure respectively the net
steady-state inflation rate and short-term nominal interest rate, expressed in percentage
           ¯ captures the mean of hours (this variable is measured as an index). We
terms, and L
assume that some of the variables are measured with "error," that is, the observed value
equals the model implied value plus an AR(1) exogenous process et that can be thought

of either measurement errors or some other unmodeled source of discrepancy between the
model and the data, as in Boivin and Giannoni (2006). For instance, the terms egdp
                                                                               t   and
egdi
 t   capture measurement error of total output.38 Alternatively, for the long-term nominal
interest rate, the term e10
                         t
                           y
                             captures fluctuations in term premia not captured by the model.

B.3. Inference, Prior and Posterior Parameter Estimates. We estimate the model
using Bayesian techniques. This requires the specification of a prior distribution for the
38We introduce correlation in the measurement errors for GDP and GDI, which evolve as follows:

                   egdp
                    t     =   gdp · egdp
                                     t-1 + gdp t
                                                gdp
                                                    ,   gdp
                                                        t      i.i.d.N (0, 1)
                   egdi
                    t     =          gdi
                              gdi · et-1 + gdp · gdp    gdp
                                                        t     + gdi gdi
                                                                     t , t
                                                                           gdi
                                                                                i.i.d.N (0, 1).
The measurement errors for GDP and GDI are thus stationary in levels, and enter the observation equation
in first differences (e.g. egdp
                            t   - egdp      gdp
                                   t-1 and et   - egdp
                                                   t-1 ). GDP and GDI are also cointegrated as they are driven
by a comment stochastic trend.
                          WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                               70

model parameters. For most parameters common with Smets and Wouters (2007), we use
the same marginal prior distributions. As an exception, we favor a looser prior than Smets
and Wouters (2007) for the quarterly steady state inflation rate  ; it is centered at 0.75%
and has a standard deviation of 0.4%. Regarding the financial frictions, we specify priors
for the parameters SP , sp,b ,  , and  , while we fix the parameters corresponding to
the steady state default probability and the survival rate of entrepreneurs, respectively. In
turn, these parameters imply values for the parameters of (B.14). Information on the priors
is provided in Table 2.




B.4. Data Construction. Data on real GDP (GDPC), the GDP deflator (GDPDEF),
core PCE inflation (PCEPILFE), nominal personal consumption expenditures (PCEC),
and nominal fixed private investment (FPI) are produced at a quarterly frequency by the
Bureau of Economic Analysis, and are included in the National Income and Product Ac-
counts (NIPA). Average weekly hours of production and nonsupervisory employees for total
private industries (AWHNONAG), civilian employment (CE16OV), and the civilian non-
institutional population (CNP16OV) are produced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)
at a monthly frequency. The first of these series is obtained from the Establishment Survey,
and the remaining from the Household Survey. Both surveys are released in the BLS Em-
ployment Situation Summary. Since our models are estimated on quarterly data, we take
averages of the monthly data. Compensation per hour for the non-farm business sector
(COMPNFB) is obtained from the Labor Productivity and Costs release, and produced by
the BLS at a quarterly frequency. The data are transformed following Smets and Wouters
(2007), with the exception of the civilian population data, which are filtered using the
Hodrick-Prescott filter to remove jumps around census dates. The federal funds rate is
obtained from the Federal Reserve Board's H.15 release at a business day frequency. We
take quarterly averages of the annualized daily data and divide by four. Let  denote the
                          WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                              71

temporal difference operator. Then:

 Output growth             = 100  LN ((GDP C )/CN P 16OV )
 Consumption growth        = 100  LN ((P CEC/GDP DEF )/CN P 16OV )
 Investment growth         = 100  LN ((F P I/GDP DEF )/CN P 16OV )
 Real wage growth          = 100  LN (COM P N F B/GDP DEF )
 Hours worked              = 100  LN ((AW HN ON AG  CE 16OV /100)/CN P 16OV )
 GDP Deflator Inflation = 100  LN (GDP DEF )
 Core PCE Inflation        = 100  LN (P CEP ILF E )
 FFR                       = (1/4)  F EDERAL F U N DS RAT E

  Long-run inflation expectations are obtained from the Blue Chip Economic Indicators
survey and the Survey of Professional Forecasters available from the FRB Philadelphia's
Real-Time Data Research Center. Long-run inflation expectations (average CPI inflation
over the next 10 years) are available from 1991Q4 onward. Prior to 1991Q4, we use the
10-year expectations data from the Blue Chip survey to construct a long time series that
begins in 1979Q4. Since the Blue Chip survey reports long-run inflation expectations only
twice a year, we treat these expectations in the remaining quarters as missing observations
and adjust the measurement equation of the Kalman filter accordingly. Long-run inflation
             O,40
expectations t    are therefore measured as

             10y Infl Exp = (10-year average CPI inflation forecast - 0.50)/4.

where 0.50 is the average difference between CPI and GDP annualized inflation from the
beginning of the sample to 1992. We divide by 4 to express the data in quarterly terms.
  We measure Spread as the annualized Moody's Seasoned Baa Corporate Bond Yield
spread over the 10-Year Treasury Note Yield at Constant Maturity. Both series are available
from the Federal Reserve Board's H.15 release. Like the federal funds rate, the spread data
are also averaged over each quarter and measured at a quarterly frequency. This leads to:

                Spread = (1/4)  (Baa Corporate - 10 year T reasury ).

Similarly,
                      10y Bond yield = (1/4)  (10 year T reasury ).
                               WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                      72

  Lastly, TFP growth is measured using John Fernald's TFP growth series, unadjusted
for changes in utilization. That series is demeaned, divided by 4 to express it in quarterly
growth rates, and divided by Fernald's estimate of (1 - ) to convert it in labor augmenting
terms:

TFP growth, demeaned = (1/4)(Fernald's TFP growth, unadjusted, demeaned) /(1 - ).

                       Appendix C. Additional Tables and Figures




                          p                                                     w




         Figure C.1. Prior and posterior distributions for some additional parameters of the
         NY Fed DSGE model described in section 6 and appendix B.4. The pre- and post-1990
         samples consist of data from 1964:II to 1989:IV, and from 1990:I to 2019:III, respectively.
                       WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                   73

                                                                     y




                   y                                                 R




Figure C.2. Prior and posterior distributions for selected parameters of the NY Fed
DSGE model described in section 6 and appendix B.4. In this experiment, the model
is estimated allowing for two distinct monetary policy regimes, pre- and post-1990, but
assuming that all other coefficients are constant for the entire sample that now excludes
the ZLB period, from 1964:II to 2008:III.
                                           WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                                                74

                                 hours                                                                  inflation
            -0.5                                                                            0.2

                                                      Pre 1990                                                              Pre 1990
            -1.0                                      Post 1990                                                             Post 1990

                                                                                            0.0




                                                                       percentage points
            -1.5
  percent




            -2.0                                                                           -0.2



            -2.5

                                                                                           -0.4

            -3.0



                                                                                           -0.6
                          5          10         15                20                              5          10        15               20
                                     horizon                                                                horizon


                              labor share                                                             wage inflation
                                                      Pre 1990                                                              Pre 1990
            0.00                                      Post 1990                                                             Post 1990
                                                                                            0.0




                                                                       percentage points
          -0.25                                                                            -0.3
percent




                                                                                           -0.6
          -0.50



                                                                                           -0.9
          -0.75


                                                                                           -1.2
          -1.00
                          5          10         15                20                              5          10        15               20
                                     horizon                                                                horizon




                   Figure C.3. Impulse responses of hours worked, price inflation, the labor share, and
                   wage inflation to a shock to the unemployment equation. The impulse responses are
                   from the VAR approximation of the NY Fed DSGE model described in section 6 and
                   appendix B.4. The shock is identified using a Cholesky strategy, with unemployment
                   ordered first. The solid lines are posterior medians, while the shaded areas correspond to
                   95-percent posterior credible regions. In this experiment, the model is estimated allowing
                   for two distinct monetary policy regimes, pre- and post-1990, but assuming that all other
                   coefficients are constant for the entire sample that now excludes the ZLB period, from
                   1964:II to 2008:III.
                           WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?                                        75

                                                  p




     Figure C.4. Prior and posterior distributions for the slope of the price Phillips curve
     in the NY Fed DSGE model described in section 6 and appendix B.4. In this experiment,
     the model is estimated allowing for two distinct regimes for the slope of the price Phillips
     curve, pre- and post-1990, but assuming that all other coefficients are constant for the
     entire sample from 1964:II to 2019:III.




               Dist        Mean Std Dev                                     Dist        Mean Std Dev

Policy Parameters
           1 Normal      1.50             0.25                      rm Beta               0.50      0.20
           2 Normal      0.12             0.05                      rm InvG               0.10      2.00
           3 Normal      0.12             0.05                      ant1 InvG             0.20      4.00
           R Beta        0.75             0.10
Nominal Rigidities Parameters
           p Beta        0.50              0.10                 w Beta      0.50                      0.10
           p Beta        0.50              0.15                  w Beta     0.50                      0.15
             p -        10.00            fixed                    w -      10.00                    fixed
Other Endogenous Propagation and         Steady State Parameters
        100 Normal       0.40              0.10                 S Normal    4.00                      1.50
             Normal      0.30              0.05                   Beta      0.50                      0.15
100( -1 - 1) Gamma       0.25              0.10                   -         0.50                    fixed
           c Normal      1.50              0.37            gdpdef Normal    1.00                      2.00
            h Beta       0.70              0.10            gdpdef Normal    0.00                      2.00
           l Normal      2.00              0.75                   ¯
                                                                 L Normal -45.00                      5.00
             -           0.03            fixed                  w -         1.50                    fixed
           p Normal      1.25              0.12                  g -        0.18                    fixed
Financial Frictions Parameters
        F (¯
           ) -           0.03            fixed                       sp,b Beta            0.05        0.00
         SP Gamma        2.00              0.10                        -                  0.99      fixed
Exogenous Process Parameters
           g Beta        0.50              0.20                       g     InvG          0.10      2.00
           b Beta        0.50              0.20                       b     InvG          0.10      2.00
           µ Beta        0.50              0.20                      µ      InvG          0.10      2.00
        z til Beta       0.50              0.20                       z~    InvG          0.10      2.00
           Beta          0.75              0.15                             InvG          0.05      4.00
           -             0.99            fixed                              InvG          0.03      6.00
          z p Beta       0.50              0.20                      z p    InvG          0.10      2.00
          f Beta         0.50              0.20                      f      InvG          0.10      2.00
         w Beta          0.50              0.20                       w     InvG          0.10      2.00
          f Beta         0.50              0.20                      gz     Beta          0.50      0.20
                         WHAT'S UP WITH THE PHILLIPS CURVE?   76

Federal Reserve Bank of New York
E-mail address : marco.delnegro@ny.frb.org


European Central Bank and ECARES
E-mail address : michele.lenza@ecb.europa.eu


Northwestern University, CEPR, and NBER
E-mail address : g-primiceri@northwestern.edu


Federal Reserve Bank of New York
E-mail address : a.tambalotti@gmail.com
