                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 SHOTGUN WEDDING:
                            FISCAL AND MONETARY POLICY

                                       Marco Bassetto
                                      Thomas J. Sargent

                                      Working Paper 27004
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27004


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2020




We thank John H. Cochrane and a referee for helpful comments. The views expressed in this
paper are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
When citing this paper, please use the following: Bassetto, Marco, Sargent, Thomas J. 2020.
Shotgun Wedding:         Fiscal and Monetary Policy. Annual Review of Economics:
Submitted. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-economics-091319-050022

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Marco Bassetto and Thomas J. Sargent. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Shotgun Wedding: Fiscal and Monetary Policy
Marco Bassetto and Thomas J. Sargent
NBER Working Paper No. 27004
April 2020
JEL No. E52,E61,E62,E63

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper describes interactions between monetary and fiscal policies that affect equilibrium
price levels and interest rates by critically surveying theories about (a) optimal anticipated
inflation, (b) optimal unanticipated inflation, and (c) conditions that secure a "nominal anchor''
in the sense of a unique price level path. We contrast incomplete theories whose inputs are
budget-feasible sequences of government issued bonds and money with complete theories whose
inputs are bond-money strategies described as sequences of functions that map time t histories
into time t government actions. We cite historical episodes that confirm the theoretical insight
that lines of authority between a Treasury and a Central Bank can be ambiguous, obscure, and
fragile.


Marco Bassetto
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55401
and University College London
m.bassetto@ucl.ac.uk

Thomas J. Sargent
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
thomas.sargent@nyu.edu
                                                                      The best way to defend the
                                                                      independence of a central bank is never
                                                                      to exercise it.

                                                                            Anonymous Federal Reserve official



1         Introduction
A government's budget forces monetary and fiscal policies to be either coordinated or consol-
idated. From the point of view of sequences of government IOUs called bonds and money,
institutional arrangements that delegate decisions about bonds and money to people who work
in different agencies are details. Central bank independence is a convention or a fiction.
        Episodes from 19th and early 20th century US monetary-fiscal history illustrate our theme
that a government budget doesn't sharply separate monetary from fiscal policy. When the United
States had no central bank before 1914, Secretary of Treasury Leslie M. Shaw leaned against
the wind by depositing federal funds in temporarily distressed commercial banks and afterwards
returning them to the Independent Treasury vaults where, according to the Independent Treasury
Act of 1846, they belonged.1 Shaw (Treasury 1906, page 49), wrote that "No central bank or
government bank in the world can so readily influence financial conditions throughout the world
as can the Secretary under the authority with which he is now clothed."2 Shaw's landmark 1906
Treasury report culminated more than 50 years of extralegal actions by Secretaries of Treasury
and compliant Congresses that by 1906 had subverted 1830s and 1840s Jacksonian intentions to
separate US fiscal and monetary activities from all banks, public and private.3
        The Independent Treasury Act that governed US cash-management practices from 1846 until
the founding of the Federal Reserve in 1914 banned the Secretary of Treasury from depositing
federal funds in banks, a rule that had eroded so much by 1906 that Secretary Shaw could write
    1
        See "Central-Banking Activities of the Treasury" in Friedman and Schwartz (1963, ch. 4).
    2
        In the same report, Shaw asked Congress for even more power: ". . . $100,000,000 to be deposited with banks
or withdrawn as he might deem expedient, . . . [and] authority over the reserves of the several banks with power
to contract the national-bank circulation at pleasure . . .."
   3
     See Hofstadter (1948, ch. 3) and "The Jacksonian Movement and the Bank War" in Rothbard (2002).


                                                          2
openly about ignoring it. Prospective profits from issuing paper bank notes fueled that erosion
process. After Andrew Jackson's Democrats in the 1830s and 1840s had forced the Federal gov-
ernment to forego them, state governments quickly moved to gather some of those profits by
chartering state banks that issued low denomination circulating notes backed by state bonds
as collateral. States issued those charters on the condition that the banks would share profits
with the state governments. During the Civil War, the US government nationalized those profit
sharing arrangements by imposing a tax that put state banks out of the note issuing business
and establishing a National Banking system whose member banks were authorized to issue Na-
tional Bank Notes collateralized by a list of Federal bonds. With that nationalization and other
measures, Congress abandoned the Jacksonian hands-off, hard-money policy and put Congress
in day-today charge of running U.S. monetary policy. In 1862, Congress issued an inconvertible
currency called the greenback that it made legal tender for almost all debts public and private
and whose value soon dropped to 40 or 50 cents in terms of the gold dollar that continued to
be used for international trade and customs duties. That set off years of Congressional debates
about how many greenbacks Congress should issue or withdraw and whether Congress should
service interest-bearing Federal bonds with gold dollars or depreciated greenbacks. Congress
resolved that dispute, but only temporarily as it eventually turned out, when on January 1, 1879
it made greenbacks convertible into gold dollars one for one.
      From the Civil War until the founding of the Federal Reserve in 1914, monetary policy gave
headaches and heartaches to U.S. Congresses. Congresses authorized various paper monies ­
greenbacks, silver certificates, National Bank Notes ­ and, against the background of a declining
price level from 1865 to 1896, confronted political pressures to issue more money and to broaden
the collateral behind the National Bank Notes that had been confined to a list of Federal bonds.
For example, in 1889 the Farmer's Alliance called for issuing low denomination Treasury notes
in exchange for collateral in the form of farmers' crops to be stored in government warehouses to
be called subtreasuries.4 Silver producers and inflation proponents advocated coining silver or
issuing federal notes collateralized by silver at an exchange rate that, relative to market prices,
  4
      See White (2017, p.830) and Malin (1944).




                                                  3
overvalued silver by a factor of two or three. Secretary Shaw's 1906 report lamented that his
ability to conduct open market operations was limited by the accumulated cash (i.e., greenbacks,
National Bank notes, silver certificates, gold coins) that he held in independent treasury vaults.
To relax that constraint, during financial crises clearing houses issued collateralized certificates
that temporarily served as cash substitutes. To expand what counted as cash, the 1902 "Fowler
Bill" and other unsuccessful proposals would have authorized banks to issue notes backed by rail-
road bonds, municipal securities, and other assets. The force behind those proposals eventually
led Congress to pass the Aldrich-Vreeland Act in 1908 that, among other things, authorized the
Comptroller of Currency to issue emergency currency collateralized by various types of private
securities to coalitions of banks organized in national currency associations. Congress delegated
these and other monetary management headaches when in December 1913 it passed the Federal
Reserve Act.5
       In this paper we mostly ignore institutional details and instead focus on the arithmetic that
binds monetary to fiscal policy.6 Only when we discuss theories of "nominal anchors" for a price
level sequence in worlds with only fiat paper money shall we be forced to study how a polity
assigns budgets and actions to separate decision makers called a treasury and a central bank.
       Section 2 uses a baseline model to describe how a gold standard secures a nominal anchor,
then tells how the addition of a paper money can improve outcomes but leaves an exchange
rate between paper and gold indeterminate. That indeterminacy is our first encounter with
difficulties in securing a unique nominal anchor for a paper currency. Section 3 extends our
baseline model to include an intertemporal consolidated government budget within which we can
study theories of an optimal quantity of money under flexible prices. Here we study normative
theories of both anticipated and unanticipated inflation. Section 4 uses irrelevance theorems
for open market operations to frame difficulties in distinguishing between monetary and fiscal
   5
       To divorce monetary from fiscal policy, the Federal Reserve Act constrained the Fed to issue notes and reserves
backed only by "real bills" ­ evidences of low-risk short term commercial debts. World War I fiscal exigencies
soon led Congress to look the other way when the Fed's "borrow and buy" for Liberty Bonds evaded the real bills
restriction.
   6
     We also limit our discussion of the closely related fragile line that separates monetary from credit policies.



                                                           4
policies when considering "quantitative easing" and a debate on the relevance of the government
budget constraint when the interest rate is smaller than the growth rate of the economy. While
sections 2, 3, and 4 naturally cast monetary-fiscal policies in terms of sequences of settings of
monetary and fiscal policy variables, e.g., government taxes and expenditures and bonds and
money supplies, we must proceed differently when we study a "fiscal theory of the price level" in
section 5 in terms of government strategies (i.e., sequences of functions that map time t histories
into time t actions) that are sufficient to deliver a unique price level path and thereby secure
a nominal anchor. Section 6 extends our discussion of fiscal theories of nominal anchors by
describing how separate budget constraints and strategies can be assigned to a central bank and
treasury. We relate the two-budget analysis to recent manifestations of "in-house fiscal policies"
conducted by central banks in the United States and other countries since the 2007-2008 financial
crisis.



2         A Gold Standard
A fiscal/monetary authority interacts with a continuum of identical households. Time is discrete
and indexed by t = 0, 1, 2, . . .. At the beginning of a period each household sends one buyer and
one seller to distinct decentralized markets where a seller from one household can use its labor
to produce a single consumption good and a buyer from another household can purchase that
consumption good for a perfectly storable asset called cash.7 After decentralized markets close,
a single centralized market opens in which all household members can trade the nonstorable
good and labor for cash and interest-bearing assets. We depart from the bilateral bargaining in
decentralized markets that occurs in Lagos and Wright (2005) and instead assume that enough
participants attend decentralized markets to make them competitive.8 This renders our setup
    7
        We'll use "cash" and "money" as synonyms.
    8
        We assume symmetry across markets so that, while each household cannot consume the good it produces
and is required to send its buyer and seller to different markets, equilibrium prices and quantities are the same
in all decentralized markets.




                                                       5
equivalent to the cash-in-advance model of Lucas and Stokey (1987).9 Agents are anonymous in
decentralized markets so that trade is possible there only if a medium of exchange called cash is
present. Accordingly, we refer to the consumption good exchanged in decentralized markets as
the "cash good."
       After producing and exchanging goods for cash in decentralized markets, households reunite
and go to the centralized market where they can use additional labor to produce more of a
consumption good that they can also purchase from other households. Then they consume what
they have purchased in the two markets they have attended this period. In the centralized
market, households interact with a monetary/fiscal authority that can tax, trade, and issue
paper currency. In the centralized market, three assets are traded, namely, "token money" and
"bonds," and a perfectly durable costlessly storable object called "gold." As in Sargent and
Smith (1997), there is a reversible linear technology that yields  ounces of gold per unit of the
consumption good and one unit of consumption from -1 ounces of gold.10 Gold is costlessly
recognizable, making it usable as cash in decentralized trade.11
       Distinctions between fiscal and monetary policies rest partly on how differences between
money and bonds are modeled. We assume that paper money can be used in the decentralized
market but that bonds cannot.12 A story that supports this outcome is that bonds can be
recognized and traded only in the centralized market. Households cannot hold negative amounts
of gold or money, but they can hold negative bonds by borrowing up to an exogenous real bound
B denominated in units of the consumption good.
       Households order consumption, labor streams {ct , xt , t }t=0 by
                                              
                                         E0          t [u(ct ) + v (xt ) - t ],                              (1)
                                              t=0
   9
       In discussing interactions between monetary and fiscal policies, it is important to describe precisely how
households interact with the government. The Lagos-Wright model is more explicit about this than are many
other cash-in-advance models, our reason for adopting it here. We refrain from following Bassetto (2002) in
completely describing a monetary economy as a game.
  10
     See Barro (1979) and Sargent and Wallace (1983) for related settings in which adopting a gold standard sets
a nominal anchor.
  11
     We ignore Sargent and Smith's tax on minting.
  12
     Record-keeping facilities are not available there, opening a role for gold or paper money.

                                                            6
where ct is consumption of the "credit good" that is traded in the centralized market, xt is con-
sumption of the "cash good" that is traded in the decentralized market, and              t   is the sum of labor
supplied in decentralized and centralized markets. We assume that u and v are strictly increasing
and concave and continuously differentiable. Linearity of utility in labor is not essential for our
results about monetary and fiscal policies but helps tractability.13 E0 denotes a mathematical
expectation conditioned on time 0 information. Uncertainty can be about different things in
different applications. We introduce uncertainty mostly as stochastic processes for government
spending and possibly an exogenous component of tax revenues. We can also include a sunspot
process that has no direct effects on preferences or technologies but only indexes multiple equi-
libria that emerge purely as shifts in expectations about the nominal price level that are identical
across households .


2.1       Gold as Medium of Exchange

Consider a situation in which there are no taxes, government-issued bonds, or government-issued
money. To carry out decentralized trade, households can use only gold as cash. In an equilibrium
in which the cash good and credit good are both produced and consumed, their prices in terms
of gold are equal and households are indifferent whether to supply labor in the decentralized
market now in order to earn money for buying the cash good next period or to supply labor
in the decentralized market to produce the credit good. Let Pt be the common price of both
the cash good and the credit good in terms of gold. Since gold can be freely converted from or
into the credit good at a rate  ounces of gold per unit of the consumption good, we must have
Pt = . A feasible consumption/labor plan satisfies:

   · Let zt-1 be gold carried by a household into the decentralized market. Because gold is the
        only cash, a buyer must start a period with enough gold to purchase the cash goods that
 13
      We also assume that parameter values are such that the nonnegativity constraint on labor never binds.




                                                        7
         the household wants to consume that period:14

                                                        xt  zt-1 .                                                (2)


    · Let Bt+1 be nominal bonds purchased by the household in period t, to be repaid in period
         t + 1. The payoff of these bonds can depend on time t + 1 shock realizations. Households
         trade in (dynamically) complete markets. We will often restrict the government to issue
         nominally risk-free bonds, in which case all state-contingent claims must be in zero net
         supply. Let St+1 be the time-t equilibrium one-period stochastic discount factor, so that
         the value at time t of a portfolio Bt+1 is Et St+1 Bt+1 . Then the household budget constraint
         in the asset market in period 0 is

                                   Bt + ( t - xt - ct ) + zt-1  zt + Et [St+1 Bt+1 ].                             (3)

         A household starts a period owning maturing nominal bonds and gold carried over from the
         previous period, earns wages from working in either market, and buys consumption goods.
         What is not spent on consumption is allocated between gold and (possibly state-contingent)
         bonds to be carried into the next period.

    · A "no-Ponzi condition" ensures that households cannot finance consumption by borrowing
         each period and forever rolling over maturing debts:15

                                           lim Et [qs (Bs+1 + zs )]  0,      t  0,                                (4)
                                          s

  14
       At the beginning of a period, it is optimal for the household to allocate all of the gold to the buyer since a
seller does not need it in a decentralized market.
  15
     We express a no-Ponzi condition as the limit of an expectation that must hold almost surely at any time
t. For a more-complete discussion of the no-Ponzi condition and the resulting transversality condition, see
Weitzman (1973) for deterministic problems and Kamihigashi (2003) and Co¸
                                                                        sar and Green (2016) for stochastic
problems. Because we have assumed that disutility is linear in labor, in principle a household could repay any
amount of debt by working sufficiently many hours. In our applications, we implicitly assume that there is an
upper bound on hours worked that is sufficiently loose that it never binds in finite time; its role is to imply that a
strategy of rolling over debt indefinitely would eventually make it impossible to repay the accumulated balance.



                                                           8
         where Et is a mathematical expectation conditional on information available at time t and
         qs is the cumulated stochastic discount factor between period 0 and period s:

                                                      q0 = 1                                                            (5)
                                                              s
                                                      qs =         St ,   s > 0.                                        (6)
                                                             t=1

       Optimal household decisions are characterized by:

   · Intratemporal optimality between leisure and credit goods:

                                                             u (ct ) = 1;                                               (7)

   · Intertemporal optimality via Euler equation:16

                                                             St+1   ;                                                   (8)

   · Optimality of cash goods:17
                                                          v (xt ) = 1/ ;                                                (9)

   · Optimal gold holdings:
                                                             zt = xt-1 ;                                              (10)

   · The budget constraint (3) and the transversality condition (4) must hold as equalities.

       Households are indifferent about when they work, so a household's bond position is indeter-
minate. In the aggregate, bonds are in zero net supply, so in a symmetric equilibrium Bt = 0.
The labor supply is determined as a residual either from the household budget constraint or
from the production function.18 The use of gold as cash fixes the price level over time and thus
provides a "nominal anchor".19
  16
       Utility is linear in leisure and the price level is constant over time, so the stochastic discount factor is constant
over time.
  17
     Time 0 is special, as the household may inherit an exogenous level of gold that does not correspond to
equations (9) and (10). For that period, we have v (x0 ) = max{1, v (z-1 /)}, and the cash-in-advance constraint
may be slack.
 18
    These yield the same solution by Walras' law.
 19
    We have fixed the relative price of gold and goods by setting the linear technology parameter  to be a


                                                               9
2.2     More Efficient Equilibria

The equilibrium of Section 2.1 anchors the nominal price level at the social cost of requiring
households to carry gold as cash. In our reference model households hold gold not because it
gives them utility directly (see equation (1)) but because trading arrangements give gold utility
indirectly by enabling decentralized trade. More efficient equilibria exist if it is feasible to replace
gold as cash with a costlessly produced paper money whose supply society is able to limit. Then
paper money can be used as cash and all gold can be converted into the consumption good.
Adopting the paper dollar as the unit in which prices are denominated, the household budget
constraint now becomes
                                                    (zt - zt-1 )Pt
             Bt + Pt ( t - xt )  Mt - Mt-1 +                       + Pt ct + Et [Bt+1 St+1 ] + Tt ,         (11)
                                                          
where Tt are nominal taxes or transfers (if negative) from the government. As a simple first
experiment, assume that the government distributes to each household M0 paper dollars before
the start of period 0, after which no subsequent transactions occur between the government and
households, so that T0 = -M0 and Tt = 0 in all subsequent periods. In period 0, B0 = M-1 = 0,
and z-1 > 0 is exogenously given, as before.20 The cash-in-advance constraint and the no-Ponzi
condition now include paper money:
                                                    Pt
                                           Mt-1 +      zt-1  Pt xt ,                                        (12)
                                                    
                                                            zs Ps+1
                                lim Et qs+1 Bs+1 +                  + Ms     0.                             (13)
                               s                               
There exists a paper-money-only equilibrium in which equations (7), (8), and (9) are satisfied
and zt = 0 and Mt /Pt = xt for t  0. In this equilibrium, consumption is the same as in the
constant. In practice, a gold standard imperfectly stabilized the price level, as analyzed, e.g., in Cogley and
Sargent (2015). We could capture such observed outcomes mechanically by letting  vary over time either
predictably or unpredictably.
  20
     This experiment sheds light on the end of the Hungarian hyperinflation after World War II described by
Paal (2000). Hyperinflation drove real money balances nearly to zero. The government reformed fiscal-monetary
policy so that it would no longer print currency to finance government expenditures. To supply new currency,
the central bank extended loans to favored clients. Many of these loans were not repaid, so that the central bank
remonetized the Hungarian economy partly by gift-giving.


                                                       10
economy with only gold as cash, but households use only paper money to trade. They convert all
of their gold into the consumption good at the start of period zero. That increases their utility
by reducing their labor supply at t = 0.21
       However, once the nominal anchor provided by gold is weakened or removed, many other
types of equilibria exist. Paper money and gold may coexist as cash while the value of total
cash in terms of consumption goods equals its value in the cash-must-be-gold equilibrium. In a
stochastic environment, the price level (the inverse of the value of money) may fluctuate over time
in response to sunspots. In such equilibria, logic that underlies Kareken and Wallace's (1981)
exchange rate indeterminacy finding renders the initial value of money indeterminate.22 The
original cash-must-be-gold equilibrium also survives: if households expect paper money to be
worthless tomorrow, they will accept only gold as cash today.23 In pure paper money equilibria
in which zt = 0, equilibria other than the steady state described above can emerge. Before we
return to the question of uniqueness and nominal anchors in Section 5, we explore the implications
of paper money for the government budget and for equilibrium.
       We have assumed that the government simply gives the entire money stock to the represen-
tative household. There are various alternative ways for a government to spend paper money,
many of which have been studied by monetary theorists and tried in practice. A government can
sell paper money to households in exchange for either goods or for private-sector IOUs that the
government can later use to finance government purchases. Furthermore, economic fundamentals
don't require that a government issue the paper currency. Instead a private bank could do that.
  21
       Households reap all of the benefit in the form of leisure in period zero because we assumed linear preferences
in leisure. In a richer model, the real interest rate would change, consumption in period zero would increase, and,
depending on parameter values, the benefit could be spread over multiple periods.
  22
     The evolution of the price level is also indeterminate, but we know that it must be a submartingale.
  23
     To represent this no-value equilibrium would require adjusting our notation because money cannot be taken
as the numeraire when it is worthless.




                                                          11
3        Government Budget and Optimal Inflation
In the Section 2.2 analysis, the government acts only at time 0 when it distributes fiat money. We
now consider what happens when the government and private households both act repeatedly.
In this case, interactions between monetary and fiscal policy actions over time become more
complicated. To simplify (and modernize), we drop gold from the analysis and also assume that
the government is a monopoly provider of money.24
       The evolution of the government budget is thus

                                   g
                                  Bt + Pt gt + Mtg-1  Tt + Mtg + Et St+1 Bt
                                                                          g
                                                                           +1 .                               (14)

                   g
In equation (14), Bt are bonds issued by the government (i.e., liabilities on the government
accounts) and gt is government spending in goods (purchased in the centralized market). Initial
                                                                                       g
holdings of money and bonds are exogenous and must satisfy the consistency conditions B0 = B0
     g
and M- 1 = M-1 .

       Market clearing requires
                                                 ct + xt + gt = t ,
                                                      g
                                                     Bt = Bt ,

and
                                                     Mtg = Mt .

Whether the government is also subject to a no-Ponzi condition that constrains monetary/fiscal
policy sequences or whether this condition prevails only in equilibrium as a consequence of
households' transversality conditions hinges on how monetary and fiscal policies are assumed
to be conducted. Thus, it matters whether the Treasury and central bank together freely print
  24
       When used as cash, gold puts a lower bound on the return of money, limiting a government's ability to pursue
inflationary policies. Governments intent on pursuing high-inflation policies have circumvented this constraint by
imposing legal restrictions that make it costly to hold gold or to use it for trades. Edwards (2018) describes and
interprets actions taken by the U.S. Roosevelt administration in the 1930s to raise the US price level. Sargent
and Velde (1995) describe draconian restrictions that the Jacobins imposed during the 1794 Terror in France in
order to lower the price level.


                                                         12
money in order to service maturing bonds, or whether the paper money supply is rigidly set
independently of households' preferences about rolling over their portfolios of government bonds.
It also matters whether the government runs permanent primary surpluses or whether instead
there are times in which public spending temporarily exceeds tax revenues so that, in addition to
rolling over preexisting claims, bonds are issued to cover temporary revenue shortfalls. Different
authors use the distinct terms "government budget constraint" or "government debt valuation
equation" to refer to the same equation,25 labels that occur in formulations of the Fiscal Theory
of the Price Level that we shall discuss in Section 5. Here we sidestep the naming issue and
simply refer to "government budget balance," which holds in any sequence of allocations, prices,
and policies that constitute a competitive equilibrium.
      Compared to the previous case of a commodity-backed standard, household optimality con-
ditions still require (7) to hold but are otherwise modified to allow prices to vary over time:
                                                                     Pt
                                                       St+1 =                                    (15)
                                                                    Pt+1
                                                                Pt
                                             1 = Et                 v (xt+1 )                    (16)
                                                               Pt+1
                                                       Mt-1  Pt xt                               (17)

and
                                     lim Et [qs (Bs + Ms-1 )] = 0,              t  0.            (18)
                                     s

Next, we sum the household budget constraint forward and substitute market clearing and house-
hold optimality conditions. For convenience, we also define the (gross) risk-free nominal interest
rate between periods t and t + 1 to be Rt := (Et St+1 )-1 . We obtain a key equation that links
monetary and fiscal policy actions:
                                                    
                           Bt + Mt-1                            Ts        Ms            1
                                     = Et               s- t       - gs +         1-         .   (19)
                               Pt               s=t
                                                                Ps        Ps            Rs

Another representation of equation (19) is
                                             
                                 Bt                         Ts        Ms - Ms-1
                                    = Et             s- t      - gs +           .                (20)
                                 Pt          s= t
                                                            Ps           Ps
 25
      For the latter, see Cochrane (2018).


                                                               13
In both versions (19) and (20), at every time t the present value of the government liabilities must
                                                         Ts
equal the present value of primary surpluses             Ps
                                                              - gs augmented by revenues from "seigniorage"
defined as revenues that the government raises by issuing paper money that bears a net nominal
interest rate of zero.


3.1        Seigniorage

Representations (19) and (20) express seigniorage, i.e., government revenues from printing money,
in different ways. Equation (19) emphasizes that money is a government liability, a standard
accounting practice in many countries today;26 that paper money pays zero interest leads to
recording positive seigniorage revenue being earned on real money balances when Rs > 1 so
that the net nominal interest rate exceeds zero. In contrast, equation (20) implicitly treats only
interest bearing government bonds as government liabilities and treats new issues of fiat money
as seigniorage. Notice that the accounting scheme based on (20) records seigniorage as being
negative when a government reduces its paper money supply.
       Representations (19) and (20) tie together equilibrium sequences of taxes, government spend-
ing, interest bearing debt, and paper money. In models with a single government decision maker,
giving names to separate monetary and fiscal policy decisions is arbitrary and without conse-
quence. A distinction between monetary and fiscal policies comes to life only when we assign
decisions about particular actions exclusively either to a Treasury or a central bank, as we do in
Sections 5 and 6.
       A stochastic process for inflation interacts with the government budget in distinct ways: (1)
an anticipated part of inflation acts as a tax rate on real money balances; and (2) an unanticipated
part of inflation (a.k.a. an innovation in inflation) revalues the entire stock of nominal government
liabilities (fiat money plus nominal interest-bearing debt).
  26
       In practice, money is usually a liability of the central bank, which is a distinct entity from the Treasury, and
seigniorage profits are a transfer from the central bank to the Treasury. We will return to this point in Section 6.




                                                           14
3.1.1       Anticipated inflation

To study anticipated inflation, we shut down uncertainty. Define t+1 := Pt+1 /Pt to be the gross
inflation rate between periods t +1 and t. Equilibrium conditions imply that seigniorage revenues
L(t+1 ) satisfy27

                                       Ms          1                  s+1        s+1
                          L(t+1 ) :=          1-           = v -1           1-           .                   (21)
                                       Ps          Rs                            

Equation (21) states that in equilibrium seigniorage revenues from one-period inflation infla-
tion anticipated in period s can be represented as a function of anticipated inflation that is
unambiguously increasing when inflation is negative or in a neighborhood of zero inflation. At
higher inflation rates, countervailing forces contend: higher inflation increases revenues directly
but indirectly decreases them by depressing households' demand for real money balances. In
settings where government-issued money competes with imperfect substitutes issued by other
borrowers, the second force is likely to dominate at higher levels of inflation, implying that there
is a maximum amount of revenues that can be raised each period.28 To keep things simple,
we assume that preferences are such that L is strictly increasing up to some inflation max and
strictly decreasing afterwards.
                                                                                             Ts
       A manifold of equilibria share the same sequence of real primary deficits/surpluses { P s
                                                                                                 -gs }s=0
                                                  g    g
and the same time-0 real government obligations (B0 + M- 1 )/P0 . If we consider only equilibria

in which inflation stays in the range in which the function L is increasing, then equations (19)
and (21) imply that all equilibria in the manifold share the same present value of revenues from
seigniorage:
                                                        
                                                ¯
                                                L              s L(s ).                                      (22)
                                                        s=0

The invariant object defined in equation (22) provides a concise representation of Sargent and
Wallace's (1981) unpleasant monetarist arithmetic. Given initial real liabilities and a fixed pro-
  27
       Note that this is true even when Rs = 1, so that the cash-in-advance constraint may not be binding and real
money balances are not uniquely defined in equilibrium: in this case, the argument of v -1 may not correctly
represent real money balances, but the second factor is zero anyway.
  28
     As an example, in the case of Section 2.2, gold is perfectly durable and a perfect substitute for government-
issued paper, and the demand for money drops to zero as soon as Pt+1 > Pt .


                                                           15
file of real primary deficits/surpluses, a lower inflation rate in some period t must necessarily be
compensated by higher inflation in some other period t in order to keep the present value of
seigniorage revenues constant. Associated with equation (22) is a natural notion of an intertem-
poral average of future inflation rates, in particular, the constant ¯ that satisfies29
                                                       
                                                 ¯
                                                 L           s L(¯
                                                                  ),                                         (23)
                                                      s=0

which is the "Chisini (1929) mean" of the sum in (22). According to equation (23), Chisini mean
inflation is uniquely pinned down by initial debt and prospective primary government surpluses.30
If we assume an exogenous and fixed sequence of primary surpluses, then Chisini mean inflation
is determined by fiscal policy and monetary policy determines only the distribution of inflation
over time. Notice how this analysis takes exogenous sequences of fiscal actions as given and
has not modeled how they have been chosen. The analysis simply derived implications from the
budget equations that link monetary and fiscal policy action sequences together with inequalities
describing private agents' optimal decisions that determine an equilibrium allocation and price
system.
       A second and equally valid use of the very same equilibrium conditions would instead take the
sequence of gross inflation rates {t }                                              ¯
                                      t=0 to be given exogenously, find the implied L from (22), and

deduce a required present value of taxes net of spending from (19). In this second interpretation
monetary policy "goes first" and fiscal policy then adjusts.
       These two uses of the same equilibrium conditions delineate an irreconcilable hypothetical
conflict between a fiscal authority intent on reducing taxes and a monetary authority intent
on reining in inflation. Thus, in our first scenario, a monetary authority is forced to adjust to
choices made first (and once-and-for-all) by a fiscal authority. The second interpretation instead
envisions a monetary authority as "choosing first", forcing the fiscal authority then to adjust.
Sargent (1986) referred to this as "Wallace's game of chicken."31
  29                                              ¯ , our assumptions about preferences imply that 
       If there exists an equilibrium that raises L                                                ¯ exists and is
unique.
  30
     Here we take initial real government liabilities (B0 + M-1 )/P0 as exogenous. We discuss the role of initial
inflation later in section 3.2.
  31
     For recent formalizations of the game of chicken, see Barth´
                                                                elemy and Plantin (2018) and Camous and


                                                         16
    While perhaps helping us to make sense of contending forces that break loose during big
inflations, the hostile relationship between monetary and fiscal policy envisioned in a game of
chicken differs markedly from the well aligned monetary and fiscal policies embedded in an opti-
mal taxation theory in which coordinated monetary-fiscal policy actions implement a Friedman
rule that drives the net nominal interest rate to zero. In the context of our reference model,
optimality of a Friedman rule follows immediately because we assumed that the government can
impose lump-sum taxes. When Rt > 0, competitive equilibria are distorted since the marginal
rate of substitution in preferences between cash goods and leisure exceeds the marginal rate of
transformation in production, which equals 1 in our model. There exist monetary-fiscal policies
consistent with an equilibrium that undo this distortion and render the equilibrium allocation
efficient by setting Rt = 0 and hence Pt+1 /Pt =  . Under a policy that supports that outcome,
equation (19) then requires that the present value of taxes must equal the value of initial money
and debt plus the present value of government spending. To deliver the required deflation, the
government taxes the households and uses the proceeds to retire money over time.32
    The Friedman rule remains optimal in some economies in which lump-sum taxes are not
available. As an example, if we replaced lump-sum taxes with proportional taxes on labor
income, results described by Chari, Christiano, and Kehoe (1991) imply that the Friedman rule is
optimal in our simple model whenever u and v exhibit constant and equal relative risk aversions.33
This follows from the uniform commodity taxation result in Atkinson and Stiglitz (1972): with
homothetic preferences between cash and credit goods, it is optimal to tax both goods at the same
rate. To do this, the production of both goods must be distorted by the same labor tax. Adopting
the Friedman rule equates the unit marginal rate of substitution between cash and credit goods
to the marginal rate of transformation in production. Da Costa and Werning (2008) extend
Matveev (2020).
 32
    Cole and Kocherlakota (1998) emphasize that a government has wide latitude in choosing a path of repurchases
because when Rt = 0 the cash-in-advance constraint does not bind, so households are happy to hold excess money
balances as a good savings vehicle.
  33
     The rule is optimal if the constant relative risk aversion of v is lower than that for u. In this case, it would
be optimal for the government to tax cash goods less than credit goods, but this cannot be achieved when the
only instrument available is the inflation tax.


                                                         17
Chari, Christiano and Kehoe's result to allow nonlinear income taxes.34
       Up to now, we have distinguished sharply between "bonds" that are held purely as stores of
value and "money" that also serves as a means of payment. But Treasury bonds can also serve
as transactions vehicles, as became especially apparent after the financial crisis of 2008. Interest
rates on Treasury bonds are below rates on bank reserves (and below zero rates of return on
cash) in a number of countries today. It would be straightforward to extend our reference model
to account for such a situation. We could add two types of anonymous transactions, one in which
central-bank money (currency) is required, and another in which Treasury bonds can be used,
leaving private bonds in zero net supply as a residual category that can be held as a pure store of
value. In this situation, the wedge between the interest on private and government debt (beyond
the part that is driven by risk) is another source of seigniorage revenues for the Treasury.35 Since
in most countries government debt is much higher than the monetary base, this second source
of seigniorage can also be bigger.36


3.2          Surprise inflations

Having discussed the role of expected inflation in (19), we now study inflation surprises. Here
we are concerned with responses of inflation to unanticipated shocks to government spending or
tax revenues. Suppose that the government issues only nominally risk-free debt, so that Bt is
predetermined and known at time t - 1. Then (19) implies


                              1         1
        (Bt + Mt-1 )             - Et-1      =
                              Pt        Pt
                                                                                                          (24)
                      s- t   Ts        Ms       1                      s- t   Ts        Ms      1
        Et                      - gs +       1-      - Et-1                      - gs +      1-
             s=t
                             Ps        Ps       Rs            s=t
                                                                              Ps        Ps      Rs
  34
       To break this result, Albanesi (2007) explores a model where cash goods are disproportionately purchased
by low-income households and inflation arises from the conflict among heterogeneous households. In her paper,
low-wage households prefer greater reliance on labor taxes, while high-wage earners favor the inflation tax.
  35
     van Binsbergen et al. (2019) estimate this wedge to be 40 basis points. See also Lagos (2010).
  36
     Notwithstanding many discussions about the demise of cash, currency in circulation in the United States is
almost 8% of GDP, still as high as it has been since the early 1950s.


                                                       18
Equation (24) links surprises in future government surpluses inclusive of seigniorage revenues to
surprises in inflation. In response to an adverse fiscal shock like a war that reduces anticipated
future real tax collections relative to prospective government expenditures, fiscal balance can be
restored in one of three ways:37

    · Taxes and spending can be adjusted to restore the present value of net of interest govern-
                           Ts
         ment surpluses    Ps
                                - gs to its initial value; or

    · Future seigniorage revenues can be increased by raising prospective inflation rates; or

    · The price level can be allowed to jump immediately in order lower the value of liabilities
         previously issued by the government.

When lump-sum taxes are available as they are in the model above, the first option is optimal.
However, when the government can levy only distorting taxes on labor supplied, a result of
Chari, Christiano, and Kehoe (1991) shows that it is optimal to use inflation as the primary
shock absorber. Unanticipated inflation turns out to be an excellent way of insuring the govern-
ment against unfavorable fiscal shocks. Because timing assumptions about cash holdings made
by Chari, Christiano, and Kehoe as well as by Lucas and Stokey (1983, 1987) allow households
to readjust their cash after observing the shock, unexpected inflation is not distortionary. So
volatility of unexpected inflation has no direct adverse welfare consquences. In contrast, our
reference model adopts Svensson's (1985) timing assumption that makes cash holdings prede-
termined relative to the arrival of the fiscal shock. This makes unanticipated inflation depress
consumption of cash goods via constraint (17) and diminishes the reliance of optimal policy on
unanticipated inflation.38 An alternative way to introduce costs from unexpected inflation is to
  37
       Our discussion of inflation as a shock absorber mirrors Sims (2001). Building on Aiyagari et al. (2002),
Sargent (2001) draws connections between precautionary saving in models with limited idiosyncratic insurance
and tax smoothing when full insurance through inflation or state-contingent debt is impossible.
  38
     The Svensson timing has been used to guarantee existence of an interior solution in models in which optimal
government policy is subject to time inconsistency and to moderate a temptation fully to default ex post on all
nominal liabilities. See Albanesi, Chari, and Christiano (2003).




                                                        19
assume sticky prices, an avenue first pursued in this context by Siu (2004) and Schmitt-Grohe
and Uribe (2004).
     Equation (24) opens the door to a hedging theory of an optimal level of government debt that
activates a new avenue by which fiscal and monetary policies interact. Thus, let the government
spending process {gs }s=0 be given. Break taxes into two parts, an exogenous real component

represented by the stochastic process {s }                                          
                                          s=0 and a residual component {Tt /Pt - t }t=0 that the

government adjusts to ensure that (19) is always satisfied. Also take as given the stochastic
process of inflation. We can then rewrite (24) as:

              Bt + Mt-1   1        1
                            - Et-1         = PVt ( ) - Et-1 [PVt ( )] + PVt (T /P -  )
                 Pt-1     t        t
                                           - Et-1 [PVt (T /P -  )] + PVt (g ) - Et-1 [PVt (g )],     (25)

where PV represents a present-value operator that for our economy with quasilinear preferences
is
                                                           
                                          PVt (g ) := Et           s-t gs ,
                                                           s= t

and similarly for the other stochastic processes. We can compute that the level of government
liabilities to be issued at t - 1 that minimizes the conditional variance of the residual component
of taxes is
                     -1
 Bt + Mt-1   Covt-1 (t  , PVt ( - g ))            -1                           Vart-1 (PVt ( - g ))
           =                -1         = Corrt-1 (t  , PVt ( - g ))                         -1      , (26)
    Pt-1          Vart-1 (t )                                                     Vart-1 (t    )

an equation that summarizes responses to hedging motives implied by the object being mini-
mized. If inflation and the present value of the exogenous component of surpluses are negatively
                                 -1
correlated (that is, if Corrt-1 (t  , PVt ( - g )) > 0), then the quantity of government debt that
achieves the best hedge is larger (a) the more correlated are inflation and the present value of
the surplus, and (b) the more variable is the exogenous component of the surplus, and (c) the
smaller is the volatility of inflation.
     In our reference model, setting nominal liabilities at the optimal hedging solution (26) is not
urgent because taxes are lump sum and can be adjusted at no cost. However, in a model with
only distorting labor taxes, Bhandari et al. (2016) show that an optimal fiscal policy eventually

                                                     20
drives government debt to the value (26). Their result reflects the balancing of two forces. First,
that labor-tax distortions are typically convex in the tax rate creates a reason to use debt to
hedge fiscal risks.39 Second, as in Lucas and Stokey (1983), debt would remain constant in the
absence of shocks. The envelope condition then implies that the cost of deviating from a constant
path and tilting it slightly is of second order. In the presence of shocks, the hedging benefits
of moving debt slowly toward the optimal hedging value more than compensate for losses from
                                             40
deviating from a constant tax rate.
       The next step is to consider both inflation and tax rates as jointly determined. Two aspects
of this problem are worth further consideration:41

    · If unanticipated inflation is costly, there is a reason to limit the conditional variability of
         inflation. However, from equation (26), hedging fiscal risk then requires higher values of
         debt. Depending on the initial value, this may require more costly deviations from tax
         smoothing. It might also imply that a level of debt that achieves an optimal hedge is above
         the peak of the Laffer curve.42

    · The more correlated are inflation and government fiscal needs, the better nominal debt is
         as a hedge. Forces ignored by our model would reduce this correlation, including shocks be-
         yond government control that buffet nominal variables. Such shocks would have important
         implications for the joint conduct of monetary and fiscal policy.

       Since our model includes just short-term debt, only an unanticipated jump in the price level
has any effect on the real value of debt. With long-term debt, ongoing inflation depreciates the
  39
       We can interpret the exogenous component t as the revenues associated with a constant tax rate.
  40
       Bhandari et al. (2016) study a real economy in which the state-contingent payoff of debt one period ahead is
exogenously given. This corresponds to our assumption of exogenous inflation since we have assumed that debt
is nominally risk free.
   41
      The first consideration below implicitly appeared in Siu's (2004) analysis, but he did not analyze the asymp-
totic level of debt in depth. Bhandari et al. (2018) analyze economies in which distortionary taxes are desirable for
social-insurance purposes; since they allow for lump-sum taxes, a representative-agent version of their economy
does not feature a need for the government to hedge fiscal risk.
  42
     Bhandari et al. (2016) do not characterize the solution for this case. Since they consider cases in which the
real payoff of debt is exogenous, they simply assume it to be such that the optimal hedging value is interior.


                                                         21
real value of future promised repayments, as discussed for instance in Cochrane (2001) and Sims
(2013). That would allow spreading the costs of inflation over a longer time span. But even with
long-term debt, it is only the arrival of inflation surprises after debt has been issued that affects
the government budget constraint.43
       Berndt et al. (2012) assessed fiscal hedging delivered by government debt in the United States
after World War II. They find that innovations in defense spending were mostly absorbed by
future increases in taxes, but that about 10% were absorbed by abnormally low returns on gov-
ernment debt. Hall and Sargent (2014) infer that during the 18th and 19th centuries the federal
government of the United States earned a reputation for repaying its debts in gold and that it did
not often use state-contingent inflation as a major hedge against its fiscal needs.44 An interesting
aspect of Berndt, Lustig, and Yeltekin's analysis is that low returns on government debt were
realized in the years that followed the shocks, contrary to the theory described above, which
stresses a contemporaneous correlation. This is consistent with Reinhart and Sbrancia (2015),
who argue that debt erosion after World War II occurred primarily through financial repressions
that delivered low real interest rates. This finding is confirmed in Hall and Sargent's (2011)
decomposition of the evolution of U.S. federal debt after World War II.



4        Modigliani-Miller Logic in Monetary Economies
Since both of these financial claims have the same zero nominal net rate of return at the Friedman
rule, households regard money and nominally risk-free bonds as perfect substitutes. When real
                                                         -1
money balances exceed the satiation level v                   (1), open-market operations that swap money
for bonds do not affect equilibrium consumption, leisure, or prices. Thus, starting from an
equilibrium in which Rt = 1, an increase in money balances Mtg by M and a corresponding
  43
       An empirical analysis of the degree by which inflation surprises would affect the balance sheet of the federal
government in the United States is undertaken by Hilscher et al. (2014).
  44
     It is worth noting that convertibility of greenbacks into gold was suspended at critical junctures, and that the
United States did not lose any of the wars in which it was engaged; it is thus possible that the states of nature
in which the hedge would have been exercised did not materialize.




                                                          22
reduction in nominal bond issuance Bt+1 by the same (uncontingent) amount M affect neither
household nor government budget constraints (equations (11), (18), and (14)). Furthermore, the
cash-in-advance constraint (12) is slack when Rt = 1 and continues to be satisfied if households
accept the extra money injected by the policymaker. With no change in asset or goods prices,
a household's optimal choice of sequences of consumption and labor also remain the same. It
follows that the consumption-leisure allocation together with the asset-pricing kernel and the
nominal price sequence {Pt } that formed the original equilibrium remain an equilibrium after
the open-market operation.
       Such irrelevance results obscure lines between monetary and fiscal policies: the classic tool
of monetary policy, namely, open-market operations, have no effects and the price level is gov-
erned exclusively by the present value of primary surpluses, an object typically viewed as being
determined by fiscal policy. Wallace (1981b) and Chamley and Polemarchakis (1984) show that
open market operations are irrelevant in many settings in which money is held purely as a store
of value and provides no special transaction services. A tell-tale sign that an irrelevance theorem
is at work is that money is not dominated in rate of return by other stores of value. Examples
of such settings include ones in which a monetary-fiscal policy implements the Friedman rule.
       Irrelevance theorems extend to operations in which the government does not simply swap
one risk-free nominal liability for another one but instead issues money to buy state-contingent
securities. For example, in our reference model, starting from a competitive equilibrium in which
the Friedman rule applies, let the government issue money M in period t and buy an arbitrary
portfolio of state-contingent bonds Bt+1 of equal value at asset prices prevailing in the original
equilibrium:45
                                         Mt = -Et [St+1 Bt+1 ].

As of time t + 1, this open-market operation yields profits Mt - Bt+1 . If the government
distributes these profits by adjusting lump-sum taxes in period t + 1 by Tt+1 = Bt+1 - Mt ,
government and household budget sets remain unchanged at the original sequence of goods and
  45
       Our convention is that Bt+1 is a liability for the government, so a purchase of assets implies that
Et [St+1 Bt+1 ] < 0.



                                                     23
asset prices, so the original equilibrium allocation continues to form a competitive equilibrium at
those prices. Wallace (1981b) connects this result to the Modigliani-Miller neutrality theorem in
corporate finance: the government resembles a corporation that issues nominal claims (money)
in order to acquire new assets (state-contingent securities) at market prices and then increases its
future dividends (reductions in lump sum taxes) by the payouts from these purchased assets, an
operation that has no effects on the firm's total net present value.46 Chamley and Polemarchakis
(1984) consider another purchase that leaves taxes fixed and instead makes the net present value
of surpluses change by the amount Mt - Bt+1 at time t + 1 and lets prices jump just enough
to restore (19).
       A general lesson from irrelevance theorems is that alterations in the central bank's balance
sheet that indicate the same open-market exchange can be associated with markedly different
equilibrium outcomes depending on subsequent fiscal policy adjustments triggered by that ex-
change.47
       So far, we have associated the Friedman rule with a zero nominal interest rate in models in
which the nominal interest rate is the relevant cost of holding cash. However, the last decade
has witnessed large increases in fractions of the monetary base being held as bank reserves that
sometimes pay interest. We can easily adjust our reference model to let money pay a nominal
              ~ t . A Friedman rule then calls for supplying sufficient real balances to eradicate
interest rate R
                                                          ~ t = Rt .48 An irrelevance result
any gap between rates of return on money and debt so that R
under this more general Friedman rule provides a useful tool for understanding the "quantitative
  46
       In the case of the government, the net present value is the present value of future primary surpluses, which
is unchanged in this experiment as of time t, since, at the Friedman rule, Et [St+1 (Mt - Bt+1 )] = 0.
   47
      In assessing their macroeconomic impact, Bhattarai et al. (2015) emphasize the signalling role of "quantitative
easing" policies.
  48                                                                       ~ t = Rt > 0, a monetary authority
     Without uncertainty, equation (15) implies Pt+1 /Pt = Rt . By setting R
can decouple the Friedman rule prescription from a requirement to generate a deflation. Doing that would be
desirable in models with nominal frictions that make deflations costly, or in new Keynesian models where a
zero lower bound on nominal interest rates prevents implementing an optimal policy. These observations are
relevant for assessing papers that have argued that persistently low-interest rate policies are responsible for
inflation recently undershooting central bank's target in many developing countries; Williamson (2019) reviews
the argument.


                                                         24
easing" (QE) of the last decade. Under such an interest-on-reserves Friedman rule, QE will
have real effects only if frictions in addition to those underlying a cash-in-advance constraint
are present. Indeed, in this spirit, recall that Wallace (1981b) mentioned having some agents be
credit constrained as a way to overturn his Modigliani-Miller theorem for open market operations.
       Various devices have been used to disarm irrelevance of open market operations. A common
approach recently has been to assume that heterogeneous households trade financial assets with
each other as well as with the government. C´
                                            urdia and Woodford (2011) require all private
transactions to go through intermediaries that bear a cost to transfer funds from savers to
borrowers. Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010) and Gertler and Karadi (2013) introduce agency costs
that limit intermediaries' sizes. Cui and Sterk (2018) follow Kaplan and Violante (2014) by
assuming that households are subject to idiosyncratic shocks and that they face costs when
rebalancing their portfolio between liquid assets (in our case, money) and illiquid assets (bonds).
In all of these settings, open-market operations that swap money for bonds relax some agents'
credit constraints. That affects their consumption decisions and thereby sets off other general-
equilibrium effects. But even in such settings, the line between monetary and fiscal policy is
still tenuous. Sargent and Smith (1987) showed that even when some agents' asset holdings
are constrained, open-market operations can be neutral when type-dependent fiscal transfers are
made. To reinstate irrelevance of open-market operations they adjust the timing and amounts
of type-specific transfers so that the budget-feasible set of each type of agent remains unchanged
at the pre-intervention prices when the mix of government-issued assets is altered. With such
a policy, private agents' original choices remain optimal after the open-market operation,so no
general-equilibrium effects are triggered. Thus, even when enough of these frictions are present
to render open market operations "relevant", the boundary between monetary and fiscal policies
remains fuzzy: open market exchanges by the central bank can be regarded as having real effects
only when they serve as substitutes for alternative fiscal actions.49
       Williamson (2012) analyzed open-market operations in a model in which both money and
  49
       In addition to the assumption of missing fiscal instruments, this avenue of research needs a story for why it
is not optimal for the government to flood the market with money by purchasing enough public or private bonds,
thereby restoring the irrelevance theorem, as in Sargent and Wallace (1982).


                                                          25
bonds have transaction roles.50 In this context, open-market operations affect relative scarcities
of the two payment instruments. To implement a Friedman rule, the real value of money and
bonds must both be sufficiently high that they do not constrain opportunities to trade that
would be present if perfect credit markets were to exist. However, the government's present-
value budget constraint inextricably links the real value of its total liabilities to the present value
of fiscal surpluses.51 Yet again, a government's ability to facilitate private-sector transactions
cannot be separated from its choices of taxes, transfers, and spending.


4.1        Real Bills Doctrine and Manufactured Liquid Assets Scarcities

In Section 3.1 we discussed the optimality of the Friedman rule when money plays a special
transaction role relative to either government or private bonds and the Friedman rule calls for
equalizing rates of return on money and bonds. As discussed by Sims (2019), a Friedman rule
prescription requires that there be room for the government to lower a wedge between returns on
money and bonds by exchanging money for bonds. In the setting studied by Sims, it is optimal
for the government to inflate away all government bonds outstanding at the beginning of time
0, all of which are denominated in dollars. But at time 0, the government is not allowed to
accumulate private assets. This renders inapplicable the Modigliani-Miller equivalence discussed
above because there are no outstanding government bonds for the government to purchase with
currency issues after time 0. In this setting, it turns out that driving the opportunity cost of
money to zero is not optimal.52 But most governments today have outstanding (large) stocks of
nominal bonds, so for them the option of reducing the bond supply and increasing the money
supply remains open.
       When other government issued liabilities ­ say both money and bonds ­ play special roles
  50
       In Williamson (2012), bonds are not used directly in decentralized trade, but rather are needed to back bank
deposits that are used by households for payments.
  51
     Note however that the present value is now taken with respect to an interest rate that is below the interest
rate for private credit transactions.
  52
     In Sims (2019), driving the opportunity cost of money to zero is impossible because money demand becomes
infinite. This is not the case if a satiation point exists, as in our reference model.



                                                          26
in providing transaction services, a rule in the spirit of Friedman's calls for equating returns of
both money and government-issued bonds to the return on privately-issued nominally risk-free
assets.53 To attain this outcome, a government may have to purchase private assets; Sims's
analysis is especially pertinent here. As an example, in Sargent and Wallace (1982) the Fried-
man rule is a requirement for Pareto optimality: the Friedman rule can be implemented by
having the monetary authority open a "discount window" and offer freely to exchange money for
private bonds. After a sufficient quantity of private securities have been discounted by the mon-
etary authority to equate returns on money and private risk-free bonds (or to eliminate other
rate-of-return dominations), any further discounting of private indebtedness has no effects on
asset or goods prices, an instance of a "real bills doctrine" stating that central bank purchases
of high-quality private indebtedness have no effects on an equilibrium price level path. This
interpretation of the real bills doctrine stands as another manifestation of a Modigliani-Miller
irrelevance result. Sargent and Wallace (1982) also remark that, in their environment, equilib-
ria resulting from policies that restrict the provision of liquidity need not be Pareto inferior to
those arising from the Friedman rule: while less desirable from a pure efficiency perspective,
those equilibria can redistribute wealth to favor some groups at the expense of others. In the
absence of direct nondistorting fiscal instruments for achieving these redistribution aims, it may
be optimal for the government to rely on policies that artificially drive wedges between prices of
different classes of assets, even when buying private assets is possible.
       With heterogeneous endowments, owners with similar endowments want to collude to drive
up the relative prices of their wares. Government tax policy can substitute for collusion. Because
this insight applies to intertemporal prices as much as it does for apples or milk, different agents
will have incentives to lobby for an intertemporal distribution of taxes that distorts asset prices
in their favor, as was emphasized by Bassetto (2014). Several recent papers have rationalized
policies that restrict supplies of government debt on those grounds. Common to these papers
is the idea that some agents are constrained in their abilities to borrow, so (as in Woodford
  53
       More precisely, a Friedman rule would require that government-issued liabilities and private securities are
priced by the same stochastic discount factor. This is relevant because in practice only the government has
ultimate control of the money printing press and is thus able to issue nominally risk-free assets.


                                                         27
1990), the government can relax their borrowing constraint by lowering current taxes and issuing
government debt, then raising them later. Such a policy effectively allows the government to
borrow on behalf of some private agents. In such an economy, a characteristic of borrowers that
are to be helped is that they are well endowed in the future relative to their preference for future
consumption. To act as a cartel, borrowers would need collectively to restrict their demands
for loans enough to lower the equilibrium interest rate. Borrowers do not favor a policy under
which the government issues so much public debt that private borrowing constraints become
slack. Rather, the optimal level of public debt from a borrowers' perspective keeps borrowing
constraints binding. Different papers supplement this same idea with different reasons for why
the government may wish to favor borrowers over savers. Bhandari et al. (2017) make this point
for a general case. In Azzimonti and Yared (2017, 2019), borrowers are poorer than savers and
a government that is utilitarian and wishes to redistribute is prevented from doing so by using
type-specific taxes. Yared (2013) considers a Diamond and Dybvig (1983) setup in which, in the
absence of private insurance markets, it is optimal for the government to redistribute in favor of
some agents who ex post are revealed to be impatient and want to borrow. Bhandari et al. (2017)
push these forces one step further: rather than take borrowing constraints as given, a government
can deliberately limit enforcement of private contracts in order to restrict the demand for loans
and thereby move the interest rate. Such a policy can remain optimal even when a government
has access to nonlinear income taxes so long as information frictions prevent full redistribution
by fiscal policy alone.54
  54
       The transaction role of government debt in Sargent and Wallace (1982) and Azzimonti and Yared (2017,
2019) differs from the role of money in our reference model. In our model, money permits trade in anonymous
transactions in which record keeping is impossible. In Azzimonti and Yared (2017, 2019), public debt alleviates
a limited commitment problem that arises when agents are tempted to default on previous private obligations ex
post. The force arising here remains valid in alternative environments in which public debt plays a money-like
role that private debt cannot serve so long as government debt is disproportionately purchased by agents from
whom the government wishes to redistribute. The key difference between cash and government bonds is that poor
agents' portfolios are relatively concentrated in cash and away from bonds. It is for this reason that a utilitarian
government with no direct instruments for redistribution would find it optimal to pursue the Friedman rule for
cash, but not for bonds.



                                                        28
   In the competitive equilibria of our simple reference model, the present value of household
consumption
                                    
                               Et         qs Ps (cs + xs ) = Et  s (cs + xs )                 (27)
                                    s=0

is always well defined. If the economy is deterministic, this equation means that the real interest
rate is asymptotically greater than the growth rate of consumption. The present value of house-
hold consumption continues to be well defined in more general models so long as households
trade in complete markets and borrowing is constrained only by a no-Ponzi condition like (13).
However, the situation changes when households have finite planning horizons. This can happen
either because their lifetimes are finite, or because they might eventually face binding borrow-
ing constraints that (at the margin) will make choices of variables at the date of the binding
borrowing constraint insensitive to what will happen in subsequent periods.
   Darby (1984) argues that Sargent and Wallace's (1981) unpleasant monetarist arithmetic
does not apply when the economy's growth rate exceeds the interest rate on government debt.
Similarly, Blanchard (2019) refines arguments from Diamond (1965) and shows that the cost of
issuing extra government debt may be small or nothing if his historical estimates of U.S. risk-free
rates of return relative to growth rates prevail in the future. By way of assessing Darby's and
Blanchard's analysis, and inspired by Sargent and Wallace (1982), Yared (2013), and especially
Azzimonti and Yared (2017), we now present a simple example that shows that budget balance
still imposes limits on fiscal policy, and also how the line between monetary and fiscal policy
becomes potentially even more tenuous in an environment in which the growth rate exceeds the
interest rate. We consider a deterministic economy populated by overlapping generations of two
period-lived people with constant size total population. We abstract from cash and credit goods
but impose that no household can borrow. In this model, government debt and transfers can at
least partially substitute for missing credit markets.
   We depart from Blanchard (2019) by introducing equal numbers of two types of agents for
each cohort. Savers receive endowments (eS    S
                                         y , eo ) = (, ) when young and old, respectively, while

borrowers receive (eB    B
                    y , eo ) = ( ,  ). We abstract from labor supply. We assume that       is small




                                                      29
and study the limit of equilibria as          0.55 Households of type i = B, S born in period t have
utility
                                               log ci         i
                                                    yt + log co t+1 ,


where ci                                  i
       yt is consumption when young, and co t+1 is consumption when old. We assume that no

durable goods exist.56
       The government is not allowed to redistribute directly between generations or between bor-
rowers and savers; rather, it is restricted to apply equal lump-sum taxes and transfers to every
living household. Since young borrowers have an                   0 endowment, the government is thus
effectively prevented from taxing, but it can implement transfers. The government can also
issue debt and/or money, which are equivalent here since there is no separate transaction role
for one instrument relative to the other. We consider two alternative specifications of policy,
one that more closely resembles "monetary" policy, and another that looks more "fiscal." We
will then show that the two policies implement the same allocations; but contrasts between two
implementations of the same allocations bring insights.
       In the monetary implementation, at the beginning of each period t there is a stock of
government-issued money Mt-1 per capita, and the government makes a transfer (a negative
tax)
                                            - Tt = Mt - Mt-1  0.                                           (28)

Budget constraints for a household of type i born in period t are

                                            mi        i     i
                                             t = Pt (eyt - cyt ) - Tt ,                                    (29)

                                       Pt+1 (ci        i          i
                                              o t+1 - eo t+1 ) = mt - Tt+1 ,                               (30)

where mi
       t is the choice of money holdings for a household of type i born in period t, and the

borrowing constraint imposes mi
                              t  0. The initial old cohort in period 0 faces just equation (30),
  55
       Having > 0 ensures that household utility is well defined even in autarky.
  56
       Our results can survive introduction of a durable reproducible good such as capital, but depending on the
production function may no longer apply if there is a factor in fixed supply. See Rhee (1991).




                                                        30
taking mi
        -1 as exogenously given. In each period, market clearing for money balances requires
                                                                                            57



                                              mS    B
                                               t + mt = 4Mt .                                              (31)

       In the fiscal implementation, we use real quantities as numeraire. The government starts a
period owing bt units of goods per capita. It then sells debt bt+1 payable in period t + 1 at a real
gross interest rate t+1 and uses the proceeds to repay existing debt obligations and make real
transfers -t . Government policy must be such that

                                          - t = bt+1 /t+1 - bt  0.                                         (32)

The budget constraint for a household of type i born in period t is

                                             bi
                                              t+1
                                                  = ei     i
                                                     yt - cyt - t ,                                        (33)
                                             t+1

                                         ci        i        i
                                          o t+1 - eo t+1 = bt+1 - t+1 ,                                    (34)

with bi
      t being real debt purchased in period t, which must be nonnegative due to the borrowing

constraint. As before, the initial old cohort starts with an exogenous amount bi
                                                                               0 . Market clearing

for debt requires that
                                             bS      B
                                              t+1 + bt+1 = 4bt+1 .                                         (35)

       To verify that our "monetary" and "fiscal" implementations correspond to the same eco-
                                                                                   
nomic fundamentals, take any allocation (ci     i     i
                                          yt , cot , mt-1 )t=0 , price system {Pt }t=0 , and monetary

policy (Tt , Mt-1 )t=0 that satisfies (28), (29), (30), and (31). We then construct an allocation
               i                                                                  
( ci     i
   yt , cot , bt )t=0 , asset price system {t+1 }t=0 , and fiscal policy (t , bt )t=0 that satisfies (32), (33),

(34), and (35) as follows: take the same consumption allocation, set bi    i
                                                                      t = Mt-1 Pt , bt = Mt-1 Pt ,

t+1 = Pt /Pt+1 , and t = Tt Pt . The same process works in reverse, starting from a "fiscal policy"
specification and going back to a "monetary policy" specification. Since the households and the
government face the same budget constraints in the two specifications (after prices have been
  57
       The number 4 in equation (31) appears because in each period there are an equal number of young savers,
old savers, young borrowers, and old borrowers.




                                                       31
appropriately transformed as above), the set of consumption allocations that are part of a com-
petitive equilibrium is the same in the two implementations. Yet again, a distinction between
monetary and fiscal policy is tenuous and arbitrary.
      We now study which equilibria are preferred by different households. For brevity, we restrict
the investigation by considering only consumption allocations that converge to a steady state and
by focusing on the welfare of generations born far into the future, at dates at which allocations
have nearly converged.
      As a first step, we show that in a steady state, borrowers always consume their post-transfer
endowments, while savers buy all government bonds: borrowing and saving are intermediated
through the government. We use our fiscal notation, which is expressed in real terms, and denote
by subscript SS a steady-state value. In a steady state, since SS  0, the government budget
constraint (32) requires either bSS = 0 or SS  1. If bSS = 0, no intertemporal trade can
take place among households: young borrowers would indeed like to borrow from savers, but are
prevented from doing so by the borrowing constraint, while savers have no other people to whom
they can lend. Since bonds are in zero net supply, the interest rate must be such that savers
find it optimal not to demand any bonds, which requires SS = / < 1.58 When bSS > 0, the
after-transfer endowment of the borrowers is ( + SS ,  + SS ). With SS < 1, their optimal
choice is not to save, but rather to consume their endowments, verifying our claim.
      Having established that all bonds will be acquired by young savers, we characterize a steady
state. In the limit as  0, savers' bond demand is

                                              1
                                      bS
                                       SS =     [ - SS (SS - 1)] .                             (36)
                                              2

Combining equations (36) and (32) along with the market-clearing condition bS
                                                                            SS = 4bSS yields

a quadratic equation in SS and bS
                                SS . Keeping in mind that positive taxes are ruled out by the

borrowing constraints, the quadratic expression yields

                                                     bS        S
                                                      SS ( + 2bSS )
                                     SS = bS
                                           SS -                     .                          (37)
                                                          2

The range of debt that yields a negative tax (a positive transfer) is (0, /2) per each saver
 58
      Any value of SS  / would also work, but the same consumption allocation would prevail.


                                                    32
(or (0, /8) in per capita terms). In this range, the government earns seigniorage revenues by
providing an asset that savers are willing to hold to smooth consumption over time even at a
negative net real interest rate. The government transfers the revenues to all households alive,
benefiting the borrowers as well.59 Over this range, SS is a convex function with a unique
minimum bmin . As pointed out by Miller and Sargent (1984) in their reply to Darby (1984),
when the quantity of government debt affects interest rates, the observation that the interest
rate is below the growth rate of the economy for the levels of debt that we historically observed
does not imply that an arbitrary net-of-interest deficit is sustainable.
       Since borrowers consume their after-transfer endowments, when the government acts in their
interest, it chooses the level of debt that maximizes transfers, namely, bmin . At this point, the
negative net real interest rate is strictly below the growth rate of the economy, which is zero
in our case. In contrast, savers' welfare is strictly increasing in b all the way to /2, the point
at which the real interest rate becomes zero. We obtain results similar to Diamond (1965) and
Blanchard (2019) only for the savers: so long as bS
                                                  t < /2, cutting taxes and issuing extra debt

allows making some transfers to an initial generation without making future savers worse off.
This is because, unlike borrowers, future savers benefit from the higher interest rates more than
they suffer from smaller transfers.
       A lesson from this example is that it would be misleading to conclude that the government
budget constraint is disarmed whenever the government pays interest rates that fall short of
the growth rate. First, even when the interest rate is less than the growth rate, higher debt
and the correspondingly higher interest rates may reduce the government funds that in our
example finance redistributive transfers; this is because the marginal cost of debt can be positive
even when the average is negative. Second, to the extent that direct redistribution channels
are limited, an increase in interest rates benefits some groups at the expense of others. It is
thus possible that a government could choose to limit its debt in order to accomplish a desired
redistribution.
       In the monetary interpretation of our overlapping-generations economy, a constant real rate
  59
       As emphasized by Bhandari et al. (2017), a similar allocation could be achieved if the government enforced a
limited amount of private borrowing. This is the sense that the government borrows on behalf of private agents.


                                                         33
of return is achieved by setting money growth and therefore inflation to the common constant
rate 1/SS . The equivalence that we proved earlier lets us still use (37) to establish the poli-
cies preferred by different groups among cohorts that are born after the economy has (nearly)
converged to steady state. Borrowers prefer the rate of money growth that maximizes the real
value of the monetary transfers, the rate that prevails when real balances per young saver equal
bmin . We can derive the implied (positive) rate of money growth by solving (32) and (37) for the
steady-state value of SS . Not surprisingly, savers' utility is decreasing in money growth:60 they
prefer to forgo transfers in exchange for being able to save with money that retains a constant
value.
       Forces underlying our results also prevail in environments with richer sources of household
heterogeneity. For example, it would be tempting to carry out similar experiments in Bewley
models of idiosyncratic uninsurable income shocks. It would also be worthwhile to analyze what
happens when a low rate of return on government debt coexists with higher returns on private
assets driven by discrepancies in assets' transaction roles like the differences that arise between
money and debt in the cash-in-advance model discussed above. In those models, an increase in
debt implies a lower convenience yield, i.e., a lower spread between government debt and private
assets that reduces seigniorage revenues in ways similar to those analyzed here. Interactions
between household heterogeneity, convenience yields, and rates of return on private assets add
extra dimensions that are worth exploring.61
       Our model is silent about whether monetary or fiscal authorities should be in charge of man-
aging public liabilities. It is tempting to relate our model's silence to the section 1 troubles that
nineteenth century US statesmen confronted in designing institutions that could draw sustainable
lines between monetary and fiscal policies.
  60
       Savers would want to push money growth to an interior negative value; however, in our environment money
growth cannot go below zero because young borrowers would be unable to pay the taxes required to reduce the
money supply.
 61
    A recent literature emphasizes how heterogeneity across households shapes macroeconomic responses to mon-
etary and fiscal policy shocks. Kaplan, Moll, and Violante (2018) show that the effects of interest rate movements
depend on how taxes and spending react to these shocks. Other examples are Auclert (2019) and Auclert, Rognlie,
and Straub (2018).


                                                       34
5        Fiscal Policy as Nominal Anchor
Up to now, we have studied consequences of alternative arbitrary sequences of monetary-fiscal
policy actions and how disputes about what are properly thought of as fiscal versus monetary
policy actions can boil over into conflicts among institutions that have somehow been assigned
responsibility for setting different components of a government's intertemporal budget. In this
section, we turn to questions about price level determinacy that force us to cast monetary and
fiscal policies in terms of mechanical rules that relate actions to past and present outcomes.
This will naturally lead us to discuss versions of a "fiscal theory of the price level (FTPL)"
that generates a determinate price level (a.k.a. a nominal anchor) by fostering complementarities
between particular monetary and fiscal policy rules.
       Section 2.2 told how the absence of a nominal anchor for unbacked paper money leads to a
multiplicity of equilibrium price levels at time 0 and indeterminacies in the form of sunspot equi-
libria in all subsequent periods. As an example, going back to the reference model of Section 2.2
without gold, consider a monetary-fiscal policy in which the government trades no bonds and
spends nothing, but at each period t  0 makes a proportional transfer of money to households
in the amount µMtS
                 -1 , so that money grows at the geometric rate µ. We consider settings in

which µ > 0 and equilibria in which the cash-in-advance constraint binds.62 Combining equations
(16) and (17) and imposing market clearing, we conclude that in any equilibrium the following
difference equation for consumption of the cash good xt is satisfied:63

                                                   xt+1 v (xt+1 )
                                             1=                   .                                         (38)
                                                  µ      xt

Brock (1974, 1975), Matsuyama (1990, 1991), and Woodford (1994) analyze a similar difference
equation and show that for many interesting preference specifications it has many solutions. The
lack of a nominal anchor comes from the lack of a boundary condition for equation (38). The only
candidate for such a boundary condition is the government budget balance; however, for the rule
that we just specified, (20) always holds, since in each period Bt = gt  0 and Tt  Ms - Ms-1 .
  62
       Woodford (1994) considers other assumptions about money growth rates, as well as more general preferences.
  63
       The equilibrium is then completely characterized by obtaining St+1 from (15) and the price level from the
cash-in-advance constraint.


                                                        35
       To rule out equilibria with xt  0, Wallace (1981a) and Obstfeld and Rogoff (1983) add a
"fiscal backstop" in which at every time t the government offers to exchange money for goods
              ¯ and promises to raise the revenues required to do so by levying lump-sum taxes
at a price µt P
                                     ¯ high enough that it need not use the fiscal backstop
on households.64 The government sets P
along an equilibrium path so that real tax revenues required by the policy would be small even
off an equilibrium path. This policy puts a floor under the real value of money and rules out
self-fulfilling high-inflation equilibria in which the household expects real money balances to
approach zero as time passes without limit.
       Although Wallace's and Obstfeld and Rogoff's backstop excludes some equilibria, it does not
necessarily assure a unique equilibrium. It excludes equilibria having real money balances that
approach zero asymptotically but possibly leaves intact multiple equilibria with strictly positive
real balances that remain bounded both from above and from below. An example is provided
by Sargent and Wallace (1975) who analyze a set of equilibria in an economy in which the
monetary/fiscal authority sets a fixed nominal interest rate Rt at which it is willing to exchange
money and one-period risk-free nominal bonds maturing in period t + 1, appropriately adjusting
taxes and transfers to ensure that the present-value budget balance holds. In our reference model,
taking conditional expectations of equation (15), we obtain
                                               1        Pt
                                                  = Et      .                                                   (39)
                                               Rt      Pt+1
Starting from any Pt , there exist multiple stochastic solutions that make Pt+1 and xt+1 functions
of a sunspot and that satisfy (16) and (39).65 There are infinitely many solutions arbitrarily
close to the non-stochastic solution given by

                                      Pt+1 = Rt Pt ,      xt+1 = v -1 (Rt ).                                    (40)

Thus, for a given price Pt , a Wallace-Obstfeld-Rogoff back-stop policy higher than Rt Pt fails
  64
       Cochrane (2011) asserts that Obstfeld and Rogoff's analysis does not explain how equilibria with eventual
demonetization are ruled out. Obstfeld and Rogoff (2017) fill in important details about this.
  65
     When an allocation, policy, and price system satisfy (16) and (39), (17) will also hold, since the government is
supplying any amount of real balances demanded by households, and (19) holds by the assumption that transfers
are adjusted to make it hold.


                                                         36
to rule out multiple equilibria.
       Leeper (1991), Sims (1994), and Woodford (1994) describe a policy that does guarantee a
unique equilibrium. Shift equation (19) forward one period. Since the government trades only
one-period risk-free nominal bonds, both Bt+1 and Mt on the left-hand side are predetermined. A
candidate sunspot equilibrium would imply a change in Pt+1 in the denominator of the left-hand
side that would exactly offset movements in the seigniorage term on the right-hand side, which
would require that either taxes or government spending be adjusted to ensure that equilibrium
condition (19) holds. Leeper, Sims, and Woodford consider fiscal policies that prohibit any such
adjustment and that thereby deliver a unique equilibrium price level path. An example of such
a policy is one in which government spending and nominal interest rates are constant at g
                                                                                        ¯ and
¯ > 1 respectively and in which taxes in period t satisfy66
R

                                           Tt = ¯Pt-1 - (Mt - Mt-1 ),                                           (41)

with ¯ exogenous.67 When fiscal policy obeys this rule, substituting (15) and (41) into (20)
implies
                                         Bt - ¯Pt-1    1            ¯
                                             Pt
                                                    =
                                                      1-            ¯ -g
                                                                    R
                                                                       ¯ .                                      (42)

In period 0, the only endogenous variable in equation (42) is the price level P0 . It follows that in
any equilibrium the initial price level P0 is uniquely determined by equation (42). In all subse-
quent periods, since the government only trades nominally risk-free bonds, Bt is predetermined
as of time t. Equation (42) then implies then that Pt must also be predetermined and so cannot
depend on the realization of a time t sunspot variable. It is then straightforward to prove that
there exists a unique allocation, price sequence, and stochastic discount factor that satisfies (15),
(16), (17), and (42). Here a fiscal policy provides the nominal anchor in the sense that it delivers
and shapes a unique price level path.
       Uniqueness is attained by mechanics well explained by Cochrane (2005). Our nominal anchor-
ing fiscal policy effectively turns holders of nominal government claims into residual claimants
  66
       The tax policy in (41) is written so that the government need not observe Pt when it sets Tt .
  67                                                                                             ¯0 - (M0 - M-1 ). We
       In period 0, we can equivalently specify an arbitrary initial condition P-1 , or set T0 = T
take the first option in the text for simplicity.


                                                          37
to the stream of real payments described by the right-hand side of (42).68 The price level is
thus determined by an equilibrium condition that the real value of nominal claims issued by the
government equals the present value of fiscal primary surpluses.
       The preceding discussion forgets that the government issues two claims, namely, bonds and
money, and leaves open how total claims are divided between these two components and doesn't
explain where a relative price between the two would affect the analysis. To remedy this de-
ficiency, Buiter (2002) includes a "debt revaluation factor" that allows a dollar of maturing
nominal bonds to be different from a dollar of paper money. A justification for ignoring Buiter's
revaluation factor could be that maturing bonds will be redeemed for paper money at par, a
justification that automatically implies that the FTPL substantially limits the independence
of whatever "monetary authority" is assigned to control the money supply and also rules out
monetary-fiscal rules in which the government sets an unconditional supply of money independent
of the amount of bonds that households might wish to redeem.69
       Credibility of a FTPL hinges on plausibility attached to the particular fiscal-monetary rules
on which it rests. Whether these rules are stated explicitly or left implicit, a FTPL analysis
is not just about competitive equilibrium sequences of allocations, prices, and monetary-fiscal
policy actions but about an equilibrium collection of strategies ­ sequences of functions that
map information at time t into actions at time t ­ that are essential components of a theory
not just about household and government behavior along an equilibrium path but about how
everyone would behave under a vast number of alternative scenarios, most of which would never
happen. As an example, Cochrane (2019, 2020) studies a model in which "surpluses do not
respond to arbitrary unexpected inflation and deflation, so fiscal policy remains active" and shows
how such an assumption selects appealing equilibria in a New Keynesian framework. What the
government can and will do during such off-equilibrium path scenarios decisively shapes outcomes
  68
       Because P-1 is given and from the details of our timing protocols, the first-period tax receives a special
treatment on the left-hand side.
  69
     Regime changes in interactions between monetary and fiscal policies are the subject of a literature that
promises to improve accounts of the relationship between output and inflation in New Keynesian models. Ex-
amples are Davig and Leeper (2007), Chung, Davig, and Leeper (2007), and Bianchi and Melosi (2014, 2018,
Forthcoming).


                                                        38
along an equilibrium path, but it cannot be coherently analyzed by looking only at competitive
equilibria in which "unexpected inflation" in the sense of Cochrane never materializes. Modeling
an equilibrium collection of strategies in the rigorous fashion accomplished in game theory is
challenging to carry out in an environment with competitive markets and large numbers of
anonymous private decision makers who take prices as given: the presence of a single large
player called the government prevents us from treating prices as being set by that convenient
deus ex machina called the "Walrasian auctioneer". Instead, we are forced explicitly to model
how prices are set as the government and the private sector interact70 and to specify precisely the
information it has and the actions that it takes when the government sets taxes and the money
supply. To refine understandings of the FTPL and other topics, Bassetto (2002, 2005) studied
these issues.71 Two important conclusions emerged from Bassetto (2002), which described an
economy as a game in which equilibria emerge from fully-specified strategies for households and
a government.

   · There exist government strategies that defend a unique price level even when the govern-
         ment (or central bank) pursues a policy of a constant interest rate like one that led to
         indeterminacy in Sargent and Wallace (1975). This "nominal anchor" outcome substanti-
         ates a FTPL.

   · Strategies that sustain a nominal anchor are associated with outcomes that confront the
         government with "confidence crises" triggered by private households' occasional refusals to
         make new loans to the government. At times when government spending exceeds planned
         tax revenues, these crises can require the government strategy to adjust tax plans to guar-
         antee that real tax revenues are at least as large as government spending. Details about
         how the government makes this adjustment determine whether fiscal policy indeed acts as
         a nominal anchor.

       Even when monetary and fiscal policy coordinate as the theory instructs, the FTPL cannot
  70
       Shapley and Shubik (1969) provide one framework in which this is possible.
  71
       Other papers that have grappled with this question are Kocherlakota and Phelan (1999), Christiano and
Fitzgerald (2000), Niepelt (2004), and Daniel (2007).


                                                        39
cure all indeterminacies. Thus, when it provides additional liquidity services, the interest rate
on government debt can be below the economy's growth rate. Then even though, as required
for the FTPL, the intertemporal balance in the government budget continues to matter as we
discussed in Section 4.1, Bassetto and Cui (2018) and Berentsen and Waller (2018) show that
the FTPL is able only to select a range of possible equilibrium price levels, not a unique one.



6        Two Government Budget Constraints
"Unconventional monetary policies" deployed after the 2007-2008 financial crises have attracted
attention to relationships between monetary and fiscal policies as events have taught policy
makers that setting interest-rates in the fashion codified by Woodford (1995) or Clarida et al.
(1999) may not suffice to attain inflation targets. Sims (2004, 2005) set the stage for analyzing
such policies when he studied consequences of endowing a Treasury and a central bank with
separate budget constraints.72 To the extent that we are only interested in describing the set
of equilibria consistent with a given sequence of monetary/fiscal actions, there is no reason
to distinguish between different government agencies sharing a common budget constraint. But
recall how in section 5 we moved forward from descriptions just of sequences of actions to studying
government strategies that generate those sequences. In that context, if the government is not a
monolith but rather a set of distinct decision makers, how these decision makers manage their
own budgets can affect all outcomes, including the monetary-fiscal policy sequence. For these
reasons, we now split equation (14) into one equation for the Treasury and another for the central
bank. To keep things simple, we assume that only the Treasury is allowed to levy taxes on the
households and to spend resources, while only the central bank is allowed to issue non-interest-
  72
       While it is natural to think that the two main agencies in charge are the government (especially the "Trea-
sury") and the central bank, in reality things can be more complicated, as our introduction attests. The distinction
between a treasury and central bank itself can be obscure and decision makers from other agencies may enter the
scene. Good examples are Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac in the United States, private corporations that were able
to issue government-backed claims. We have limited our distinctions among government agencies to the Treasury
and the central bank in order to emphasize obscure boundaries between monetary and fiscal policy.




                                                         40
bearing claims in the form of paper money. While previous sections highlighted how arbitrary
this assignment is from the point of view of much macroeconomic theory, it does a good job of
approximating institutions observed in many countries.
              T
      Define Bt as (potentially state-contingent) nominal bonds that the Treasury issues in period
t - 1 and repays in t, and define Ht as nominal transfers from the central bank to the Treasury.
The Treasury's budget constraint at time t is

                                  T                        T
                                 Bt + Pt gt  Tt + Et St+1 Bt+1 + Ht .                          (43)

        CB                                                                              CB
Define Bt  as net holdings of nominal state-contingent bonds held by the central bank; Bt
counts as positive the central bank's holdings of Treasury-issued securities as well as nominal
claims issued by the private sector while it subtracts interest-bearing claims issued by the central
bank, which in practice are comprised of reserves held by banks and short-term borrowing effected
through repurchase agreements (repos). We also reintroduce gold as a real asset, but, unlike
Section 2, we assume that gold's only role is as a store of value and that it cannot be used as a
                             CB
medium of exchange. Letting zt  be central bank holdings of gold at the beginning of period t,
it follows that
                                                                       Pt CB
                       CB
                      Bt  - Mtg-1  Ht - Mtg + Et St+1 Bt
                                                       CB
                                                        +1 +
                                                                               CB
                                                                         (z - zt-1 ).          (44)
                                                                        t
If we aggregate (43) and (44), we obtain (19), except that gold now appears as an additional
government asset.73
      If we solve these difference equations forward, we obtain two intertemporal balance equations,
namely, the Treasury's
                                  T             
                                 Bt                           Ts + Hs
                                    = Et               s-t            - gs ,                   (45)
                                 Pt             s=t
                                                                 Ps
                         74
and the central bank's
                   CB                                                         CB    CB
                  Bt  - Mt-1                   s- t   Hs Ms          1       zt  - zt-1
                             = Et                        -        1-       -            .      (46)
                      Pt              s=t
                                                      Ps   Ps        Rs          
 73                      g     T     CB
    In the aggregation, Bt = Bt  - Bt   .
 74                                       g
    We use market clearing to substitute Ms = Ms in equilibrium.




                                                         41
Notice that gold counts as an asset only to the extent that it is sold and converted into goods.
Since we assume gold not to be productive, if it forever remains in central bank vaults it is
considered wasted from the perspective present-value budget balance.
       Sims (2004) distinguishes two models of central bank operations: "model F" and "model E".
A model F central bank resembles more closely the U.S. Federal Reserve System or the Bank
of England, while a model E central bank looks more like the European Central Bank or the
Hong Kong Monetary Authority. In model F, the central bank invests exclusively in government
debt. In normal times (at least in the past), the nominal interest rate Rs is always positive.
This implies that the seigniorage term on the right-hand side of (46) is also positive: revenues
accrue to the central bank from issuing paper money bearing no interest and from investing
the proceeds in bonds paying positive interest. If we assume in addition that the central bank
only invests in short-term securities and that it does not pay to the Treasury more than its net
interest income, then (46) ensures that a central bank that starts with positive net worth on
the left-hand side will continue to have positive net worth into the indefinite future. It is easy
to imagine that, if and when the central bank and the Treasury bargain over policy, the central
bank is in a stronger position if its balance sheet is such that a recapitalization in the form of
Hs < 0 is never required, as is the case here. But while a central bank in this position may look
to be "independent" in the short run, the fact that its assets are purely nominal implies that the
central bank alone cannot provide a nominal anchor for the price level. From equation (46), the
central bank can easily control nominal transfers Hs , but it cannot control real transfers.75 If
money supply and/or interest rate rules potentially lead to multiple equilibria, only the Treasury
can provide fiscal backstop by levying appropriate real taxes.
       In extensions of his model to long-term debt discussed in Sims (2005), if a model F central
bank invests in long-term securities, then the mismatch in the duration of its asset (long-term
debt) and money (a zero-maturity claim) can lead to fluctuations in the central bank's net worth,
  75
       To make this argument precise requires describing an economy in more detail along lines in Bassetto (2002).
The reason the central bank cannot commit to a sequence of real transfer payments to the Treasury is that the
real value of its profits is driven by the willingness of households to accept its money and its bonds. But the
Treasury can force households to pay a quantity of real goods through taxes.



                                                         42
even becoming negative. Nonetheless, we can rewrite (46) as
                            CB                                       CB    CB
                           Bt                          Hs Ms - Ms-1 zt  - zt-1
                               = Et             s- t      -        -           .                                (47)
                            Pt          s= t
                                                       Ps    Ps         

       In a richer model with long-term debt, the left-hand side term represents the real value of
the central bank's portfolio of bonds. Bassetto and Messer (2013) remark that, so long as all of
the central bank's liabilities are in the form of paper money and the bank pursues a policy of
always expanding the money supply, fluctuations in the real value of bonds do not threaten the
central bank's ability to deliver Hs > 0 every period. But the central bank's ability to do this
deteriorates markedly if the central bank issues reserves that are held by banks uniquely as a store
of value and that are remunerated at the market interest rate. In this case, the mismatch between
short-term interest-bearing liabilities and long-term bonds can imply that the left-hand side of
(47) turns negative in an adverse scenario, forcing the central bank either to ask for fiscal help
from the Treasury or to pursue more monetary expansion, with its inflationary implications.76
       In contrast to his model F central bank, Sims's model E central bank holds substantial reserves
in the form of real assets. In our equation above, these assets are represented by gold, but in
practice they could be other real claims such as hard-currency reserves.77 In this case, the required
fiscal backstop that puts a lower bound on the real value of money can happen "in-house:" at any
point in time t, the central bank can offer to redeem all of the money balances for its current gold
                                    CB
holdings at a price given by Mt-1 /zt-1 . This is a natural model for the European Central Bank,

since its fiscal counterpart is represented by a heterogeneous collection of national governments,
with a correspondingly weaker link between fiscal and monetary authorities. However, as Sims
  76
       Carpenter et al. (2013) and Greenlaw et al. (2013) analyzed in detail the magnitude of the interest-rate risk
created by quantitative easing policies undertaken by the U.S. Federal Reserve after 2008. They concluded that
it would take extreme swings in long-term rates to turn the net value of interest-bearing assets and liabilities into
a negative number. A similar conclusion arises in the complete dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model
analyzed by Del Negro and Sims (2015). Hall and Reis (2015) extend the discussion to other sources of risk for
the balance sheet of the central bank, such as exchange risk and, in the case of the Eurozone, outright default by
national Treasuries. In contrast, the position of the Bank of Japan is more precarious.
  77
     Of course, with foreign-currency reserves, questions about ultimate fiscal backing become questions about
what ensures the real value of foreign currencies.


                                                          43
points out, risks arising from fluctuations in the value of the central bank portfolio may be of
greater consequence in a world of weak links because help from the fiscal authorities may not be
forthcoming ultimately.78



7        Concluding Remarks
We began this paper by reciting examples of challenges that statesmen confronted in separating
monetary from fiscal policy. Promises written on paper and metal monies on display in collec-
tions of U.S. coins and bank notes testify to fiscal and and monetary policy decisions that the
Congress and President had sometimes delegated to the Treasury Department and Comptroller
of the Currency before 1914, and after 1914 divided sometimes ambiguously between the Trea-
sury and the Federal Reserve System. While it can be done various ways, government budget
arithmetic asserts that, one way or another, monetary and fiscal policies must be coordinated or
consolidated.



References
Aiyagari, Rao, Albert Marcet, Thomas J. Sargent, and Juha Sepp¨
                                                              al¨
                                                                a. 2002. Optimal Taxation
    without State-Contingent Debt. Journal of Political Economy 110 (6):1220­1254.

Albanesi, Stefania. 2007. Inflation and inequality. Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (4):1088­
    1114.

Albanesi, Stefania, V. V. Chari, and Lawrence J. Christiano. 2003. Expectation Traps and
    Monetary Policy. Review of Economic Studies 70:715­741.

Atkinson, A.B. and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1972. The Structure of Indirect Taxation and Economic
    Efficiency. Journal of Public Economics 1 (1):97­119.
  78
       Our equations rule out fluctuations by imposing a constant real value of gold. Also, note that, as was the
case for a model F central bank, fluctuations in the price of central bank assets require no outside intervention so
long as the desired policy path involves an ever-increasing money supply, as discussed by Schmitt-Groh´
                                                                                                      e (2005).


                                                        44
Auclert, Adrien. 2019. Monetary Policy and the Redistribution Channel. American Economic
  Review 109 (6):2333­2367.

Auclert, Adrien, Matthew Rognlie, and Ludwig Straub. 2018. The Intertemporal Keynesian
  Cross. Working Paper 25020, NBER.

Azzimonti, Marina and Pierre Yared. 2017. A Note on Optimal Fiscal Policy in an Economy
  with Private Borrowing Limits. Economics Letters 151:62­65.

------. 2019. The Optimal Public and Private Provision of Safe Assets. Journal of Monetary
  Economics 102:126­144.

Barro, Robert J. 1979. Money and the Price Level under the Gold Standard. The Economic
  Journal 89 (353):13­33.

Barth´
     elemy, Jean and Guillaume Plantin. 2018. Fiscal and Monetary Regimes: A Strategic
  Approach. Discussion Paper 12903, CEPR.

Bassetto, Marco. 2002. A Game-Theoretic View of the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level. Econo-
  metrica 70 (6):2167­2195.

------. 2005.      Equilibrium and Government Commitment.       Journal of Economic Theory
  124 (1):79­105.

------. 2014.   Optimal Fiscal Policy with Heterogeneous Agents.      Quantitative Economics
  5 (3):675­704.

Bassetto, Marco and Wei Cui. 2018. The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level in a World of Low
  Interest Rates. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 89:5­22.

Bassetto, Marco and Todd Messer. 2013. Fiscal Consequences of Paying Interest on Reserves.
  Fiscal Studies 34 (4):413­546.




                                            45
Berentsen, Aleksander and Christopher Waller. 2018. Liquidity Premiums on Government Debt
  and the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 89:173­
  182.

Berndt, Antje, Hanno Lustig, and S
                                 ¸ evin Yeltekin. 2012. How Does the US Government Finance
  Fiscal Shocks? American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (1):69­104.

Bhandari, Anmol, David Evans, Mikhail Golosov, and Thomas J. Sargent. 2016. Fiscal Policy and
  Debt Management with Incomplete Markets. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (2):617­
  663.

------. 2017. Public Debt in Economies with Heterogeneous Agents. Journal of Monetary
  Economics 91:39­51.

------. 2018. Inequality, Business Cycles, and Monetary-Fiscal Policy. Working Paper 24710,
  NBER.

Bhattarai, Saroj, Gauti B. Eggertsson, and Bulat Gafarov. 2015. Time Consistency and the
  Duration of Government Debt: A Signalling Theory of Quantitative Easing. Working Paper
  21336, NBER.

Bianchi, Francesco and Leonardo Melosi. 2014. Dormant Shocks and Fiscal Virtue. NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual 28 (1):1­46.

------. 2018. Constrained Discretion and Central Bank Transparency. Review of Economics
  and Statistics 100 (1):187­202.

------. Forthcoming. The Dire Effects of the Lack of Monetary and Fiscal Coordination. Journal
  of Monetary Economics .

van Binsbergen, Jules H., William F. Diamond, and Marco Grotteria. 2019. Risk-Free Interest
  Rates. Working Paper 26138, NBER.

Blanchard, Olivier. 2019. Public Debt and Low Interest Rates. American Economic Review
  109 (4):1197­1229.

                                             46
Brock, William A. 1974. Money and Growth: The Case of Long Run Perfect Foresight. Inter-
  national Economic Review 15 (3):750­777.

------. 1975. A Simple Perfect Foresight Monetary Model. Journal of Monetary Economics
  1 (2):133 ­ 150.

Buiter, Willem H. 2002. The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level: A Critique. Economic Journal
  112 (481):459­480.

Camous, Antoine and Dmitry Matveev. 2020.          The Central Bank Strikes Back!      Credi-
  bility of Monetary Policy under Fiscal Influence.     https://drive.google.com/file/d/
  1pAQeieNk8qQhnbiLabh6ikuY4cX9mpO1/view.         Mimeo, University of Mannheim, retrieved
  March 28.

Carpenter, Seth B., Jane E. Ihrig, Elizabeth C. Klee, Daniel W. Quinn, and Alexander H. Boote.
  2013. The Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet and Earnings: A primer and Projections. Finance
  and Economics Discussion Series 1, Federal Reserve Board.

Chamley, Christophe and Herakles Polemarchakis. 1984. Assets, General Equiilibrium, and the
  Neutrality of Money. Review of Economic Studies 51 (1):129­138.

Chari, V. V., Lawrence J. Christiano, and Patrick J. Kehoe. 1991. Optimal Fiscal and Monetary
  Policy: Some Recent Results. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 23 (3):519­539.

Chisini, Oscar. 1929. Sul concetto di media. Periodico di Matematiche 9 (4):106­116.

Christiano, Lawrence J. and Terry J. Fitzgerald. 2000. Understanding the Fiscal Theory of the
  Price Level. Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Review 36 (2):1­37.

Chung, Hess, Troy Davig, and Eric M. Leeper. 2007. Monetary and Fiscal Policy Switching.
  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 39 (4):809­842.

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gal´
                           i and Mark Gertler. 1999. The Science of Monetary Policy: A New
  Keynesian Perspective. Journal of Economic Literature 37 (4):1661­1707.


                                             47
Cochrane, John H. 2001. Long Term Debt and Optimal Policy in the Fiscal Theory of the Price
  Level. Econometrica 69 (1):69­116.

------. 2005. Money as Stock. Journal of Monetary Economics 52 (3):501­528.

------. 2011. Determinacy and Identification with Taylor Rules. Journal of Political Economy
  119 (3):565­615.

------. 2018. The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level. https://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/
  john.cochrane/research/papers/fiscal_theory_book.pdf. Mimeo, Chicago Booth Schols
  of Business and Hoover Institution.

------. 2019. The Fiscal Roots of Inflation. Working Paper 25811, NBER.

------. 2020. A Fiscal Theory of Monetary Policy with Partially-Repaid Long-Term Debt.
  Working Paper 26745, NBER.

Cogley, Timothy and Thomas J. Sargent. 2015. Measuring Price-Level Uncertainty and Insta-
  bility in the United States, 1850­2012. Review of Economics and Statistics 97 (4):827­838.

Cole, Harold L. and Narayana Kocherlakota. 1998. Zero Nominal Interest Rates: Why They're
  Good and How to Get Them. Quarterly Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 22 (2):2­
  10.

Co¸
  sar, A. Kerem and Edward Green. 2016. Necessary and Sufficient Conditions of Dynamic
  Optimization. Macroeconomic Dynamics 20 (3):667­684.

Cui, Wei and Vincent Sterk. 2018. Quantitative Easing. Discussion Paper 2018-30, Centre For
  Macroeconomics, London, UK.

C´
 urdia, Vasco and Michael Woodford. 2011. The Central-Bank Balance Sheet as an Instrument
  of Monetary Policy. Journal of Monetary Economics 58 (1):54­79.




                                             48
Da Costa, Carlos E. and Ivan Werning. 2008. On the Optimality of the Friedman Rule with Het-
  erogeneous Agents and Nonlinear Income Taxation. Journal of Political Economy 116 (1):82­
  112.

Daniel, Betty C. 2007. The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level and Initial Government Debt.
  Review of Economic Dynamics 10 (2):193­206.

Darby, Michael R. 1984. Some Pleasant Monetarist Arithmetic. Federal Reserve Bank of Min-
  neapolis Quarterly Review 8 (2):15­20.

Davig, Troy and Eric M. Leeper. 2007. Generalizing the Taylor Principle. The American Eco-
  nomic Review 97 (3):607­635.

Del Negro, Marco and Christopher A. Sims. 2015. When Does a Central Bank's Balance Sheet
  Require Fiscal Support? Journal of Monetary Economics 73:1­19.

Diamond, Douglas W. and Philip H. Dybvig. 1983. Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity.
  Journal of Political Economy 91 (3):401­419.

Diamond, Peter A. 1965. National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model. The American Eco-
  nomic Review 55 (5):1126­1150.

Edwards, Sebastian. 2018. American Default: The Untold Story of FDR, the Supreme Court,
  and the Battle over Gold. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press.

Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz. 1963. A Monetary History of the United States 1867-
  1960. Princeton University Press.

Gertler, Mark and Peter Karadi. 2013. QE1 vs. 2vs. 3...: A Framework for Analyzing Large-
  Scale Asset Purchases as a Monetary Policy Tool. International Journal of Central Banking
  9 (s1):5­54.

Gertler, Mark and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. 2010. Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in
  Business Cycle Analysis. In Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3, edited by Benjamin M.
  Friedman and Michael Woodford, 547­599. Elsevier.

                                             49
Greenlaw, David, James D. Hamilton, Peter Hooper, and Frederic S. Mishkin. 2013. Crunch
  Time: Fiscal Crises and the Role of Monetary Policy. Working Paper 19297, NBER.

Hall, George J. and Thomas J. Sargent. 2011. Interest Rate Risk and Other Determinants of
  Post WW-II U.S. Government Debt/GDP Dynamics. American Economic Journal: Macroe-
  conomics 3 (3):192­214.

------. 2014. Fiscal Discrimination in Three Wars. Journal of Monetary Economics 61:148­166.

Hall, Robert E. and Ricardo Reis. 2015. Maintaining Central-Bank Financial Stability under
  New-Style Central Banking. Working Paper 21173, NBER.

Hilscher, Jens, Alon Raviv, and Ricardo Reis. 2014. Inflating Away the Public Debt? An
  Empirical Assessment. Working Paper 20339, NBER.

Hofstadter, Richard. 1948. The American Political Tradition: and the Men Who Made It. New
  York: A. A. Knopf.

Kamihigashi, Takashi. 2003. Necessity of Transversality Conditions for Stochastic Problems.
  Journal of Economic Theory 109 (1):140­149.

Kaplan, Greg and Giovanni L. Violante. 2014. A Model of the Consumption Response to Fiscal
  Stimulus Payments. Econometrica 82 (4):1199­1239.

Kaplan, Greg, Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2018. Monetary Policy According to
  HANK. American Economic Review 108 (3):697­743.

Kareken, John and Neil Wallace. 1981. On the Indeterminacy of Equilibrium Exchange Rates.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 96 (2):207­222.

Kocherlakota, Narayana R. and Christopher Phelan. 1999. Explaining the Fiscal Theory of the
  Price Level. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 23 (4):14­23.

Lagos, Ricardo. 2010. Asset Prices and Liquidity in an Exchange Economy. Journal of Monetary
  Economics 57 (8):913­930.

                                            50
Lagos, Ricardo and Randall Wright. 2005. A Unified Framework for Monetary Theory and Policy
  Analysis. Journal of Political Economy 113 (3):463­484.

Leeper, Eric. 1991. Equilibria under `Active' and `Passive' Monetary Policies. Journal of Mone-
  tary Economics 27 (1):129­147.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. and Nancy L. Stokey. 1983. Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in an
  Economy without Capital. Journal of Monetary Economics 12:55­93.

------. 1987. Money and Interest in a Cash-in-Advance Economy. Econometrica 55 (3):491­513.

Malin, James C. 1944. The Farmer's Alliance Subtreasury Plan and European Precedents. The
  Mississippli Valley Historical Review 31 (2):255­260.

Matsuyama, Kiminori. 1990. Sunspot Equilibria (Rational Bubbles) in a Model of Money-in-
  the-Utility-Function. Journal of Monetary Economics 25 (1):137­144.

------. 1991. Endogenous Price Fluctuations in an Optimizing Model of a Monetary Economy.
  Econometrica 59 (6):1617­1631.

Miller, Preston J. and Thomas J. Sargent. 1984. A Reply to Darby. Federal Reserve Bank of
  Minneapolis Quarterly Review 8 (2):21­26.

Niepelt, Dirk. 2004. The Fiscal Myth of the Price Level. The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  119 (1):277­300.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff. 1983. Speculative Hyperinflations in Maximizing Models:
  Can We Rule Them Out? Journal of Political Economy 91 (4):675­687.

------. 2017. Revisiting Speculative Hyperinflations in Monetary Models. Discussion Paper
  12051, CEPR.

Paal, Beatrix. 2000. Destabilizing Effects of a Successful Stabilization: a Forward-Looking Ex-
  planation of the Second Hungarian Hyperinflation. Economic Theory 15 (3):599­630.



                                              51
Reinhart, Carmen M. and M. Belen Sbrancia. 2015. The Liquidation of Government Debt.
  Economic Policy 30:291­333.

Rhee, Changyong. 1991. Dynamic Inefficiency in an Economy with Land. The Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies 58 (4):791­797.

Rothbard, Murray N. 2002. A History of Money and Banking in the United States: the Colonial
  Era to World War II. Auburn, Alabama: Ludwig von Mises Institute.

Sargent, Thomas J. 1986. Interpreting the Reagan Deficits. Economic Review, Federal Reserve
  Bank of San Francisco 1986 (4):5­12.

------. 2001. Comment on Fiscal Consequences for Mexico of Adopting the Dollar. Journal of
  Money, Credit, and Banking 33 (2):617­625.

Sargent, Thomas J. and Bruce D. Smith. 1987. Irrelevance of Open Market Operations in
  Some Economies with Government Currency Being Dominated in Rate of Return. American
  Economic Review 77:78­92.

------. 1997. Coinage, Debasements, and Gresham's Laws. Economic Theory 10:197­226.

Sargent, Thomas J. and Fran¸
                           cois R. Velde. 1995. Macroeconomic Features of the French Revo-
  lution. Journal of Political Economy 103:474­518.

Sargent, Thomas J. and Neil Wallace. 1975. "Rational" Expectations, the Optimal Monetary
  Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule. Journal of Political Economy 83 (2):241­
  254.

------. 1981. Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
  Quarterly Review 5 (1):1­17.

------. 1982. The Real-Bills Doctrine versus the Quantity Theory: A Reconsideration. Journal
  of Political Economy 90 (6):1212­1236.

------. 1983. A Model of Commodity Money. Journal of Monetary Economics 12 (1):163­187.

                                             52
Schmitt-Groh´
            e, Stephanie. 2005. Comment on Limits to Inflation Targeting. In The Inflation-
  Targeting Debate, vol. 32 of National Bureau of Economic Research Studies in Business Cycles,
  edited by Ben S. Bernanke. and Michael Woodford, chap. 7, 299­308. University of Chicago
  Press.

Schmitt-Grohe, Stephanie and Martin Uribe. 2004. Optimal fiscal and monetary policy under
  sticky prices. Journal of Economic Theory 114 (2):198­230.

Shapley, Lloyd S. and Martin Shubik. 1969. On market games. Journal of Economic Theory
  1 (1):9­25.

Sims, Christopher A. 1994. A Simple Model for Study of the Determination of the Price Level
  and the Interaction of Monetary and Fiscal Policy. Economic Theory 4 (3):381­399.

------. 2001. Fiscal Consequences for Mexico of Adopting the Dollar. Journal of Money, Credit,
  and Banking 33 (2):597­616.

------. 2004. Fiscal Aspects of Central Bank Independence. In European Monetary Integration,
  edited by Hans-Werner Sinn, Mika Widgr´
                                        en, and Marko K¨
                                                       othenb¨
                                                             urger, CESifo Seminar Series,
  103­116. MIT Press.

------. 2005. Limits to Inflation Targeting. In The Inflation-Targeting Debate, vol. 32 of National
  Bureau of Economic Research Studies in Business Cycles, edited by Ben S. Bernanke. and
  Michael Woodford, chap. 7, 283­299. University of Chicago Press.

------. 2013. Paper Money. American Economic Review 103 (2):563­584.

------. 2019. Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy with Distorting Taxes. http://sims.
  princeton.edu/yftp/CostlessDebt/InflTax.pdf. Mimeo, Princeton University.

Siu, Henry E. 2004. Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy with Sticky Prices. Journal of Monetary
  Economics 51 (3):575 ­ 607.

Svensson, Lars E.O. 1985. Money and Asset Prices in a Cash-in-Advance Economy. Journal of
  political Economy 93 (5):919­944.

                                                53
Treasury, United States. 1906. Annual Report of the Secretary of the Treasury on the State of
  the Finances for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 1906.

Wallace, Neil. 1981a. A Hybrid Fiat-Commodity Monetary System. Journal of Economic Theory
  25 (3):421­430.

------. 1981b. A Modigliani-Miller Theorem for Open-Market Operations. The American Eco-
  nomic Review 71 (3):267­274.

Weitzman, Martin L. 1973. Duality Theory for Infinite Horizon Convex Models. Management
  Science 19 (7):783­789.

White, Richard. 2017. The Republic for Which It Stands: The United States during Reconstruc-
  tion and the Gilded Age, 1865-1896. Oxford History of the United States. Oxford and New
  York: Oxford University Press.

Williamson, Stephen. 2019. Neo-Fisherism and Inflation Control. Canadian Journal of Economics
  forthcoming.

Williamson, Stephen D. 2012. Liquidity, Monetary Policy, and the Financial Crisis: A New
  Monetarist Approach. American Economic Review 102 (6):2570­2605.

Woodford, Michael. 1990. Public Debt as Private Liquidity. American Economic Review (Papers
  and Proceedings) 80 (2):382­388.

------. 1994. Monetary Policy and Price Level Determinacy in a Cash-in-Advance Economy.
  Economic Theory 4 (3):345­380.

------. 1995. Price Level Determinacy Without Control of a Monetary Aggregate. Carnegie-
  Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 43:1­46.

Yared, Pierre. 2013. Public Debt under Limited Private Credit. Journal of the European Eco-
  nomic Association 11 (2):229­245.




                                             54
