                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE ROOTS OF AGRICULTURAL INNOVATION:
                  PATENT EVIDENCE OF KNOWLEDGE SPILLOVERS

                                     Matthew S. Clancy
                                         Paul Heisey
                                          Yongjie Ji
                                     GianCarlo Moschini

                                     Working Paper 27011
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27011


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2020




The authors would like to thank the organizers and participants at the NBER conference on the
Economics of Research and Innovation in Agriculture, and in particular our discussant Alberto
Galasso. GianCarlo Moschini also acknowledges the support of the Pioneer Endowed Chair in
Science and Technology Policy. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Matthew S. Clancy, Paul Heisey, Yongjie Ji, and GianCarlo Moschini. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Roots of Agricultural Innovation: Patent Evidence of Knowledge Spillovers
Matthew S. Clancy, Paul Heisey, Yongjie Ji, and GianCarlo Moschini
NBER Working Paper No. 27011
April 2020
JEL No. O31,O34,Q16

                                           ABSTRACT

This chapter investigates the extent to which agricultural innovations draw on ideas originating
outside of agriculture. We identify a large set of US patents for agricultural technologies granted
between 1976 and 2018. To measure knowledge spillovers to these patents, we rely on three
proxies: patent citations to other patents, patent citations to the scientific literature, and a novel
text analysis to identify and track new ideas in the patent text. We find that more than half of
knowledge flows originate outside of agriculture. The majority of these knowledge inflows,
however, still originate in domains that are close to agriculture.


Matthew S. Clancy                                 Yongjie Ji
Iowa State University                             Department of Economics
30B Curtiss Hall                                  Iowa State University
513 Farm House Lane                               567 Heady Hall
Ames, IA 50011                                    518 Farm House Lane
mclancy@iastate.edu                               Ames, IA 50011-1054
                                                  yongjiej@iastate.edu
Paul Heisey
Department of Agriculture                         GianCarlo Moschini
pwheisey@gmail.com                                Iowa State University
                                                  Department of Economics
                                                  Iowa State University
                                                  518 Farm House Lane
                                                  Ames, Iowa 50011-1054
                                                  moschini@iastate.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27011
    0. Introduction

Changes in the technology of farming have profoundly affected U.S. production agriculture over
the past century (Gardner, 2002). Myriad innovations adopted by farmers contributed to this
transformation, including mechanization, vastly improved genetics for plants and animals, novel
inputs such as fertilizers, pesticides, and antibiotics, and re-organization of farming activities to
exploit specialization and scale economies. The results are impressive: between 1950 and 2015,
for example, the total factor productivity index for U.S. agriculture increased by 167%.1

Digging deeper into the causes of these waves of agricultural technical change uncovers the
critical role played by past research and development (R&D) activities. Griliches' (1957)
pioneering work on the yield improvements due to hybrid maize found a large payoff to the
cumulated past research investment in this technology: a benefit­cost ratio of 7, or an internal
rate of return of about 40%. More broadly, for a set of studies published over the 1965-2005
period, the median estimate of the internal rate of return of agricultural R&D was 45%, or a
benefit-cost ratio of about 10 (Fuglie and Heisey 2007).

R&D explicitly focused on agriculture, conducted by firms and public organizations, is
obviously essential to agricultural innovation. Non-agricultural R&D, however, may also play a
role via so-called knowledge spillovers. The most immediate output of R&D is new knowledge,
but it has long been recognized that the R&D performed by one entity (e.g., a public lab, or a
firm) in a given industry may have substantial productivity impacts outside this entity or industry
(Griliches 1992). At a positive level, spillovers create serious challenges to the task of inferring,
from data, what R&D effort had which effect on outcomes of interest.

In this chapter, we focus squarely on assessing the extent to which knowledge spillovers may
impact agricultural innovation. With some caveats, discussed later, we find that our proxies for
knowledge flows--citations to patents, citations to scientific papers, and novel text--suggest
more than 50% of knowledge spillovers originate in non-agricultural knowledge domains.

Knowledge spillovers have received limited attention in previous agricultural R&D studies. The
typical econometric procedure has been to regress an estimate of agricultural productivity on


1
 Based on input, output, and productivity data published by the Economic Research Service of the U.S.
Department of Agriculture, https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/agricultural-productivity-in-the-us/
                                                   2
relevant past R&D expenditures. To account for spillovers, some studies include broader
measures of R&D expenditures. Attention has mostly concerned spillover between segments of
agricultural R&D (Evenson 1989), or privileged spatial R&D spillovers, i.e., across states or
countries (Latimer and Paarlberg, 1965; Khanna, Huffman, and Sandler, 1994). Alston (2002)
concludes that such spillovers are sizeable: interstate or international R&D spillovers may
account for more than half of the measured agricultural productivity growth. Consideration of
vertical spillover effects in agriculture is rare. One exception is Wang, Xia, and Buccola (2009),
who relate public research in three life-science fields (biology, agriculture, and medicine), and
private research in two of these fields (agriculture and medicine), to research output (measured
by patents) of private firms in agriculture and medicine.2

This paper's contribution is to provide new methods and data on the scope of knowledge
spillovers in agriculture. In contrast to most studies in this area, we do not attempt to calculate
the rate of return on R&D. Instead, we measure the extent of knowledge spillovers by directly
observing proxies for knowledge flows and measuring the share of these that originate in non-
agricultural knowledge domains. The goal is to provide new evidence on the extent to which
agricultural technologies draw on knowledge originally developed outside of agriculture. We do
so by developing various knowledge flow proxies embedded in US agricultural patents granted
over the period 1976-2018.

Our initial step is to identify a set of relevant agricultural patents among the universe of US
patents granted over this period. We identify patents belonging to six distinct subsectors of
agriculture: animal health, biocides, fertilizer, machinery, plants, and agricultural research inputs.
We chose these six subsectors because we can identify their patents with relative precision, and
because, while not exhaustive, they span the major biological, chemical, and mechanical
technology fields that have contributed to productivity growth in agriculture. Given significant
differences in the size, organization, and scientific-technological knowledge base of these
subsectors, our results are consistently presented separately for the six subsectors of interest. We




2
 Consistent with our results, Wang, Xia, and Buccola (2009) find evidence of substantial spillovers from
upstream biological to downstream agricultural and medical science, and from the public to the private
sector in both downstream agriculture and downstream medicine.
                                                    3
then track the knowledge roots of each patent, using three proxies embedded in the patent
document.

The first proxy we consider is citations to prior patents, which provides a measure of how
agricultural innovations build on other (patented) technologies. When the cited patent is not an
agricultural patent, this provides direct evidence of a knowledge spillover from outside
agriculture. Furthermore, one advantage of studying citations to patents is that we can also
identify the assignee of the cited patent. A major part of our work is to determine the
"agricultural focus" of assignees' R&D, based on the share of agricultural patents in the
assignee's recent patent portfolio. This permits us go beyond the binary classification of whether
a cited patent is agricultural or not, and instead characterize it based on the agricultural focus of
its assignee. For example, we can measure whether a cited patent belong to a firm that generally
specializes in agricultural R&D, or belongs to an assignee that has zero agricultural patents.

The second proxy we employ is citations to scientific journal articles, which provides a measure
of how agricultural innovations build on prior research. Citations to the scientific literature are
important as a way of capturing the impact of public sector research, because public sector
research frequently does not result in a patent. We create a classification system for scientific
journals, identifying agricultural science, other biology, other chemistry, and "other" journals.
We interpret a citation to a non-agricultural journal as evidence of a knowledge spillover to
agriculture from outside of its natural knowledge domain.

Whereas citations to prior patents are generally acknowledged to contain both signal and noise,
there is debate about the relative magnitude of each. For example, Chen (2017) finds the textual
similarity of patents to their citations is much higher than to a control. An early survey by Jaffe,
Trajtenberg, and Fogarty (2000), however, found only 38% of respondents were aware of the
cited patent before or during the invention. Other papers have also found evidence that citations
may not reflect genuine knowledge flows (Lampe 2012, Moser, Ohmstedt, and Rhode 2018).3 For
this reason, we also develop a third method of measuring knowledge flows, based on the text of
patents.



3
 In general, there seems to be less cause for concern about bias in citations to the scientific literature (Roach and
Cohen 2013).

                                                           4
The text analysis we develop identifies words and phrases that are new and important in
agricultural patents applied for in the second half of our data sample (1996-2018). We call these
words and phrases "text-novel concepts" and identify more than 100 in each subsector. We then
scan the text of the entire patent corpus for prior patents (outside the agricultural subsector) that
also mention these text-novel concepts. For example, in animal health, the word
"pyrimethamine" and the phrase "equine protozoal myeloencephalitis" do not appear in any
animal health patents prior to 1996, but are relatively common thereafter. In this case, we
interpret prior mentions of "pyrimethamine" in human health patents prior to 1996 as evidence of
a knowledge spillover from outside agriculture.

Our main finding is that knowledge spillovers from outside agriculture are important and
influential for agricultural R&D, possibly as much as knowledge generated within agricultural
science domains. In three of the subsectors studied--animal health, fertilizer, and machinery--
every one of our proxies for knowledge flows originates outside of agriculture more than 50% of
the time. In two additional sectors--biocides and research inputs--we have mixed evidence, but
the majority of our proxies still originate outside of agriculture over 50% of the time. Only in the
plants subsector do we typically find most knowledge flows point to agricultural technologies
and research, though even this is not unanimous.

A second finding is that the non-agricultural domains that are important sources of knowledge
spillover to agriculture are, in some sense, "close" to agriculture. It is typically more common for
agricultural patents to cite or share text-novel concepts with the (non-agricultural) patents of
firms that have at least one agricultural patent, even though the majority of patents belong to
assignees with zero agricultural patents. Likewise, it is more common for citations to non-
agricultural science journals to go to biology and chemistry journals than other journals, even
though other journals account for the majority of journals.

Lastly, we demonstrate how text analysis can be a useful complement to citation-based measures
of knowledge flows. In some cases, our text analysis suggests areas where citation-based results
may be misleading. For example, in the biocides sector, the majority of patent citations flow to
non-agricultural patents and journals. However, we find the majority of text-novel concepts for
this sector (typically chemical names) have no prior mention outside of agriculture. It seems
many of these chemicals appear for the first time in the patent corpus as part of a biocide patent.

                                                  5
Our text analysis, in principle, has the ability to capture much deeper roots of knowledge than
citations. It may be that an idea developed originally far outside of agriculture eventually enters
agriculture via a long chain of citations. Because citation-based measure of knowledge spillovers
only observe the last step in such chains, when an agricultural patents makes a citation, they may
understate the role of non-agricultural knowledge spillovers. In contrast, our text analysis lets us
track all prior mentions of important concepts used in agricultural R&D, including mentions that
are many steps removed from agriculture. Consistent with this notion we find the share of text-
novel concepts that originate in agricultural patents is smaller when measured using text than
with citation (except in the biocides sector).

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 describes our methodology for generating
data on agricultural R&D output, knowledge flows, and originating knowledge domain and gives
an example. Section 2 presents our main results. Section 3 discusses these results, and section 4
establishes that they are robust to a series of alternative assumptions. Section 5 concludes with
some directions for future research.

   1. Data

Our goal is to measure the extent of knowledge spill-ins for agricultural R&D. To accomplish
this, we require three elements: a measure of agricultural research output, a measure of
knowledge flows, and a measure of originating knowledge domain. These three components,
plus our proxies for them, are illustrated in Figure 1.

Figure 1. Knowledge Spill-ins and Proxy Elements




Working from right to left, to measure agricultural research output we use patents with primarily
agricultural application. Our paper focuses on six agricultural subsectors: animal health,
biocides, fertilizers, machinery, plants, and research tools. We describe our method for
identifying these patents in section 1.1. We measure knowledge flows in three ways: patent


                                                  6
citations to other patents, patent citations to academic journals, and shared patent text. We
describe how we generate these three proxies in section 1.2. We also define the originating
knowledge domain in three ways: with patent technology classes, with assignee type, and with
journal subject areas. We describe these methods in section 1.3. Section 1.4 provides some brief
summary statistics for our data.

    1.1. Measuring Agricultural Research Output

We use the universe of US patents granted between 1976 and 2018 for our analysis, though for
some subsectors we only have data through 2015. Over this period, 5,886,981 patents were
granted. While we use this entire dataset in our analysis, we are particularly interested in the
subset of patents closely related to agriculture. Conceptually, our guiding principle is to identify
patents over technologies used primarily in either agricultural production or agricultural research.
We attempt to exclude patented technologies that have many applications, but where agriculture
is not the primary use. For example, the CRISPR gene editing technology has applications in
agriculture, but also many more applications in human medicine and fundamental research. We
include only the subset of CRISPR patents closely related to agricultural research.

Our analysis is focused on six agricultural subsectors where we are able to identify related
patents with relatively high precision: animal health, biocides, fertilizer, machinery, plants, and
research inputs. While we feel these capture a large share of the major technological
developments in agriculture over the last 40 years, we do not claim our analysis is exhaustive. In
particular, the livestock genetics sector does not rely on patent protection to the same extent that
the crop genetics sector does, and so we lack any information on this important sector. Another
notable sector we are missing is information technology (e.g. software) applied to agriculture, for
which we lack reliable means of identifying software with primarily agricultural application from
others. Also, note that our analysis does not extend to the processing of agricultural products,
either into food, feed, or biofuel.

With one exception (described below), our classification of patents starts with the cooperative
patent classification (CPC) system. The CPC system is used by the US Patent and Trademark
Office (USPTO) to classify patents into different technology categories, to facilitate USPTO
patent examiners (and other interested parties) in finding relevant prior art. We use the
cpc_current file, available on the USPTO's patentsview website, as our primary source. Patents

                                                  7
are generally assigned multiple classifications, but we use only the primary classification for the
purpose of allocating patents to a particular group.

For the biocide, fertilizer, and machinery subsectors, we identify CPC codes associated with the
relevant sector and assign patents with identified codes as their primary classification to the
relevant sector. Here we briefly describe our approach. A complete list of patents by subsector is
available in the supplemental materials.

Biocides: This subsector includes fungicides, herbicides, insecticides, pesticides, and other
chemicals meant to control biological pests. We start with CPC classification A01N, which
includes these chemicals as well as chemicals for the preservation of bodies. We include any
classifications under A01N related to biocides, but exclude classifications related to the
preservation of bodies (which tend to begin with A01N 1/).

Fertilizer: This subsector includes chemical fertilizers. We use CPC classifications beginning
with C05, which corresponds to chemical fertilizer technology.

Machinery: This subsector includes agricultural machinery, with a focus on mechanically
powered machinery. Within the CPC classification A01, we include any classification related to
agricultural machinery (e.g., harvesting, mowing, planting, milking, etc.), and exclude many
other categories unrelated to machinery (e.g., structures, forestry, fishing, hunting, and most of
the other agricultural subsectors considered). Most of our ag machinery patents are classified
under A01B, A01C, A01D, and A01F. Within the machinery categories, we also exclude
classifications related to hand tools and animal driven machinery.

These three subsectors require no additional processing. For the plant cultivar and ag research
tools subsectors, the CPC classification system is not sufficiently precise for our purposes, so we
supplement the CPC approach with manual cleaning.

Plants: This subsector includes utility patents for specific plant varieties/cultivars.4 We begin
with the set of patents assigned primary CPC code A01H, which includes both patented plant
cultivars and plant modification and reproduction techniques, as well as related technologies. We



4
 Note that this subsector does not include "plant patents," a distinct form of intellectual property dating to
1930 and applicable to asexually reproduced plants (Clancy and Moschini, 2017).
                                                      8
exclude CPC codes related to non-agricultural plants and fungi. From the remaining set, we
manually identify patents for plant cultivars by inspection of the patent title, abstract, and claims.

Biological Research Tools: This subsector (hereafter shortened to "research tools") includes
technologies for conducting biological research, for example, genetic engineering and traditional
breeding techniques. We begin with CPC classifications under the category A01H that are related
to processes for modifying agricultural plants, and add some classifications under CPC class
C12N (microorganisms and enzymes) that are specifically designated as being for the
modification of plants. Note A01H also includes plant cultivar patents; we exclude any patents
that are already classified in the plants subsector.

Animal Health: This subsector includes all patents associated with medical technologies
approved for use in veterinary medicine by the FDA.

To obtain data on animal health patents, we adopt a different approach than for the other
subsectors. While the CPC system suffices to identify patents related to medical technology, it
does not distinguish between medical technologies for human versus non-human animal
application. Instead, to identify patents for veterinary medicine technologies, we rely on US
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) archival data. To facilitate generic competition in the
animal health market, since 1989 the FDA has maintained a list of patents associated with all
approved veterinary medicine products. Using archival records of this list, Clancy and
Sneeringer (2018) develop a list of all patents associated with approved veterinary medicine
products.

It should be noted that the patents in the animal health subsector are subject to a selection effect
that is not present in the other sectors. This is because animal health patents are only included if
they are associated with veterinary drugs that eventually receive FDA approval. Drugs that are
not approved may have associated patents, and we miss these. This selection effect may bias our
results for this subsector in two ways. First, if successful and unsuccessful drugs enjoy spill-ins
at differential rates, our results will only apply to successful drugs. In our robustness checks,
however, we find little evidence in other subsectors that the most valuable patents differ
dramatically in their citation patterns. Second, and perhaps more importantly, by omitting patents
associated with unsuccessful drug applications, we will mis-classify citations to these patents as
citations to non-agricultural patents. This may partially account for our finding that animal health

                                                   9
relies more on non-agricultural knowledge flows than other agricultural subsectors (although
there are, of course, other plausible explanations for such a finding).

Figure 2 illustrates the annual number of (granted) patents, by application year, in each of these
subsectors. A few preliminary observations are in order. First, most subsectors exhibit a sharp
decline in patents in the last few years of the sample. This is due to a truncation effect: we only
observe patents if they are granted by 2016 in most sectors (we have data until 2018 for our plants
and research tools subsectors) and few patents applied for in 2014 and 2015 are granted by 2016.

Second, the plants and research inputs subsectors exhibit a sharp increase from zero (or close to
zero) in the 1980s. This is due to legal changes in the patentability of biological innovation in the
wake of the 1980 Diamond v. Chakraborty Supreme Court case (Clancy and Moschini 2017).
Prior to 1980, biological innovations such as new plant varieties were not patentable subject
matter. It is important to note that any R&D related to biological innovation that occurs prior to
1980 is unlikely to be reflected in the patent record.

Finally, note that the scale of the vertical axis in Figure 2 varies substantially across sectors. In
our dataset, the animal health sector has the smallest number of patents (414) and the machinery
subsector has the most (19,362). Because of the variability in the size of subsector, how long
innovation in the subsector has been eligible for patent protection, and the presence of selection
effects in the animal health subsector, in this paper we always report disaggregated results by
subsector.




                                                   10
                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                                                                   15
                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                                                25




                                                                                                                         100
                                                                                                                                120




                                                                                      0
                                                                                          20
                                                                                                 40
                                                                                                            60
                                                                                                                   80




                 200
                         400
                                   600
                                          800




            0
                                                 1000
                                                          1200
                                                                                                                                                     1976
                                                                               1976
     1976                                                                                                                                            1979
                                                                               1979
     1979                                                                                                                                            1982
                                                                               1982
     1982                                                                                                                                            1985
     1985                                                                      1985
                                                                               1988                                                                  1988
     1988
                                                                               1991                                                                  1991
     1991
                                                                               1994                                                                  1994
     1994
                                                                                                                                                     1997




                                                                     Plant
     1997                                                                      1997




                                                                                                                                        Fertilizer
                                                                               2000                                                                  2000
     2000
                                                                               2003                                                                  2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Animal Health




     2003
     2006                                                                      2006                                                                  2006
     2009                                                                      2009                                                                  2009
     2012                                                                      2012                                                                  2012
     2015                                                                      2015                                                                  2015




                                                                                          100
                                                                                                200
                                                                                                      300
                                                                                                             400
                                                                                                                   500
                                                                                                                         600
                                                                                                                               700
                                                                                                                                                                      200
                                                                                                                                                                             300
                                                                                                                                                                                    400
                                                                                                                                                                                          500
                                                                                                                                                                                                600




                                                                                                                                                                100




                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                            0




                100
                       200
                             300
                                    400
                                          500
                                                600
                                                        700




            0




11
     1976                                                                      1976                                                                  1976
     1979                                                                      1979                                                                  1979
     1982                                                                      1982                                                                  1982
     1985                                                                      1985                                                                  1985
                                                                               1988                                                                  1988
     1988
                                                                               1991                                                                  1991
     1991
                                                                               1994                                                                  1994
     1994
                                                                               1997                                                                  1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Biocide




     1997
                                                                               2000
                                                                                                                                      Machinery




                                                                                                                                                     2000
     2000
                                                                               2003                                                                  2003




                                                              Research tools
     2003
                                                                               2006                                                                  2006
     2006                                                                      2009                                                                  2009
     2009                                                                      2012                                                                  2012
     2012                                                                      2015                                                                  2015
     2015
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 2. Number of Granted Patents, by Application Year and Subsector, 1979-2016
   1.2. Measuring Knowledge Flows

Our first measure of knowledge flows are patent citations to other patents. We use the USPTO
patentsview dataset uspatentcitation as our source for patent citations. This provides the patent
number of both the citing and cited patent, and identifies who added the citation (the applicant,
examiner, or other parties), from 2002 onwards. Because we will be aggregating cited patents
into different sectors and assignee-types, we limit ourselves to citations to patents granted
between 1976 and 2016.

Our second measure of knowledge flows are patent citations to academic journals. We estimate
public sector patents are just 2% of all patents granted in our observation period, far below the
public sector's share of R&D (agricultural or otherwise). Accordingly, to measure the role of
public sector R&D, it is important to supplement our patent citation analysis with journal
citations. Analysis of citations to non-patent literature is complicated by the absence of
standardized citation formatting. Patent applicants cite articles in a wide variety of ways: with or
without abbreviations; using commas or periods to divide information; the order of author
names, year, title, journal, volume number, etc. An emerging literature is attempting to match the
raw citation text in patent documents to standardized journal entries in databases such as
Clarivate (formerly Thompson Reuters) Web of Science, Elsevier Scopus, Google Scholar,
Crossref, PubMed, and the Microsoft Academic Graph. We use Marx and Fuegi (2019), a dataset
based on text analysis algorithms that matches raw patent text to entries in the Microsoft
Academic Graph. Marx and Fuegi (2019) estimate they capture 90% of citations with 99%
accuracy.

Our third measure of knowledge flows is a novel use of patent text, extending approaches
pioneered by Packalen and Bhattacharya (2015) and Balsmeier et al. (2018). We identify a large
set of "text-novel concepts," proxied by one-, two-, and three-word strings of text, that are
popular in agricultural innovation in the second half of our dataset, but absent from the first half.
We find all mentions of these text-novel concepts in other patents and use earlier mentions of the
concept as a measure of potential knowledge flow. Because this approach is novel, we describe it
in some detail here.

The goal of this approach is to identify strings of text in patents that proxy for concrete ideas and
concepts with technological applications. Following Packalen and Bhattacharya (2015), we

                                                 12
define a "concept" as a text string consisting of one, two, or three words, without separating
punctuation between them (i.e., hyphens are permitted).

For a given agricultural subsector's patents, we break the text of the title, abstract and claims into
concepts. This includes all individual words, as well as all sequences of two or three words, as
long as the words are not divided by punctuation (with the exception of hyphens). We focus on
the title, abstract, and claims because these likely are most informative as to the important
concepts in a patent: titles and abstracts are meant to succinctly describe the innovation, while
claims are legally binding.

We next clean the text of these concepts, using an approach similar to Packalen and Bhattacharya
(2015). We convert all text into lowercase letters. We then exclude concepts with numbers as one
of the words, concepts were words are divided by punctuation, or concepts which are unusually
short and long (in terms of their total number of characters) 5.

This leaves us with a very large set of text, most of which does not correspond to ideas and
concepts with technological application. To focus on new ideas in agriculture, we next divide our
dataset in half. The concepts in patents applied for in the first half of our observation period
(1976-1996) form a baseline dictionary. The concepts in patents applied for in the second half of
our observation period (1996-2016) form a set of recent concepts. Any recent concept that is not
contained in the baseline dictionary is considered a novel concept. Intuitively, this is a string of
text that did not appear in any of the subsector's patent abstracts, titles, or claims prior to 1996,
but does appear after 1996.

Next, we calculate the number of subsector patents that contain each novel concept in the
abstract, title, or claim. We call these "mentions." For example, the word "trimethoprim" refers
to an antibiotic. It does not appear in any animal health patents prior to 1996, but appears in 8
patents after 1996. We therefore say "trimethoprim" is a novel concept with 8 mentions.

Our goal is to identify a set of important agricultural concepts. To do this, we first identify the
200+ novel concepts with the most mentions. We frequently identify more than 200 concepts in


5
  Following Packalen and Bhattacharya (2015), we exclude one-word concepts shorter than 3 characters or longer
than 29 characters, two-word concepts shorter than 7 characters or longer than 59, and three-word concepts shorter
than 11 characters or longer than 89 characters. We also exclude concepts that include words in the python
nltk.corpus stopwords list.

                                                         13
this first pass, because mentions are necessarily integers and usually there are multiple concepts
with the same number of mentions as the 200th concept. By construction, these are strings of text
that did not appear in any of the sector's patent abstracts, titles, or claims prior to 1996, but which
were relatively common after 1996.

To increase our confidence that our concepts are good proxies for concrete ideas and concepts
with technological application, we go beyond Packalen and Bhattacharya (2015) and Balsmeier et
al. (2018) and manually clean the set of candidate concepts using the following four guidelines.
We exclude:

   1.      Concepts with numbers and measurements: These are unlikely to correspond to
           generalizable ideas or concepts, as they usually refer to specific measurements that
           are not good proxies in the absence of more context. Examples: "90 degrees", "1,500
           ml"
   2.      Connective phrases: These are largely free of concepts and ideas with technological
           application, and instead likely reflect variation in preferred patent language.
           Examples: "combinations thereof", "one particular type"
   3.      Words with multiple context-dependent meanings: When a set of words can have
           significantly different meanings in different contexts, then it is a poor proxy for our
           purposes because it may be mentioned in multiple patents with no technological
           similarity. Example: "artificial" (which could be paired with "intelligence",
           "insemination", "sunlight")
   4.      Concepts including uninformative words: If some of the words in a concept appear to
           be valid (not excludable by any other criteria), but they only appear in conjunction
           with an additional word that is uninformative (e.g., "said" or "and"), we exclude the
           concept. In these cases, it is likely the concept is not really novel, but only the
           conjunction of the concept and the uninformative word. Example: "said data
           structure", "the database" (if "data structure" and "database" do not appear as novel
           concepts themselves, then they were in use in 1976-1996, only the exact formulation
           adding "said" or "the" was not).

Three of the coauthors independently examined the list of candidate concepts, based on the
foregoing four criteria, and any concept excluded by at least two of the three coauthors was

                                                  14
removed. This exclusion criteria removes 37% of the top 200 concepts overall, with a low of 11%
in biocides and high of 47% in machinery. As a robustness check, we re-perform our analysis on
the set of concepts that are retained unanimously by all these coauthors. What remains
constitutes our set of "text-novel" concepts. They form a set of text proxies for concrete
technological ideas that are important in agricultural innovation over the period 1996-2016, and
are new at least in the sense that they were not used over 1976-1996 in patents. In some cases, the
underlying concepts are not actually new, but represent one of two things: first, the discovery of
new applications for ideas that had been in a state of dormancy over 1976-1996; and second, an
expansion of the use of technological terms from the scientific literature to patent text. This latter
phenomenon is often the result of an expansion of patentability, as in the case of utility patents
for plant cultivars. For patents granted after 1996, depending on the subsector anywhere from
17% (in machinery) to 94% (in plants) of patents mention one of the associated text-novel
concepts. See table 5 the breakdown by subsector.

The top 10 text-novel concepts in each subsector are listed in Table 1. See the appendix for a
complete list of top text-novel concepts in each subsector, broken down by those unanimously
retained (the majority) and those retained only by two out of three reviewers (which are excluded
in a robustness check). A cursory look at table 1 illustrates how text-concepts align with our
intuitions about the knowledge base in different fields: animal health, plants, and research tools
all involve biological terms; biocides is mostly chemical names; machinery includes different
mechanical components, and so on. In our main specification we give equal weight to all
concepts, but in our robustness checks we show our results are robust to the clustering of
concepts into families of related concepts.

To identify potential knowledge flows, we identify any patents (whether agricultural or not), that
mention these concepts. To do this, we again break the text of each patent's title, abstract, and
claims into concepts, clean the text of these concepts, and identify any concepts that match the
set of text-novel concepts in agriculture. These form the set of all patents (agricultural and
otherwise) that mention any text-novel concepts in agriculture. We interpret such mentions as
informative (albeit noisily) of knowledge flows, and indicative that relevant research was
ongoing in the sector to which agricultural researchers may have been exposed.




                                                  15
Table 1. Top ten text-novel concepts by patent subsector, 1996-2016


                     Top ten text-novel concepts

                     Protozoal, trimethoprim, microbial, microbial infection, ear, preservative,
 Animal Health
                     terbinafine, penetration enhancer, kinase, bird

                     Thiamethoxam, azoxystrobin, clothianidin, trifloxystrobin, spinosad,
 Biocides
                     acetamiprid, thiacloprid, prothioconazole, pyraclostrobin, emamectin

                     Selenium, itaconic, tea, canola, mean particle, chlorine dioxide, wetting
 Fertilizer
                     agents, phosphite, ferrate, compost tea

                     Controller configured, actuator configured, apparatus configured, antenna,
 Machinery           dairy livestock, arm configured, flexible cutterbar assembly, controller
                     operable, opening configured, gps receiver
                     Insect resistance, transgene, conversion, locus, trait selected, locus
 Plants
                     conversion, carbohydrate, backcross, metabolism, carbohydrate metabolism
                     Clustal, one regulatory sequence, silencing, polynucleotide selected,
                     isolated polynucleotides, chimeric gene results, polynucleotide operably
 Research tools
                     linked, polynucleotide operably, polyunsaturated fatty acids,
                     Rnai


   1.3. Originating Knowledge Domains

To measure the source of knowledge flows, we define the originating knowledge domain in three
ways. Our first approach is simply to leverage our work identifying patents in distinct
agricultural subsectors. When a cited patent, or a patent linked by common text, belongs to one
of our agricultural subsectors, we use the subsector as the originating knowledge domain. We
find it useful, in general, to group these sectors by "own subsector" (for example, an animal
health patent citing another patent belonging to animal health), "other agriculture" (for example,
an animal health patent citing an agricultural research tools patent), and "not agriculture" (for
example, an animal health patent citing a human health patent).

   1.3.1.     Assignees

Our second approach relies on the assignees and inventors associated with patents. Most patents
have an assignee, usually corresponding to the employer of one of the patent's inventors, and all
patents have an inventor (or inventors). We are interested in distinguishing between assignees


                                                 16
that are specialized in agriculture, assignees that conduct agricultural R&D but for whom it is not
their primary focus, and assignees that conduct no agricultural R&D.

The problem of assignee disambiguation and inventor disambiguation in patents is an active area
of research. In brief, this is the challenge of determining when two patents belong to the same
assignee or inventor. What makes this challenging is that the USPTO does not assign unique IDs
to inventors and assignees. Instead, assignees and inventors are listed as text in the patent
document. The same set of text (e.g. "John Smith") may refer to different individuals/assignees.
Or, different text (e.g. "IBM" and "International Business Machines") may refer to the same
individual/assignee.

We primarily rely on the disambiguation dataset built by Balsmeier et al. (2018). These authors
begin with the hand-curated NBER patent data project, which matched patents granted between
1976-2006 with publicly traded companies in the compustat dataset. Balsmeier et al. (2018) then
use a k-nearest neighbor clustering algorithm for the remaining patents. This algorithm identifies
the five assignees "closest" to the unmatched patent's assignee, in terms of having similar
inventors, CPC codes, locations, and cited patents. It compares the assignee name of the
unmatched patent to the names of these five nearest assignees and takes the closest match,
provided the similarity of this match exceeds a threshold. Otherwise, a new assignee is added to
the dataset. A similar technique is used to disambiguate inventors.

We use Balsmeier et al. (2018) to differentiate between patents with assignees and those with
individual inventors. However, assignees can take many forms: private firms, government
agencies, non-profit organizations, and even individuals different from the inventor who are
assigned the patent. Balsmeier et al. (2018) do not distinguish between different kinds of
assignees. We attempt to separate public sector assignees from private sector ones, and then to
characterize the extent of agricultural specialization for private sector assignees.

We adopt two approaches to identifying public sector assignees. First, the USPTO's patentsview
assignee and patent_assignee files indicate whether an assignee is a government agency (state,
federal or foreign). We classify the assignees of any patent with all government agency assignees




                                                  17
as public sector assignees. Second, we use a list of keywords6 to identify major non-
governmental agency public sector assignees. Any assignee that includes one of these keywords
is also classified as a public sector patent.

Patents not classified as belonging to the public sector or individual inventors belong mostly to
private sector firms. We are interested in characterizing the extent to which these firms R&D
focus is agricultural. We face two challenges here: ascertaining the extent of agricultural R&D,
and determining how to classify assignees that change their research focus over time. Some
major firms dramatically reinvented themselves as agricultural companies over our observation
period (Monsanto is a notable example), and so we need a way to distinguish between different
phases of the firm's existence.

We use the share of patents classified as belonging to one of our agricultural subsectors to
determine an assignee's agricultural focus. To capture the fact that assignees may change their
research focus over time, we use only patents granted in the preceding five years to construct a
time-varying, assignee-specific agricultural focus.7 While we use this continuous measure of
agricultural R&D focus, we also construct three types of assignee, where types can change year-
to-year:

Specialized Agricultural Assignee: A firm for which 50% or more of their patents, granted in
the last five years, belong to one of our 6 agricultural subsectors.

Minority Agricultural Assignee: A firm that has at least one agricultural patent in the last five
years, but for which less than 50% of their patents, granted in the last five years, belong to one of
our 6 agricultural subsectors.




6
  Keywords include: university, universities, college, colleges, institute of technology, foundation, school,
polytechnic institute, virgina tech, Argonne, Tulane education, board of regents, universita, universitat,
universite, universidad
We find these keywords largely match the number of patents granted to US colleges and universities, as
reported by the USPTO and NSF, in 2011 (USPTO 2019).
7
  When we do not have data on five prior years of patenting (i.e., in the first four years after an assignee
begins to patent, or the first four years in our dataset), we use the patents granted in the first available five
years or the maximum number of years available if five are not available. For example, for a patent
granted in 1977, we use patents granted in 1976-1980 to determine the assignee type in 1977.
                                                       18
Non Agricultural Assignee: A firm with no patents granted in the last five years that belong to
one of our 6 agricultural subsectors.

Our choice of five years balances two competing desires. A shorter time window introduces more
noise into our estimates. A longer time frame is slow to recognize when a firm reorients its R&D
focus. To assign firms a position in technology space, it is common to use the entire period under
observation (see for example, Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti 2010 and Bloom,
Schankerman, and Van Reenen 2013), and so our time five-year lag is relatively short. We find
that using a longer time-window results in fewer firms that we classify as specialized ag firms.
Therefore, if we used a longer time frame, it would likely strengthen our conclusion that non-
agricultural firms are a major source of knowledge flows in agriculture.

Approximately 5% of patents lack disambiguated assignee data in Balsmeier et al. (2018) and we
assign these to an "unclassifiable" category. When a patent has multiple assignees spanning
different types, we fractionally allocate the patent across different assignee types. Lastly, note
that there is no concordance between assignees in the USPTO patentsview data and the
Balsmeier et al. (2018) dataset. In the rare case (less than 1.5%) where a patent has multiple
assignees, and some but not all are indicated as government agencies by the USPTO datasets, we
cannot determine which of the assignees in Balsmeier et al. (2018) are the government agencies
(text similarity matching fails). We allocate this small number of patents to the unclassifiable
category.

Based on these criteria, 55% of all patents over our observation period belong to non-agricultural
assignees, 23% belong to minority agricultural assignees, 15% to individuals, 5% are
unclassifiable, 2% belong to public sector firms, and 0.5% belong to specialized ag firms. For
comparison, patents in any of our agricultural subsectors account for 1% of all patents granted
over the period. Note this implies the agricultural patents of minority ag firms account for
slightly more than 3% of their patents.

Table 2 displays the four assignees with the most patents in each agricultural subsector. As
expected, they largely correspond to well-known firms.




                                                 19
Table 2. Top four patent-holding assignees by subsector, 1976-2016


                      Top four assignees by patent holdings

                      Pfizer Inc., Eli Lilly and Company, Alza Corporation, Hoechst
    Animal Health
                      Aktiengesellschaft

                      Hoechst Aktiengesellschaft, BASF Aktiengesellschaft, Sumitomo Chemical
    Biocides
                      Company Limited, CIBA Geigy Corporation

                      Union Oil Company of California, Tennessee Valley Authority, OMS
    Fertilizer
                      Investments Inc., Allied Signal Inc.

                      Deere & Company, CNH America LLC, Unisys Corporation, J I Case
    Machinery
                      Company

                      Pioneer Hi Bred International Inc., Monsanto Technology LLC, Stine Seed
    Plants
                      Farm Inc., Syngenta Participation AG

                      Pioneer Hi Bred International Inc., E I Du Pont De Nemours and Company,
    Research tools
                      Monsanto Technology LLC, The Regents of the University of California



      1.3.2. Journal Classification

Our first two approaches to defining the originating knowledge domain are only appropriate for
knowledge flows that are proxied by patents (i.e., either cited patents or patents with shared text
concepts). Here, we develop a third approach--appropriate for our journal citation proxy of
knowledge flows--based on the classification of cited journals into broad academic categories.
We create four main categories: agricultural science journals, other biology/biochemistry
journals, other chemistry journals, and other journals.

Our list is based on the SCImago portal for the Scopus abstract and citation database for peer-
reviewed literature. 8 Journals are placed in broad "subject areas," and within each subject area
are more narrowly defined "subject categories." Journals can be placed in more than one subject
category, and for that matter, in more than one subject area. To create the "agricultural science"
category, we start with two SCImago subject areas: (1) Agricultural and Biological Sciences; (2)




8
    https://www.scimagojr.com/

                                                 20
Veterinary Sciences. Table 3 lists the subject categories within these two areas, and how the
journals of each subject category are treated.

Table 3. Defining the set of Agricultural Sciences Journals

 Agricultural and Biological Sciences
  Agricultural and Biological Sciences (misc)              Journals manually inspected
  Agronomy and Crop Science                                All journals included
  Animal Science and Zoology                               Journals manually inspected
  Aquatic Science                                          Journals not inspected
  Ecology, Evolution, Behavior and Systematics             Journals not inspected
  Food Science                                             Journals not inspected
  Forestry                                                 Journals not inspected
  Horticulture                                             All journals included
  Insect Science                                           Journals manually inspected
  Plant Science                                            Journals manually inspected
  Soil Science                                             All journals included
 Veterinary Science
  Equine                                                   Journals not inspected
  Food Animals                                             All journals included
  Small Animals                                            Journals not inspected
  Veterinary (misc.)                                       Journals manually inspected


Note that because journals can be cross-listed in several categories, it is possible for a journal to
be designated an agricultural science journal, even if it belongs to one of the subject categories
whose journals we do not inspect. This can occur, for example, if the journal is also listed in a
category we do inspect. Eliminating duplicate entries results in a set of 981 journals classified as
"agricultural sciences."

To create our set of "other biology/biochemistry" journals, we begin with all journals in the
SCImago Agricultural and Biological Sciences area and Veterinary Sciences area that ended up
not being included in the aforementioned agricultural sciences category. To this, we add all
journals classified by SCImago in the "Biochemistry, Genetics, and Molecular Biology" subject
area, and which were not already classified as Agricultural Sciences by us. This results in a set of
3,029 journals classified as "all other biology/biochemistry."




                                                  21
To create the "other chemistry" journal list, we combine all journals (not already classified in the
preceding steps) from the "Chemistry" and "Chemical Engineering" subject areas in the
SCImago set. This results in a set of 995 journals classified as "other chemistry."

Lastly, all remaining journals in SCImago are classified as "Other." In all cases, we retain
journals, book series, and trade journals, but mostly exclude conferences and proceedings
volumes. This results in a set of 21,166 other journals.

A final challenge remains. Our source for journal citations is Marx and Fuegi (2019), which links
the raw text in patents to entries in the Microsoft Academic Graph. We match journal titles in the
Microsoft Academic Graph to journal titles in our SCImago classification system by a
Levenshtein distance text-matching algorithm (we retain matches above 90% confidence). For
Agricultural Sciences, we further manually check all journal matches. Table 4 illustrates the
share of Microsoft Academic Graph journals that we successfully match to journals in the
SCImago.

Table 4. Journal Match Performance

                                   Matched to Matched in MSAG               Not Matched in
                              SCImago Journals to other Journals          MSAG to Journals
       Animal Health                    75.6%             16.9%                      7.5%
       Biocides                         79.6%             10.2%                     10.2%
       Fertilizer                       74.1%             11.9%                     14.0%
       Machinery                        60.9%             10.1%                     29.0%
       Plants                           73.0%              1.6%                     25.4%
       Research tools                   92.4%              3.5%                      4.1%
Note: MSAG denotes Microsoft Academic Graph. Column 1 is the share of patent citations to
journals in the MSAG that we match to journals in SCImago. Column 2 is the share of citations
in the MSAG that Mircosoft indicates correspond to journals, but for which we are unable to
match the entry to a journal in SCImago. Column 3 is the set of citations that Microsoft lacks
enough information to match to a journal.



As indicated by Table 4, we always match the majority of journals and typically match
approximately 75%. Our performance is worse in the machinery subsector (60.9%)--this is
probably due to the fact that this is a field where citations to academic journals is rare and
citations to conference proceeding papers (which we mostly exclude) are common. In the plants


                                                 22
subsector, the Microsoft Academic graph is unable to match 25% of non-patent citations to
journals. Manual inspection of a sample of these citations indicate they mostly accrue to books,
which are also not in our dataset.

   1.4. Summary

Table 5 provides a summary of our data.

Table 5. Summary Statistics

                              Share Top 4       Avg. Patent   Avg. Non-Patent      Share Patents w/
                   Patents      Assignees       Cites Made         Cites Made        Text Concepts
 Animal Health        414          24.9%                9.4                8.5               76.3%
 Biocide           12,774          13.7%                8.3                6.5               24.2%
 Fertilizer         2,554           3.7%               10.7                3.4               32.9%
 Machinery         19,362          16.8%               13.2                  1               16.7%
 Plants            10,216          67.0%                7.6                9.2               94.4%
 Research Tools    10,872          21.5%                7.5               37.3               41.6%

Note: Patents is the number of patents in the subsector. Share top 4 assignees is the share of these
patents assigned to the four largest assignees. Avg. Patent Cites Made is the mean number of
citations made to other patents, per patent. Avg. Non-Patent Cites Made is the mean number of
non-patent references per patent. Share patents w/ text concepts is the share of patents granted
after 1996 that mention one of the top text-concepts included in our text analysis.


Note the subsectors vary significantly in their propensity to cite, especially with respect to non-
patent references (the majority of which are to academic journals). The machinery and fertilizer
subsectors, for example, cite more patents than any other subsector, but the fewest non-patent
references. Meanwhile, the research tools subsector cites non-patent literature at more than four
times the rate of the next highest subsector.

Subsectors also vary in their concentration. Whereas fertilizer patents are dispersed among a
plethora of small assignees, plant patents are highly concentrated in a small number of firms
(with Monsanto and Pioneer alone accounting for more than half of all patents). Table 5 also
highlights how our text analysis approach varies in how representative it is for different
subsectors. Whereas the majority of patents granted after 1996 in Animal Health and Plants carry
one of our text-novel concepts, only 17% of such patents in Machinery do (although, as the
largest single subsector, the small share translates into thousands of patents).

                                                  23
   1.5. An Example

As an example, consider patent 5,747,476, titled "Treatment of equine protozoal
myeloencephalitis." The patent was applied for in July 1996 and granted in May 1998, and
assigned to the Mortar & Pestle Veterinary Pharmacy, Inc. in Des Moines, Iowa. We classify this
patent as an "animal health" patent. As the title suggests, it describes a novel treatment for equine
protozoal myeloencephalitis (EPM), a debilitating neurologic disease that affects horses. At the
time of the patent application, EPM was commonly treated by crushing two different kinds of
tablets intended to treat humans ­ one with the active ingredient pyrimethamine and another with
a trimethoprim-sulfonamide combination ­ and suspending the mixture in solution. This was fed
to the horse prior to feeding, often for 90 days. The patent describes a new therapy, designed
specifically for EPM that involves a compound of pyrimethamine and a sulfonamide ("preferably
sulfadiazine"), but with a much smaller dose of trimethoprim (or none at all).

Such an innovation obviously builds on ideas developed outside of agriculture. Pyrimethamine
was discovered in 1952 and developed into an anti-malarial treatment (for humans) in 1953 but
has many applications in treating parasitic diseases. Sulfanomides have an even older history,
forming part of the first set of antibiotics widely used (again, for humans) in the 1930s. However,
their joint application in treating EPM is novel.

Patent 5,747,476 reflects these deep roots in several ways. It cites 10 patents, most of which have
little to do with veterinary medicine (the oldest being US patent 4,293,547: Method of Treating
Malaria, granted in 1981). We identify patents as belonging to agriculture if they belong in one of
our agricultural patent datasets (which the cited ones do not), or if the assignees of these cited
patents have other agricultural patents within the last five years. Where they do we find the share
of agricultural patents is quite small. To take one example, patent 4,293,547 belongs to the
Upjohn company, and only 1.1% of its patents were agricultural in 1981 (over the preceding 5
years).

Only one cited patent belongs to a publicly owned entity, patent 5,486,535 ­ Method of treating
Toxoplasmosis, which is assigned to the regents of the University of California. To understand
the patents use of publicly funded knowledge, we instead turn to its 13 citations to journals. The
cited references include the American Journal of Veterinary Research, the Canadian Veterinary
Journal and the Journal of Parasitology. Of these, we classify the first two as agricultural science

                                                    24
journals, and the last as a biology/biochemistry journal, suggesting this patent draws on both
specific agricultural research and basic biology.

Finally, the text of the patent itself contains important concepts. The word "pyrimethamine" is
absent in our animal health dataset for the first half of our observation period, but relatively
common in the second half, so that it is one of our top text-novel concepts. The words "equine
protozoal myeloencephalitis" are another concept that is absent over 1976-1995, but relatively
common in animal health patents after 1995.

When we search the broader patent corpus for patents including the word "pyrimethamine" (in
the title, abstract, or claims), we find many examples that predate its use in animal health (hardly
surprising, given its history) not among the patents cited. These patents provide a third indicator
that this patent draws on knowledge developed outside of agriculture. In contrast, the phrase
"equine protozoal myeloencephalitis" appears for the first time in any US patent in patent
5,747,746. Beginning with this example, it goes on to appear in several other patents in animal
health. In contrast to "pyrimethamine", the concept of (treating) "equine protozoal
myeloencephalitis" is one that was born in agriculture, reflecting the primarily agricultural
research base upon which it is based.

    2. Main Results

We here present five different measures of knowledge spill-ins to agriculture. We begin with
results that use patent citations, then present results that rely on citations to non-patent literature,
and then results that use shared text concepts.

    2.1. Patent Citations

In figure 3, we show the share of citations made by each agricultural subsector that originate in
their own subsector (i.e., animal health patents citing animal health patents) and other subsectors
(i.e., animal health patents citing research tool patents).




                                                    25
Figure 3. Share of Patent Citations to Agricultural Subsectors

         100%

          90%

          80%

          70%

          60%

          50%

          40%

          30%

          20%

          10%

           0%
                   Animal       Biocides    Fertilizer   Machinery       Plants   Research
                   Health                                                          Tools
                                     Own Sector      Other Agriculture


Note: The citing sector is on the horizontal axis. Only cited patents granted between 1976 and
2016 are included. Each citation is counted once, even if multiple citations point to the same
patent. Own sector gives the share of these citations to patents in the same subsector. Other
agriculture gives the share of these citations to any other agricultural subsector. The remaining
share of citations accrue to patents not contained in any of our agricultural subsectors.


It is apparent that for the first four agricultural subsectors, more than half of citations accrue to
patents not classified as agricultural patents. This indicates a substantial role for knowledge spill-
ins from outside agriculture. In these four sectors, the second most cited subsector is the own
subsector. There is very little knowledge flow between different agricultural subsectors.

In contrast, the majority of citations in the plants and research tools subsectors accrue to patents
that belong to these subsectors. While the research tools subsector still cites a substantial number




                                                   26
of patents outside of agriculture (40.9%), in the plants subsector citations to other plant patents
and to research tool patents account for almost 100% of all citations made.

Table 6 breaks down the share of citations from each subsector to the type of assignee/inventor
associated with the cited patent. As noted in section 1.3, we divide non-individual assignees into
four categories: assignees (mostly firms) specializing in agricultural R&D, assignees (mostly
firms) that conduct some agricultural R&D, but for whom such activities are the minority,
assignees (mostly firms) conducting no agricultural R&D, and the public sector (mostly
government, universities, and not for profit organizations). We omit the patents of unclassified
assignees, which never receive more than 1.5% of citations.

Table 6. Share of Patent Citations to Assignee Types

                                Ag               Ag         Non        Public
                        Specialized         Minority         Ag        Sector    Individuals
         Animal Health        1.8%           69.1%        18.4%         4.1%           6.2%
         Biocides             8.6%           65.1%        13.2%         4.6%           7.8%
         Fertilizer         17.4%            33.7%        20.7%         4.5%          23.5%
         Machinery          33.5%            29.1%         8.8%         1.1%          27.5%
         Plants             80.6%              5.4%        0.3%        12.8%           0.6%
         Research tools     28.1%            38.2%        12.8%        13.6%           5.8%
Note: The rows indicate the citing agricultural subsector and columns the assignee and inventor
type to which the cited patents belong. Specialized ag assignees have more than 50% of their
patents belonging to an agricultural subsector in the last 5 years. Minority ag assignees have
more than zero patents belonging to an agricultural subsector in the last 5 years, but less than
50%. Non-ag assignees have no patents belonging to agricultural subsectors. Public sector
assignees correspond to government and non-profit organizations. Individuals refers to patents
owned by individual inventors. Rows do not add up to 100% - the remainder of patent citations
are made to unclassified assignees (see section 1.3.1).


Only in the plants subsector do the majority of cited patents belong to assignees that specialize in
agriculture. A plurality of patent citations in the machinery subsector also originate with
assignees that specialize in agriculture. For animal health, biocides, fertilizer, and research, either
a plurality or majority of patent citation originate in ag minority firms. In no sector do more than
21% of patent citations originate with assignees that do not conduct any agricultural research
(even though these assignees account for 55% of all patents over this period). Public sector



                                                  27
research is disproportionately important for all firms (considering that it accounts for just 2% of
all patents), and especially important for plant and research tools patents.

Figure 4 presents more granular information on the agricultural focus of cited patents. For each
point (x,y), share y of all citations made by the subsector accrue to patents belonging to firms
with x% or less agricultural patents over the past 5 years. Note that this sample is conditional on
the citation going to an assignee, and not a public sector organization or individual inventor.

Figure 4. Share of Citations to Assignees by Agriculture-Specialization




Note: Cumulative distribution function for citations, by agricultural focus of cited assignee. For
each point (x,y), share y of all citations made by the subsector accrue to patents belonging to
firms with x% or less agricultural patents over the past 5 years. Note that this sample is
conditional on the citation going to an assignee, and not a public sector organization or
individual inventor.


                                                 28
The concave-to-convex curves in most of these figures tell us most citations go to firms that are
either very specialized in agriculture (i.e., a very large share of the assignees patents are
classified as agricultural) or have only a tiny agricultural R&D operation (i.e., a very small share
of the assignee's patents are agricultural). Only the machine subsector is an outlier, with an
approximately linear curve. No curve has a convex-to-concave "S" shape, which would
characterize the presence of many cited assignees with agricultural focus near 50%. This
suggests our division of assignees into ag-minority and ag-specialized is a reasonable one. It also
suggests most of the ag-minority patents have only a tiny footprint in agriculture.

   2.2. Journal Citations

In figure 5, we present the share of matched SCImago journal citations belonging to different
journal categories.

Only in the plants subsector do the majority of cited journals belong to the agricultural sciences
category. In the fertilizer and machinery subsectors, a plurality of cited journals belong to the
agricultural sciences sector. With the exception of machinery, the other biology and biochemistry
category is either the most or next-most important category of cited journals. In the machinery
subsector, other journals are the second-most important source.




                                                  29
Figure 5. Share of Journal Citations to Journal Categories

         100%

          90%

          80%

          70%

          60%

          50%

          40%

          30%

          20%

          10%

           0%
                   Animal      Biocides      Fertilizer     Machinery     Plants     Research
                   Health                                                             Tools
                     Agricultural Sciences                Other Biology and Biochemistry
                     Chemistry/Chem Engineering


Note: Citing agricultural subsector is listed on the horizontal axis. Shares are given conditional
on matching journal title to the SCImago database. The remaining share of citations to journals
accrue to other journals in SCImago that we do not classify as one of the above categories.


   2.3. Shared Text Concepts

Our shared text concept results are designed to detect the sources of important new (or at least
recently reawakened) concepts in agriculture. An important difference compared to the foregoing
analysis is that whereas citations track knowledge flows "one step removed", our text approach
can accurately track the "deep roots" of knowledge spill-ins. For example, an idea originating in
a distant technology sector may pass through a long sequence of citations before finally being
cited by an agricultural patent. To generate the following results, we perform the following
calculation for each text-novel concept (see section 1.2) in each subsector. First, we identify the


                                                    30
earliest subsector patent that mentions the concept. We use the application date of this patent as
the date this text-novel concept is first applied in that subsector.

Next, we look for any mention of the concept in patents granted prior to this date. By
construction, none of these patents will be in the "own subsector" prior to this date, but they may
have been used in other agricultural subsectors, or outside of agriculture. If there are any
antecedent patents mentioning the concept, we compute the share of these that belong to each
originating knowledge domain. Denote the share of concept c's prior mentions originating in
knowledge domain i by si (c ) . If no prior patents mention the concept, we say the concept has no

prior mentions ( si (c)  1 , with i denoting "no prior mentions"). We then take the average share
across all text-novel concepts:

                                                    n
                                                  1
                                            pi 
                                                  nc si (c)                                         (1)
                                                     1


Intuitively, the interpretation of pi is the probability a randomly selected knowledge flow from a
randomly selected text-novel concept c originates in sector i. Figure 6 depicts the probability a
random knowledge flow from a concept originate in agriculture.

In the biocides sector, fully 63% of top text-novel concepts appear for the first time in the patent
corpus as part of the title, abstract, or claims of a biocide patent. This turns out to be an
exception. Other than the biocides sector, the majority of text-novel concepts in each subsector
are mentioned in earlier patents. The majority of these are mentioned by patents outside of
agriculture. Again, there is little transfer of knowledge from within agriculture, with the
exception of the plant subsector, where 20% of prior mentions come from the research tools
subsector and 5% from the biocides subsector.




                                                   31
Figure 6. Probability of Antecedent Text-novel Concept Mentions across Agricultural
Subsectors

         100%

          90%

          80%

          70%

          60%

          50%

          40%

          30%

          20%

          10%

           0%
                   Animal      Biocide     Fertilizer   Machine       Plant     Research
                   Health                                                        Tools
                                     No Prior     Other Agriculture


Note: Each bar gives the probability a randomly selected patent mentioning a randomly
mentioned text-novel concept originates in a given sector. Antecedent mentions are all those
made by patents applied for prior to the first patent in the given subsector that mentions the
concept. The remaining share of antecedent mentions accrue to patents not classified as
agriculture.


Table 7 performs the same exercise for the type of assignee/inventor. Most text-novel concepts
are mentioned before their use in agriculture by patents that do not specialize in agricultural
R&D. This is consistent with figure 6, which establishes that most text-novel concepts are not
mentioned in other agricultural sectors prior to their appearance in a given subsector. A large
share of these concepts are mentioned, however, in firms with some agricultural research. The
plurality of mentions occurs in minority ag assignees in four of the six sectors, whereas the
plurality occurs in non-agricultural assignees in the other two (machinery and research tools).

                                                  32
Table 7. Share of Antecedent Text-novel Concept Mentions across Assignee-Type

                                 Ag          Ag        Non-                                No
                         Specialized    Minority         Ag    Public Individuals        Prior
      Animal Health            1.2%      44.1%        31.2%     7.0%        9.4%         5.1%
      Biocide                  3.5%      26.3%         4.8%     0.9%        0.3%        63.3%
      Fertilizer               2.5%      29.8%        29.0%     4.3%       11.2%        22.1%
      Machine                  2.8%      16.1%        42.3%     1.0%       11.8%        25.5%
      Plant                  10.8%       28.7%        23.3%    10.4%        5.9%        19.5%
      Research tools           2.1%      25.4%        30.3%    13.3%        7.2%        19.7%
Note: An entry gives the probability a randomly selected patent mentioning a randomly selected
text-novel concept originates with a given assignee type. Antecedent mentions are all those made
by patents applied for prior to the first patent in the given subsector that mentions the concept.
Specialized ag assignees have more than 50% of their patents belonging to an agricultural
subsector in the last 5 years. Minority ag assignees have more than zero patents belonging to an
agricultural subsector in the last 5 years, but less than 50%. Non-ag assignees have no patents
belonging to agricultural subsectors. Public sector assignees correspond to government and non-
profit organizations. Individuals refers to patents owned by individual inventors. No prior
indicates the concept has no prior mentions. Rows do not add up to 100% - remainder of patent
mentions (0.1-1.5%) made to unclassified assignees (see section 1.3.1).


Figure 7 again presents more granular information on the agricultural focus of patents
mentioning text-novel concepts. Any point (x,y) in figure 7 gives the cumulative probability x a
randomly selected knowledge flow containing a randomly selected concept belongs to a patent
with agricultural focus y or less. Note that this sample is even more restricted than figure 6, since
it excludes the patents of public sector firms and individuals, as well as text-concepts that have
no prior mentions.

Unlike figure 6, these shapes are mostly just concave, rather than concave-to-convex (the plant
subsector being the only one showing a significant concave ending). This suggests that prior
mentions by minority-ag assignees are mostly assignees with only a small agricultural focus ­
much less than 50%. For important text-novel concepts that are not born in agriculture, they tend
to come from firms with either no history in agriculture or a very minor one.




                                                 33
Figure 7. Cumulative probability of Antecedent Text-novel Concept Mentions by Assignee
specialization in agriculture




Note: Cumulative distribution function for prior mentions of text-concepts, by agricultural focus
of cited assignee. Any point (x,y) in figure 7 gives the cumulative probability x a randomly
selected knowledge flow containing a randomly selected concept belongs to a patent with
agricultural focus y or less. Note that this sample is even more restricted than figure 6, since it
excludes the patents of public sector firms and individuals, as well as text-concepts that have no
prior mentions.


   3. Discussion

Section 2 describes five different measures of the extent of knowledge spill-ins to agriculture.
Each measure emphasizes a different potential aspect of spill-ins. Section 2.1 emphasizes the
flow of knowledge in the space of patented technologies across our entire time period. Section
2.3 also focuses on the space of patented technologies, but focuses specifically on a subset of
"concepts" that arose to prominence in agriculture during the second half of our observation
period. It measures the extent of prior R&D (potentially many citations removed) related to these
concepts outside of the particular agricultural subsector. Section 2.2, in contrast, examines the
flow of knowledge from the primarily academic sector to patented technology.


                                                 34
Summarizing this heterogenous set of proxies is challenging, but one of our over-arching
conclusions is that knowledge spill-ins from outside agriculture are likely as important as
knowledge generated within agricultural domains. This conclusion is bolstered by figure 8,
which indicates whether the share of knowledge flows that originate in an agricultural
knowledge domain, defined below.

Figure 8. Share of Knowledge Flows Originating Within Agriculture

    100%

      90%

      80%

      70%

      60%

      50%

      40%

      30%

      20%

      10%

      0%
               Animal Health   Biocides     Fertilizer      Machinery       Plants       Research Tools

       Patent Cites 1      Patent Cites 2   Journal Cites     Text concepts 1        Text concepts 2



Notes: Patent cites 1 is the sum of own-sector and other-agriculture bars from figure 3. Patent
cites 2 is the share of citations going to specialized-ag assignees in table 6. Journal cites is the
share of journal citations to agricultural science journals from figure 5. Text concepts 1 is the sum
of no-prior and other-agriculture bars from figure 6. Text concepts 2 is the sum of no-prior and
ag-specialized categories in Table 7.


In this figure, we pull together proxies for the share of knowledge flows originating in
agriculture:

       Patent Cites 1. Share of patent citations to agricultural subsectors in figure 3.
       Patent Cites 2. Share of patent citations to specialized ag assignees in table 6.

                                                  35
       Journal cites. Share of journal citations to agricultural sciences journals in figure 5.
       Text concepts 1. Probability a text-concept either has no-prior mention or a knowledge
       flow originating with an agricultural patent in figure 6.
       Text concepts 2. Sum of the no-prior mention and specialized ag columns in table 7.

By these definitions, the animal health, fertilizer, and machine subsectors source the majority
(more than half) of their ideas from outside agriculture, as measured by any proxy.

The evidence is more mixed for the research tools and biocide subsectors. For research tools,
55% of patent citations refer back to other research tools patents and another 4% originate with
other agricultural patents. However, most of these patents are assigned to firms that are not
specialized in agriculture, and most of the text-novel concepts in research tools patents are
mentioned in patents that lie outside agriculture. Moreover, research tools patents cite academic
journals at four times the rate of any other sector, but only 34% of citations flow to agricultural
science journals.

Biocide patent and journal citations primarily flow to non-agricultural firms, patents and
journals. However, the strong majority of text-novel text concepts in biocides have no prior
mention and appear for the first time in the patent corpus in a biocide patent. The majority of
these concepts are chemical names, suggesting the subsector develops many chemicals for
application in agriculture that appear nowhere else in the patent corpus. This is an observation
that would be missed if we relied solely on citations.

Finally, plants seem to be different. The majority of citations flow to specialized ag firms,
agricultural patents, and agricultural science journals. For text concepts, the majority are
mentioned in non-agricultural patents before their appearance in patent for plant varieties, but not
by an overwhelming number (55%). It is important to note that utility patents for plants differ
from other utility patents in more than just their subject matter. This field is dominated by an
unusual extent by a small number of firms, with some evidence that they use a standardized
template for new patents (Moser, Ohmsteadt, and Rhode 2018).

Taken together, in no field do all our knowledge flow proxies agree that agriculture is the main
source of inputs. Rather, spill-ins from outside agriculture appear to matter, and to matter a great
deal in most subsectors. We now turn to the nature of these non-agricultural spill-ins.

                                                 36
Whereas our paper does not try to rigorously define the "distance" between different knowledge
domains, our results do provide some evidence that knowledge flows from outside of agriculture
do not originate "too far" from agriculture. In figure 9, we present an attempt to measure whether
knowledge flows originate "far" from agriculture, by resorting to some reasonable but perhaps
ad hoc assumptions. We assume research originating in "non-ag" assignees (tables 6 and 9) is
farther from agriculture than research originating in "minority ag" firms. This would be the case,
for example, if an assignee's knowledge capital has some agricultural applications, as well as
many others. In this case, the fact that the assignee also patents in agriculture is a signal that it
has recognized the agricultural application of its knowledge capital. The animal health sector
would seem to be a good example of this kind of dynamic. Much of the basic research on health
for humans or animals is similar at the cellular level, even though the human health market is
vastly larger than the veterinary health market (Clancy and Sneeringer 2019). That said, caution
is warranted, because an assignee may also be a conglomerate with many parallel research
operations that effectively embody separate knowledge capital stocks.

We feel it is also reasonable to assume biology and chemistry are scientific disciplines that are
among the closest to agriculture, and so citations to biological and chemistry journals is an
indicator that fields "close" to agriculture matter. Agriculture is typically classified as one of the
life sciences (for example, by the NSF), and agricultural science has deep roots in chemistry
(Huffman and Evenson 2006). Figure 9 uses these notions to provide some evidence that
knowledge from outside agriculture is not "too far" away.




                                                   37
Figure 9. Share of Non-Agricultural Knowledge Flows Originating "Close" to Agriculture

  100%

   90%

   80%

   70%

   60%

   50%

   40%

   30%

   20%

   10%

    0%
           Animal Health    Biocides          Fertilizer     Machinery       Plants   Research Tools
                             Patent Cites 2      Journal Cites   Text concepts 2


Notes: Patent Cites 2 is the share of citations to non-specialized ag assignees that are classified as
minority ag. Journal cites 2 is the share of non-agricultural journal citations classified as
biology/biochemisty or chemical/chemical engineering. Text concepts 2 is the share of prior text
mentions by non-specialized ag assignees that are classified as minority ag.


In this figure, we pull together very rough proxies for the distance from agriculture of non-
agricultural knowledge flows.

         Patent Cites 2. Share of citations to assignees, but not specialized ag assignees, that are
         classified as minority ag (as opposed to non-agricultural).
         Journal Cites. Share of non-agricultural science journal citations to journals classified as
         biology/biochemistry or chemical/chemical engineering (as opposed to "other").
         Text concepts 2. Share of prior text mentions by assignees, but not specialized ag
         assignees, that are classified as minority ag (as opposed to non-agricultural).

In contrast to figure 9, most proxies now clear the 50% line. Where we can reasonably rank
knowledge domains as being closer or farther from agriculture, non-agricultural knowledge


                                                      38
flows in animal health, biocides, fertilizer, and plants are more likely to come from knowledge
domains close to agriculture than from afar. For machinery and research tools, text concepts tend
to be mentioned more often in non-agricultural assignees than minority ag ones. Machinery is
also more likely to cite other journals than biology or chemistry ones, which is not surprising.
Note, however, that the machinery sector cites by far the fewest journal publications.

Together, figure 8 and 9 suggest, while non-agricultural knowledge sources are very important,
some non-agricultural knowledge domains are clearly more relevant than others. Whereas we
view this conclusion as more tentative than our first one, it has relevance for science policy in
agriculture.

    4. Robustness Checks

In this section we conduct a wide array of robustness checks. To prevent the main paper from
becoming too long, we report tables in the appendix, and merely summarize important details in
the text.

    4.1. Patent Citations

We investigate three potential sources of bias in our patent citation figures. First, that our results
are driven by assignee's self-citation of their own patents. Second, that our results are robust to
the exclusion of examiner-added citations. And third, that our results are robust when we restrict
attention only to the most valuable patents (those receiving a high number of citations
themselves).

There is a debate about the extent to which patent citations may be biased by a tendency for
firms to cite their own work, or by the additional citations added by patent examiners (Lampe
2010, Moser, Ohmsteadt, and Rhode 2018). To assess whether our results are driven by self-
citation, we first remove all citations from assignees to their own patents. Because so many
individual inventors have a single patent, and because it is harder to accurately disambiguate
inventor names, we restrict attention to assignee self-citation. The results are presented in Tables
A1 and A2.

Excluding self-citations does not materially change the distribution of patent citations across
different agricultural sectors, with one exception. In figure 3, the share of citations from plant


                                                  39
patents to plant patents is 69%, but when we exclude self-citations, this falls to 56%. Similarly, in
table 6, the share of citations to specialized ag firms is 81%, but when we exclude self-citations
this falls to 69%. Moser, Ohmsteadt, and Rhode (2018), studying a sample of hybrid corn patents
granted between 1985 and 2002 find that self-citations frequently reflect genuine cumulative
innovation, as firms build on the prior genetic stock of their earlier patented plant cultivars.
Therefore, it is not at all clear that the smaller share of 56% should be preferred to our baseline
estimate of 69%.

Next, we remove all examiner-added citations. This is only possible for the period 2002 onward,
when patents begin to identify who added a citation. There is some debate about whether
examiner-added citations are good proxies for knowledge flows. If applicants seek to avoid
citing relevant prior art for strategic reasons, examiner-added citations can correct this bias
(Lampe 2010). Moreover, Chen (2017) finds examiner-added citations are more textually similar
to the patent than other patents. That said, there is a large literature that highlights potential
issues with examiner-added citations: for example, Moser, Ohmsteadt, and Rhode (2018) find
examiners of hybrid corn patents are biased towards adding from their set of preferred patents,
and that patents will tend to be added more for physical similarity of plants rather than genetic
heritage. Jaffe and Rassenfosse (2018) summarize a number of other studies that describe
potential distortions examiner-added citations may introduce. Tables A3 and A4 present the
distribution of patent citations for patents granted after 2002, excluding examiner-added
citations.

Removing examiner-added citations leaves our results largely unchanged, with one exception. In
the machinery subsector, in figure 3 we found 48% of patents citations originated in the
machinery subsector and 52% originated outside of agriculture. In Table A3, we instead find 56%
of citations originate in the machinery subsector and 44% originate outside of agriculture. It turns
out, however, that this has little to do with examiners and is instead driven by restricting patents
to those granted after 2002. If we restrict attention to patents granted after 2002 (Table A5), 56%
of patent citations in the machinery subsector originate in the same sector. Indeed, across all
subsectors, there is a slight increase in patents originating from within the same subsector when
we restrict attention to more recent patents.




                                                   40
Our final robustness check relates to the heterogenous value of patents. Many studies (see
Nagaoka, Motohashi, and Goto 2010 for an overview) have shown that the value of patents is
highly skewed. A small number of patents account for a disproportionately large share of value.
Our results may be misleading if the minority of valuable patents differ in the sources of their
knowledge, compared to patents as a whole. To check this, we identify the set of most valuable
patents in agriculture, defined as those receiving 8 or more citations9 in the 5 years following the
date they are granted (this necessarily means we do not include patents from the last five years of
our sample). Patents receiving 8 or more citations are in the top 5% for all agricultural patents.
Tables A6 and A7 repeat our patent citation analysis for this subset of elite patents.

Restricting our attention to only the citations made by "elite" patents, we find a significantly
higher share of citations originate from within the same subsector for the fertilizer, machinery,
and research subsectors. Indeed, for machinery, the effect is large enough to tip the share of
citations originating in the machinery subsector above 50%, from 48% in figure 3 to 64%, in
table A5. In no other sector, however, does the share of citations from a given sector cross the
50% threshold, and so the conclusions drawn from our figures 8 and 9 remain valid. Turning to
the share of citations received by different assignee types, restricting attention to only the most
highly cited patents has the largest impact for the plant subsector, where the share of citations to
specialized ag firms drops from 81% to 67%, and the share of citations to public sector patents
rises from 13% to 25%.

    4.2. Text Concepts

We check the robustness of our text concept analysis to three alternative specifications. First, we
impose a stricter criteria to our manual cleaning of concepts in agriculture. Second, we use an
alternative weighting scheme that controls for the possibility that some of our concepts are
duplicates that refer to the same underlying idea. Third, we use an alternative weighting scheme
that puts more weight on clusters of concepts that are used in more future patents.

Tables A8 and A9 impose stricter criteria to our manual cleaning of text-novel concepts in
agriculture. To manually clean concepts, three coauthors independently apply four exclusion



9
 Citations received is a common proxy for the value of patents. See Nagaoka, Motohashi, and Goto
(2010).
                                                  41
rules (see section 1.2) to all concepts in our data. There is some subjectivity in these rules, for
example, in judging what is an "uninformative" word and what "connective phrases" are. In the
main specification, we retain a concept when at least two of the three judges retain it. In our
robustness check, we require all three inspectors to agree for a concept to be retained. Depending
on the subsector, this leads to us excluding an additional 10-20% of the original 200 concepts (the
set of included and excluded concepts is available in tables A14-A19 of the appendix). Our core
results, however, are not substantively changed by this stricter exclusion policy. No entries in
tables 11 and 12 are changed.

Tables A10 and A11 summarize our text data in a different way. One possible concern with our
text analysis approach is that we may be "double-counting" some concepts. This could occur, for
example, if two concepts both refer to the same underlying idea. For example, suppose
pyrimethamine is exclusively used to treat variants of the disease myeloencephalitis. Whenever
the concept pyrimethamine appears in a patent, so too does the phrase myeloencephalitis, and
vice versa, although perhaps not in the same sentence (or paragraph). Section 2.3 treats these two
phrases as distinct concepts. There, we compute the share of prior mentions for each of these
concepts, and then average over all these shares. But it could be argued the two concepts
"pyrimethamine" and "myeloencephalitis" only really refer to one underlying idea (treating the
disease with the antibiotic), since they are always and everywhere used together. If this is correct,
then we are giving too much weight to the shares of prior patents mentioning these concepts by
counting each concept separately.

Here, we consider an alternative approach that creates "families" of related concepts. For each
concept, we look for its first appearance in a given agricultural subsector, which we call an
originating patent. All concepts in the same originating patent constitute a family of related
concepts.

For example, if pyrimethamine and myeloencephalitis are always used together, then they will
both appear for the first time in animal health in the same patent and therefore will belong to the
same family. For each of these families, we find the set of unique patents applied for before the
originating patent with any concepts in the family. We compute the share of these patent
originating in different knowledge domains. Denote the share of patents with concepts from
family f that originate in knowledge domain i by si ( f ) .

                                                  42
We then average these shares over all families:

                                                     n
                                                1
                                          pi      s (f)
                                                n f 1 i
                                                                                                  (2)


This methodology uses originating patents to define families of related concepts, and give each
family the same weight, ensuring we do not double-count concepts referring to the same concept.
The trade-off with this approach is that a concept with no prior mentions may belong to a family
of concepts that do have prior mentions. This methodology obscures the fact, because it treats
families of concepts as units of observation.

This alternative methodology does have some significant impacts on our results, but none large
enough to alter the conclusions in figures 8 and 9. Indeed, our major conclusion that ideas from
outside of agriculture are important is actually strengthened. Under this alternative weighting
scheme, the share of concepts originating in patents outside agriculture rises in every subsector,
as does the share of concepts originating in the patents of non-agricultural assignees.

Lastly, we weight families of concepts by the number of agricultural patents that end up using
any concepts in the family. Let w( f ) denote the number of patents in a subsector that use any

concept in family f . Our final weighting scheme is:


                                            f 1 w( f )si ( f )
                                                n

                                       pi                                                         (3)
                                            f 1 w( f )
                                              n




Intuitively, this puts more weight on families of concepts that subsequently end up being used
more heavily in the agricultural subsector. The results, presented in Tables A12 and A13 do not
differ materially from Tables A10 and A11, although they again tend to increase the weight put on
families of concepts originating outside of agriculture.

   5. Conclusions
Agricultural total factor productivity grew enormously over the past century. In the years to
come, continued increases in agricultural productivity will be essential for meeting the challenge
of feeding a rising world population amid the challenges of climate change. There is widespread
recognition that past R&D investments were crucial to develop the new and improved

                                                    43
agricultural technologies that have mediated these celebrated productivity gains. This paper
presents new evidence on the structure of knowledge underpinning agricultural R&D, with an
emphasis on the role of knowledge spillovers across scientific and technological domains.

Using agricultural patents in animal health, biocides, fertilizer, machinery, plants, and research
tools as measures of agricultural research outputs, we track knowledge flows into agriculture in
five different ways. We start with citations to patents in agricultural subsectors, and across
different types of inventive organizations and individuals. To capture knowledge flows from
academia, we also track citations to journal articles across different journal categories. Finally,
we complement these citation-based approaches with text analysis, where we identify text-
concepts that are new (in text) and important in agriculture in the second half of our observation
period. We then track the appearance of these text-concepts in earlier patents.

Our results indicate a major role for ideas that originate outside of agriculture, perhaps a role as
important as R&D conducted within agriculture. In the animal health, fertilizer, and machinery
subsectors across every measure we find the majority of knowledge flows originate in non-
agricultural knowledge domains. In the remaining three subsectors, we find mixed evidence:
some of our indicators suggest the majority of knowledge originates outside agriculture, and
some from within. Amid these sets, the strongest case for knowledge originating primarily from
within agriculture is the plant subsector, which primarily cites other agricultural patents and
agricultural science journals. But even this subsector has the majority of its text concepts
appearing outside of agriculture prior to their appearance in plant patents.

We also present some evidence that these "outside agriculture" knowledge domains remain
predictably close to agriculture. Whereas agricultural science journals do not account for the
majority of journal citations in most subsectors, together with biology and chemistry journals
they do. Moreover, our other measures of knowledge flows indicate organizations with at least
some agricultural patents do R&D more relevant to agriculture than organizations with no
agricultural patents.

The novelty of this paper is to use information contained in patents, through patent citations and
text analysis, to study agricultural knowledge flows, and this work suggests a number of possible
avenues for future research. First, our text-concept approach can be easily extended to the corpus
outside of patents. In particular, academic journals are a promising avenue to explore. For

                                                 44
example, we find the biocide sector originates the majority of its text concepts, and that these
concepts tend to be chemical names. At the same time, the sector heavily cites chemistry journals
and it would be interesting to see if these chemical names appear first in chemistry journals.
More generally, this approach can be extended to books, company filings, and so on. Second, the
combination of text-novel concepts and citations represent a clear opportunity to track the
diffusion of specific ideas through technology space. Are citations a channel through which text-
concepts flow, and if so, can we track the movement of an idea originating in one technology
field through a chain of linked citations to an eventual application in a distant technology field?
This would allow one to examine the factors that most facilitate the transfer of ideas. Lastly, the
analysis we have presented can be brought to bear on work linking agricultural R&D to
agricultural productivity measures. Patents may serve as new proxies for knowledge capital,
proxies with more detailed information about the relevant R&D spending, both in agriculture and
beyond.

Albeit preliminary, we may attempt to draw some normative implications of the results presented
in this paper. The early work of Schultz (1956) and Griliches (1958) underscored agriculture's
leading position in identifying the role of technical progress on productivity. A large and varied
literature has since established the fundamental role that investments in science and
technological R&D have on innovation and economic growth. The many market failures that
beset the innovation process suggest a critical role for public policies to fund and support the
R&D enterprise. Evidence of past remarkable successes have fostered the belief that scientific
research is underfunded, and that a renewed investment impetus is needed to sustain growth. The
argument is particularly pressing for U.S. agriculture, where public R&D investments have
substantially declined, in real terms, over the last decade.10 Meritorious calls for increased public
agricultural R&D inevitably meet the reality of declining availability of public funds. In this age
of scarcity, science policy needs to be mindful of the complexity and connectedness of the
research enterprise. As highlighted in the model of Akcigit, Hanley, and Serrano-Velarde (2016),
the spillover effects from basic research are critical. In our context, the knowledge spillovers we
have identified suggest that agricultural science policy might best support agricultural
productivity growth if it retains a holistic perspective. Attention to the broader research agenda,


10
     https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/agricultural-research-funding-in-the-public-and-private-sectors/
                                                      45
and in particular to areas that, while not being strictly agriculture oriented have traditionally been
connected with agricultural innovation, is of paramount importance. Priorities that rely on
narrowly defined measures of past returns to R&D may not provide the most productive use of
scarce public R&D funds.




                                                 46
References
Akcigit, U., Hanley, D. and Serrano-Velarde, N. "Back to Basics: Basic Research Spillovers,
     Innovation Policy and Growth." Working Paper, December 10 2016.
Alston, J.M., 2002. "Spillovers." Australian Journal of Agricultural and Resource
     Economics, 46(3), pp. 315-346.
Arrow KJ. 1962. "Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Inventions." In: The
     Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors, ed. Nelson RR.
     Princeton, JN: Princeton University Press.
Balsmeier, B., Assaf, M., Chesebro, T., Fierro, G., Johnson, K., Johnson, S., Li, G.C., Lück, S.,
     O'Reagan, D., Yeh, B. and Zang, G., 2018. "Machine learning and natural language
     processing on the patent corpus: Data, tools, and new measures." Journal of Economics &
     Management Strategy, 27(3), pp. 535-553.
Bloom, Nicholas, Mark Schankerman, and John Van Reenen. 2013. Identifying Technology
    Spillovers and Product Market Rivalry. Econometrica 81(4): 1347-1393.
Chen, Lixin. 2017. "Do patent citations indicate knowledge linkage? The evidence from text
     similarities between patents and their citations." Journal of Informetrics 11: 63-79.
Clancy, M.S., and G. Moschini. 2017. Intellectual Property Rights and the Ascent of Proprietary
     Innovation in Agriculture. Annual Review of Resource Economics 9:53-74.
Clancy, M., and Sneeringer, S., Forthcoming. "How Much Does it Cost Induce R&D in Animal
     Health?" Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy.
Evenson, R.E. 1989. "Spillover Benefits of Agricultural Research: Evidence from U.S.
     Experience." American Journal of Agricultural Economics 71(2): 447-452.

Fuglie, K.O. and Heisey, P.W., 2007. Economic returns to public agricultural research.
     Economic Brief No. 10, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economics Research Service.

Gardner, BL. 2002. American agriculture in the twentieth century: How it flourished and what it
     cost. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Greenstone, M., Horbeck., Moretti, E., 2010. "Identifying Agglomeration Spillovers: Evidence
     from Winners and Losers of Large Plant Openings." Journal of Political Economy 118(3):
     536-598.
Griliches, Z., 1957. "Hybrid corn: An exploration in the economics of technological change."
      Econometrica, 25(4), 501-522.
Griliches, Z. 1992. "The Search for R&D Spillovers." Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 94
      (Supplement), 29-47.




                                                47
Hall, B.H., J. Mairesse, and P. Mohnen. 2010. "Measuring the Returns to R&D." Chapter 24 in
      B.H. Hall and N. Rosenberg (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Volume 2.
      Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 1033-1082.
Huffman, W.E., and R.E. Evenson. 2006. Science for Agriculture: A Long-Term Perspective
    (2nd edition). Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing.
Jaffe, Adam B., Manuel Trajtenberg, and Michael S. Fogarty. 2000. "The Meaning of Patent
      Citations: Report on the NBER/Case-Western Reserve Survey of Patentees." NBER
      Working Paper 7631.
Jaffe, A. B., and de Rassenfosse, G., 2017. "Patent Citation Data in Social Science Research:
      Overview and Best Practices." Journal of the Association for Information Science and
      Technology 68(6): 1460-1374.
Khanna, J., Huffman, W.E. and Sandler, T., 1994. Agricultural research expenditures in the
    United States: a public goods perspective. Review of Economics and Statistics, pp.267-277.
Lampe, Ryan. 2012. "Strategic Citation." Review of Economic Studies 94(1): 320-333.
Latimer, R., and D. Paarlberg. 1965. "Geographic Distribution of Research Costs and Benefits."
     Journal of Farm Economics 47(2): 234-241.
Mansfield, E., J. Rapoport, A. Romeo, S. Wagner, and G. Beardsley. 1977. "Social and Private
    Rates of Return from Industrial Innovations." Quarterly Journal of Economics 91(2): 221-
    240.
Marx, M. and Fuegi, A., 2019. Reliance on Science in Patenting. Working paper, Boston
    University, 20 February 2019. Available at SSRN.
Moser, Petra, Joerg Ohmstedt, Paul W. Rhode. 2018. "Patent Citations - An Analysis of Quality
    Differences and Citing Practices in Hybrid Corn." Management Science 64(4): 1926-1940.
Nagaoka, S., K. Motohashi, and A. Goto. 2010. Patent Statistics as an Innovation Indicator. In the
    Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, eds., B.H. Hall and N. Rosenberg. North
    Holland Publishing.
Packalen, M. and Bhattacharya, J., 2015. "New ideas in invention." NBER Working Paper No.
     w20922. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Roach, Michael, Wesley M. Cohen. 2013. "Lens or Prism? Patent Citations as a Measure of
    Knowledge Flows from Public Research." Management Science 59(2): 504-525.
Schultz, T.W., 1956. "Reflections on agricultural production, output and supply." Journal of
     Farm Economics, 38(3), pp.748-762.
United States Patent and Trademark Office, Patent Technology Monitoring Team. 2019. U.S.
     Colleges and Universities ­ Utility Patent Grants, Calendar Years 1969-2012.
     <https://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/ac/ido/oeip/taf/univ/org_gr/all_univ_ag.htm>.


                                                48
Wang, C., Y. Xia, and S. Buccola. 2009. "Public Investment and Industry Incentives in Life-
    Science Research." American Journal of Agricultural Economics 91(2): 374-388.




                                              49
Appendix Tables

Table A1. Share of Patent Citations to Agricultural Subsectors, excluding assignee self-
citations

                                            Own             Other             Not
                                           Sector      Agriculture     Agriculture
                  Animal Health             5.8%             2.4%           91.8%
                  Biocides                 23.1%             3.6%           73.3%
                  Fertilizer               26.3%             5.0%           68.7%
                  Machinery                46.3%             0.1%           53.6%
                  Plants                   56.1%            41.8%            2.1%
                  Research tools           53.3%             3.5%           43.2%
Note: The rows indicate the citing agricultural subsector and columns the subsector to which
cited patents belong. Only cited patents granted between 1976 and 2016 are included. Each
citation is counted once, even if multiple citations point to the same patent. Own sector gives the
share of these citations to patents in the same subsector. Other agriculture gives the share of these
citations to any other agricultural subsector. Not agriculture gives the share of citations to patents
not contained in any of our agricultural subsectors. We exclude citations made by assignees to
their own patents.




                                                 50
Table A2. Share of Patent Citations to Assignee Types, excluding self-citations

                                Ag             Ag         Non       Public
                        Specialized       Minority         Ag       Sector   Individuals
         Animal Health        1.8%          63.1%       22.2%        4.8%          7.5%
         Biocides             8.5%          62.5%       14.8%        4.6%          8.8%
         Fertilizer          17.0%          32.0%       21.7%        4.4%         24.6%
         Machinery           32.0%          27.7%        9.5%         1.1%        29.6%
         Plants             69.2%            8.5%        0.5%       20.4%          1.0%
         Research tools      26.1%          37.9%       14.1%       14.0%          6.4%
Note: The rows indicate the citing agricultural subsector and columns the assignee and inventor
type to which the cited patents belong. Specialized ag assignees have more than 50% of their
patents belonging to an agricultural subsector in the last 5 years. Minority ag assignees have
more than zero patents belonging to an agricultural subsector in the last 5 years, but less than
50%. Non-ag assignees have no patents belonging to agricultural subsectors. Public sector
assignees correspond to government and non-profit organizations. Individuals refers to patents
owned by individual inventors. Rows do not add up to 100% - the remainder of patent citations
(0.1-1.4%) are made to unclassified assignees (see section 1.3.1). We exclude citations made by
assignees to their own patents.




                                               51
Table A3. Share of Patent Citations to Agricultural Subsectors (2002 and later), excluding
examiner-added citations

                                           Own              Other            Not
                                          Sector       Agriculture    Agriculture
                  Animal Health            6.9%              2.4%          90.7%
                  Biocides                24.4%              4.7%          70.8%
                  Fertilizer              29.3%              6.6%          64.1%
                  Machinery               56.4%              0.2%          43.5%
                  Plants                  67.0%             31.8%           1.2%
                  Research tools          55.9%              3.3%          40.9%
Note: The rows indicate the citing agricultural subsector and columns the subsector to which
cited patents belong. Only cited patents granted between 1976 and 2016 are included and only
citing patents granted after 2002 are presented. Each citation is counted once, even if multiple
citations point to the same patent. Own sector gives the share of these citations to patents in the
same subsector. Other agriculture gives the share of these citations to any other agricultural
subsector. Not agriculture gives the share of citations to patents not contained in any of our
agricultural subsectors. We exclude citations made by patent examiners.




                                                 52
Table A4. Share of Patent Citations to Assignee Types (2002 and later), excluding examiner-
added citations

                                Ag             Ag         Non       Public
                        Specialized       Minority         Ag       Sector   Individuals
         Animal Health        1.2%         64.0%        25.0%        4.7%          4.9%
         Biocides             9.3%         62.6%        14.9%        4.4%          7.7%
         Fertilizer          18.0%          31.3%       23.1%        5.4%         22.0%
         Machinery           35.7%          28.5%        9.5%        1.3%         25.0%
         Plants             79.4%            5.5%        0.3%       14.0%          0.6%
         Research tools      28.0%          38.7%       13.5%       13.2%          5.2%
Note: The rows indicate the citing agricultural subsector and columns the assignee and inventor
type to which the cited patents belong. Only cited patents granted between 1976 and 2016 are
included, and only citing patents granted after 2002. Specialized ag assignees have more than
50% of their patents belonging to an agricultural subsector in the last 5 years. Minority ag
assignees have more than zero patents belonging to an agricultural subsector in the last 5 years,
but less than 50%. Non-ag assignees have no patents belonging to agricultural subsectors. Public
sector assignees correspond to government and non-profit organizations. Individuals refers to
patents owned by individual inventors. Rows do not add up to 100% - the remainder of patent
citations (0.1-1.4%) are made to unclassified assignees (see section 1.3.1). We exclude citations
made by patent examiners.




                                               53
Table A5. Share of Patent Citations to Agricultural Subsectors (2002 and later)

                                           Own               Other           Not
                                          Sector       Agriculture    Agriculture
                  Animal Health            8.7%              2.5%          88.8%
                  Biocides                26.0%              4.5%          69.5%
                  Fertilizer              31.0%              6.2%          62.8%
                  Machinery               55.7%              0.1%          44.1%
                  Plants                  69.9%             28.8%           1.2%
                  Research tools          57.0%              3.5%          39.5%
Note: The rows indicate the citing agricultural subsector and columns the subsector to which
cited patents belong. Only cited patents granted between 1976 and 2016 are included and only
citing patents granted after 2002 are presented. Each citation is counted once, even if multiple
citations point to the same patent. Own sector gives the share of these citations to patents in the
same subsector. Other agriculture gives the share of these citations to any other agricultural
subsector. Not agriculture gives the share of citations to patents not contained in any of our
agricultural subsectors.




                                                 54
Table A6. Share of Patent Citations from Highly Cited Patents to Agricultural Subsectors

                                             Own              Other           Not
                                           Sector        Agriculture   Agriculture
                  Animal Health             0.0%               0.0%        100.0%
                  Biocides                 25.8%               7.0%         67.2%
                  Fertilizer                41.1%              1.9%         57.0%
                  Machinery                63.7%               0.1%         36.2%
                  Plants                   61.3%              37.2%          1.5%
                  Research tools           68.1%               2.2%         29.7%
Note: The rows indicate the citing agricultural subsector and columns the subsector to which
cited patents belong. Only cited patents granted between 1976 and 2016 are included and only
citing patents that receive 8 or more citations in the five years after their grant dates. Each
citation is counted once, even if multiple citations point to the same patent. Own sector gives the
share of these citations to patents in the same subsector. Other agriculture gives the share of these
citations to any other agricultural subsector. Not agriculture gives the share of citations to patents
not contained in any of our agricultural subsectors.




                                                    55
Table A7. Share of Patent Citations from Highly Cited Patents to Assignee Types

                                Ag             Ag          Non      Public
                        Specialized       Minority          Ag      Sector    Individuals
         Animal Health        0.0%         88.9%         11.1%       0.0%           0.0%
         Biocides            10.3%          72.7%         9.1%       1.9%           5.1%
         Fertilizer          23.9%          30.2%       24.3%        2.4%          19.1%
         Machinery           42.1%          27.4%         5.3%        1.1%         24.0%
         Plants              67.5%           6.8%        0.2%       24.9%           0.5%
         Research tools      30.7%          47.8%        7.8%        8.5%           4.0%
Note: The rows indicate the citing agricultural subsector and columns the assignee and inventor
type to which the cited patents belong. Only cited patents granted between 1976 and 2016 are
included, and only citing patents receiving 8 or more citations within the first five years after
being granted. Specialized ag assignees have more than 50% of their patents belonging to an
agricultural subsector in the last 5 years. Minority ag assignees have more than zero patents
belonging to an agricultural subsector in the last 5 years, but less than 50%. Non-ag assignees
have no patents belonging to agricultural subsectors. Public sector assignees correspond to
government and non-profit organizations. Individuals refers to patents owned by individual
inventors. Rows do not add up to 100% - the remainder of patent citations (up to 1.1%) are made
to unclassified assignees (see section 1.3.1).




                                                56
Table A8. Share of Antecedent Text-novel Concept Mentions to Agricultural Subsectors,
Strict Inclusion Criteria


                                        No Prior            Other             Not
                                        Mention       Agriculture      Agriculture
                  Animal Health            4.9%             2.0%            93.1%
                  Biocide                65.7%              4.3%            30.0%
                  Fertilizer             20.2%              4.2%            75.6%
                  Machine                 32.9%             0.0%            67.1%
                  Plant                   17.0%            28.8%            54.2%
                  Research tools          23.8%             5.4%            70.8%
Note: An entry gives the probability a randomly selected patent mentioning a randomly
mentioned text-novel concept originates in a given sector. Antecedent mentions are all those
made by patents applied for prior to the first patent in the given subsector that mentions the
concept. This table includes a concept only if it is included by all three co-author inspectors.




                                                 57
Table A9. Share of Antecedent Text-novel Concept Mentions to Assignee-Type, Strict
Inclusion Criterion

                                Ag           Ag       Non-                              No
                        Specialized    Minority         Ag    Public Individuals      Prior
      Animal Health           1.2%      46.0%        29.9%     7.4%         9.1%      4.9%
      Biocide                 3.7%       25.2%        3.7%     0.6%         0.1%     65.7%
      Fertilizer              2.8%       30.4%       29.4%     4.9%        11.3%     20.2%
      Machine                 1.3%       16.8%       35.4%     0.9%       12.0%      32.9%
      Plant                  12.9%        31.1%      21.4%    10.7%         5.3%     17.0%
      Research tools          1.9%       25.9%       27.4%    12.7%         6.8%     23.8%
Note: An entry gives the probability a randomly selected patent mentioning a randomly selected
text-novel concept originates with a given assignee type. Antecedent mentions are all those made
by patents applied for prior to the first patent in the given subsector that mentions the concept.
Specialized ag assignees have more than 50% of their patents belonging to an agricultural
subsector in the last 5 years. Minority ag assignees have more than zero patents belonging to an
agricultural subsector in the last 5 years, but less than 50%. Non-ag assignees have no patents
belonging to agricultural subsectors. Public sector assignees correspond to government and non-
profit organizations. Individuals refers to patents owned by individual inventors. No prior
indicates the concept has no prior mentions. Rows do not add up to 100% - the remainder of
patent mentions (up to 0.8%) are made to unclassified assignees (see section 1.3.1). This table
includes a concept only if it is included by all three co-author inspectors.




                                                58
Table A10. Share of Antecedent Text-novel Concept Mentions to Agricultural Subsectors,
Weighted by Concept Family


                                      No Prior           Other            Not
                                      Mention      Agriculture     Agriculture
                 Animal Health           2.5%            3.7%           93.8%
                 Biocide               56.8%             6.5%           36.7%
                 Fertilizer              4.2%            7.7%           88.1%
                 Machine                16.7%            0.1%           83.3%
                 Plant                   9.4%           27.4%           63.2%
                 Research tools         17.6%            4.5%           77.9%
Note: An entry gives the probability a randomly selected patent mentioning a text-novel concept
from a randomly selected family of concepts originates in a given sector. Antecedent mentions
are all those made by patents applied for prior to the first patent in the given subsector that
mentions the concept.




                                              59
Table A11. Share of Antecedent Text-novel Concept Mentions to Assignee-Type, Weighted
by Concept Family

                                 Ag          Ag       Non-                                No
                         Specialized    Minority        Ag     Public Individuals       Prior
      Animal Health            0.9%       44.3%      34.2%       5.3%      10.3%        2.5%
      Biocide                  5.3%      29.6%        6.2%        1.1%      0.5%       56.8%
      Fertilizer               1.8%       38.4%      36.3%       5.3%      12.8%        4.2%
      Machine                  3.3%       17.6%      46.5%       1.2%      14.2%       16.7%
      Plant                    9.6%       33.2%      28.5%       9.4%       7.5%        9.4%
      Research tools           3.2%       24.0%      31.4%      13.1%       8.4%       17.6%
Note: An entry gives the probability a randomly selected patent mentioning a text-novel concept
from a randomly selected concept family originates with a given assignee type. Antecedent
mentions are all those made by patents applied for prior to the first patent in the given subsector
that mentions the concept. Specialized ag assignees have more than 50% of their patents
belonging to an agricultural subsector in the last 5 years. Minority ag assignees have more than
zero patents belonging to an agricultural subsector in the last 5 years, but less than 50%. Non-ag
assignees have no patents belonging to agricultural subsectors. Public sector assignees
correspond to government and non-profit organizations. Individuals refers to patents owned by
individual inventors. No prior indicates the concept has no prior mentions. Rows do not add up
to 100% - the remainder of patent mentions (up to 1.6%) are made to unclassified assignees (see
section 1.3.1).




                                                60
Table A12. Share of Antecedent Text-novel Concept Mentions to Agricultural Subsectors,
Weighted by Concept Family and Subsequent Patents


                                      No Prior           Other            Not
                                      Mention       Agriculture    Agriculture
                 Animal Health           1.6%             3.1%          95.3%
                 Biocide                52.3%             8.1%          39.6%
                 Fertilizer              3.8%             7.4%          88.9%
                 Machine                14.5%             0.0%          85.5%
                 Plant                   4.9%            21.4%          73.7%
                 Research tools         14.4%             4.2%          81.4%
Note: An entry gives the probability a randomly selected patent mentioning a text-novel concept
from a randomly selected family of concepts originates in a given sector, where the probability
of selecting a concept family is weighted by the number of ag subsector patents using concepts
belonging to the family. Antecedent mentions are all those made by patents applied for prior to
the first patent in the given subsector that mentions the concept.




                                               61
Table A13. Share of Antecedent Text-novel Concept Mentions to Assignee-Type, Weighted
by Concept Family and Subsequent Patents

                                 Ag          Ag       Non-                                No
                         Specialized    Minority        Ag     Public Individuals       Prior
      Animal Health            0.8%       44.8%      34.5%      5.1%       10.8%        1.6%
      Biocide                  5.9%       32.4%       6.8%       1.1%       0.6%       52.3%
      Fertilizer               1.8%       38.9%      36.6%      5.0%       12.2%        3.8%
      Machine                  4.1%       17.2%      48.2%      1.3%       14.0%       14.5%
      Plant                    7.8%       35.4%      32.4%      9.0%        8.6%        4.9%
      Research tools           3.1%       22.6%      33.0%     15.2%        8.4%       14.4%
Note: An entry gives the probability a randomly selected patent mentioning a text-novel concept
from a randomly selected concept family originates with a given assignee type, where the
probability of selecting a concept family is weighted by the number of ag subsector patents using
concepts belonging to the family. Antecedent mentions are all those made by patents applied for
prior to the first patent in the given subsector that mentions the concept. Specialized ag assignees
have more than 50% of their patents belonging to an agricultural subsector in the last 5 years.
Minority ag assignees have more than zero patents belonging to an agricultural subsector in the
last 5 years, but less than 50%. Non-ag assignees have no patents belonging to agricultural
subsectors. Public sector assignees correspond to government and non-profit organizations.
Individuals refers to patents owned by individual inventors. No prior indicates the concept has no
prior mentions. Rows do not add up to 100% - the remainder of patent mentions (up to 1.6%) are
made to unclassified assignees (see section 1.3.1).




                                                62
Table A14. Top 117 Text-novel Animal Health Concepts
 UNANIMOUS (included in robustness check)
 protozoal                          sarcocystis                      physiologically active
 protozoal myeloencephalitis        cyclooxygenase-2                 volatile liquid
 equine protozoal myeloencephalitis milbemycin oxime                 bovine respiratory
 myeloencephalitis                  releasing hormone                bovine respiratory disease
 equine protozoal                   gonadotropin releasing hormone   respiratory disease
 trimethoprim                       gonadotropin                     swine respiratory
 microbial                          oral mucosa                      pharmacologically active
                                                                     compound
 microbial infection             equimolar                           pharmacologically active
 ear                             propofol                            diabetes
 preservative                    prodrug                             weaning
 terbinafine                     cyclooxygenase                      without heat
 penetration enhancer            bacterial protozoa                  heat detection
 dermal penetration              bacterial protozoa infections       without heat detection
 dermal                          protozoa infections                 sow
 dermal penetration enhancer     kinases                             c1-c6alkyl
 kinase                          polymorph                           isoxazoline-substituted
 janus kinase                    transmucosal                        insemination
 janus                           felis                               buprenorphine
 bird                            ctenocephalides felis               spinosad
 injection site                  ctenocephalides                     linoleic
 single injection                hydrate                             linoleic acid
 hydrophilic surfactant          octyl                               animal selected
 stearoyl groups                 octyl salicylate                    catalytic
 independently stearoyl groups   succinic                            alkyl substituted
 stearoyl                        succinic acid                       tobramycin
 palmitoyl groups                xanthan gum                         hydroxypropylcellulose
 palmitoyl                       xanthan                             folic acid
 asthma                          equines                             folic
 fentanyl                        furoate                             ethanesulfonic
 hydroxypropylmethylcellulose    mometasone furoate                  ethanesulfonic acid
 hydroxypropylmethylcellulose    mometasone                          methanesulfonic acid
 dissolved
 pyrimethamine                   gnrh                                methanesulfonic
 epm                             buccal                              hydroxypropyl cellulose
 prophylactic                    cox-2                               phenol
 CONSENSUS (excluded in robustness check)
 mediated                        containing                          thickener
                                 hydroxypropylmethylcellulose
 independently stearoyl          gonadotropin releasing              breeding
 pharmaceutically active agent   synchronizing                       daily dosage
 veterinary applications         transmucosal administration         sweetener
 controlled-                     gum                                 sweeteners




                                                   63
Table A15. Top 177 Text-Novel Biocide Concepts (1/2)
 UNANIMOUS (included in robustness check)
 thiamethoxam             boscalid                          spirodiclofen
 azoxystrobin             ethiprole                         asulam
 clothianidin             methoxyfenozide                   noviflumuron
 trifloxystrobin          cinosulfuron                      thifluzamide
 spinosad                 penoxsulam                        strobilurin
 acetamiprid              flonicamid                        halofenozide
 thiacloprid              triflumuron                       oxasulfuron
 prothioconazole          neonicotinoid                     quinoxyfen
 pyraclostrobin           benoxacor                         diofenolan
 emamectin                isoxaflutole                      ethaboxam
 emamectin benzoate       tebufenpyrad                      trifloxysulfuron
 fluquinconazole          sulfosulfuron                     gamma-cyhalothrin
 dinotefuran              novel active compound             cyazofamid
 lufenuron                metaflumizone                     dioxygenase
 imazamox                 dimoxystrobin                     fenpyroximate
 controlling animal pests isoxadifen-ethyl                  milbemectin
 nitenpyram               spiromesifen                      cloquintocet
 kresoxim-methyl          metosulam                         zeta-cypermethrin
 mesotrione               pyridaben                         bromobutide
 ipconazole               teflubenzuron                     halosulfuron-methyl
 fluoxastrobin            florasulam                        thifensulfuron-methyl
 sulfentrazone            chlorfluazuron                    c1-c4-alkoxy
 hexaflumuron             cyclosulfamuron                   mefenoxam
 chlorfenapyr             imazapic                          chlorantraniliprole
 cloquintocet-mexyl       protoporphyrinogen                pyroquilon
 flumioxazin              protoporphyrinogen oxidase        fluxofenim
 tebufenozide             fenclorim                         fenhexamid
 indoxacarb               orysastrobin                      tritosulfuron
 famoxadone               penthiopyrad                      oxabetrinil
 c1-c4-alkyl              spirotetramat                     mepronil
 mefenpyr-diethyl         flutolanil                        tricyclazole
 picoxystrobin            isoxaben                          thenylchlor
 novaluron                carfentrazone-ethyl               acibenzolar-s-methyl
 pymetrozine              propaquizafop                     aminopyralid
 flumetsulam              foramsulfuron                     flubendiamide
 spinetoram               simeconazole                      flufenacet
 boxh                     pyridalyl                         etoxazole
 ethoxysulfuron           fenamidone                        metominostrobin
 diafenthiuron            pyrifenox                         isoprothiolane
 spiroxamine              tau-fluvalinate                   iodosulfuron




                                                       64
Table A15: Top 177 Text-Novel Biocide Concepts (2/2)
 triazamate                      iprovalicarb       moxidectin
 daimuron                        fosamine           fosthiazate
 iminoctadine                    oxadiargyl         diflufenzopyr
 fenoxaprop-p                    furametpyr         c1-c4-haloalkyl
 carfentrazone                   doramectin         macrocyclic
 phytopathogenic harmful fungi   flufenerim         cyometrinil
 phytopathogenic harmful         probenazole        nithiazine
 fluopyram                       trinexapac-ethyl   bixafen
 pyridin-3-yl                    diclosulam         isotianil
 chromafenozide                  bifenazate         saflufenacil
 cyhalofop-butyl                 mandipropamid      fluopicolide
 pyributicarb                    cyprosulfamide     flupyrsulfuron
 kinoprene                       cyflufenamid       metalaxyl-m
 triazoxide                      mepanipyrim        pyriprole
 nanoparticles                   metrafenone        benthiavalicarb
 clodinafop                      proquinazid        cyantraniliprole
                                                    tolfenpyrad
 CONSENSUS (excluded in robustness check)
 extenders and/or surfactants preventively          whereinr1
 ch3                          r14                   no2
 plant essential              fully halogenated




                                                    65
Table A16: Top 213 Text-Novel Fertilizer Concepts (1/2)
 UNANIMOUS (included in robustness check)
 selenium                       inorganic substrate component        biomass particles
 itaconic                       inorganic substrate                  organic drying
 itaconic moieties              cell component                       compound drying
 itaconic acid                  corn steep                           organic compound drying
 itaconic anhydride             corn steep liquor                    compound drying agent
 compost tea                    fertigation                          biotic
 canola                         bactericide                          co2
 canola oil                     maleic moieties                      vermicompost
 particle domain                bioorganic                           recurring polymeric
 mean particle domain           inorganically-augmented bioorganic   polymeric subunits
                                fertilizer
 water-dispersible particle     bioorganic fertilizer                recurring polymeric subunits
 particle dispersion            inorganically-augmented bioorganic   sulfate nitrate
 polymer-containing composition inorganically-augmented              ammonium sulfate nitrate
 soil amendment compositions    animal manures                       wood ash
 chlorine dioxide               hydrolyzed animal                    plant nutrient content
 wetting agents                 animal hair                          mycorrhizal fungi
 phosphite                      hydrolyzed animal hair               seed meal
 ferrate                        urea-formaldehyde polymer            soy meal
 sodium ferrate                 vinylic polymer                      triple super phosphate
 calcium ferrate                vinylic                              dried residue
 potassium ferrate              vinylic polymers                     industrial molasses
 decompose potassium            polycarboxylated polymer             pharmaceutical fermentation
 potassium minerals             polycarboxylated                     threonine
 decompose potassium minerals   municipal biosolids                  ellipsoideus
 decompose potassium            biochar                              delbrueckii
 compounds
 partial salt                   meat meal                            saccharomyces delbrueckii
 copolymer salt                 cerevisiae                           green waste
 block copolymer                saccharomyces cerevisiae             toxins
 yeast cell                     saccharomyces cerevisiae hansen      heat source
 yeast cells                    hansen                               abiotic
 carbon-skeleton energy         cerevisiae hansen                    dissolved materials
 carbon-skeleton                calcium hypochlorite                 phosphorus minerals
 carbon skeleton energy         adenosine                            decompose phosphorus
                                                                     minerals
 skeleton energy                 adenosine triphosphate              decompose phosphorus
 complex carbon                  triphosphate                        biostimulant
 carbon compounds                atp                                 radical polymerization
 complex carbon compounds        nh4                                 free radical polymerization
 binder component                ester groups                        swine manure
 water-soluble binder            environmentally friendly            bio
 substrate component             biomass feedstock                   dissolved oxygen




                                                   66
Table A16: Top 213 Text-Novel Fertilizer Concepts (2/2)
 metal silicate                         saccharomyces uvarum beijer       saccharomyces ludwigii
 electrical conductivity                uvarum                            saccharomyces willianus
 heat-dried biosolids                   uvarum beijer                     willianus
 heat-dried                             saccharomyces uvarum              saccharomyces rosei
 lower alcohol                          beijer                            rosei
 pva                                    mellis                            rouxii
 bactericidal                           saccharomyces mellis              saccharomyces rouxii
 neodymium                              saccharomyces microellipsoides    saccharomyces sake
 bifenthrin                             microellipsoides                  sake
 c1-c4 alcohols                         oviformis                         exiguus
 electromagnetic field                  saccharomyces oviformis           saccharomyces exiguus
 decompose phosphorous                  saccharomyces fermentati          carlsbergensis
 decompose phosphorous compounds        fermentati                        saccharomyces carlsbergensis
 aluminum phosphate                     saccharomyces logos               chevalieri
 organic alcohols                       logos                             saccharomyces chevalieri
 sylvinite                              ludwigii                          saccharomyces sp.
 CONSENSUS (excluded in robustness check)
 tea                                energy component                      bimodal vinylic
 mean particle                      skeleton energy component             bimodal vinylic polymer
 particle domain size               decompose complex carbon              ch2
 polymer-containing                 decompose complex                     overproduce
 biological fertilizer composition  convert complex                       overproduce growth
 domain size ranges                 convert complex carbon                paste-like
 mean particle size                 binder component present              paste-like material
 amendment compositions             steep liquor                          dust control
 enhancing soil                     hemp                                  drying agent selected
 soil fertility                     fertilizer marketplace                quick drying
 salt form                          agricultural fertilizer marketplace   drying properties
 partial salt form                  agricultural crop                     organic drying agent
 form granulated particles          commercial agricultural fertilizer    quick drying properties
 form granulated                    polymer made                          integrated system
 yeast cell component               polymer composition also              mgso




                                                    67
Table A17: Top 106 Text-Novel Machine Concepts
 UNANIMOUS (included in robustness check)
 aeration apparatus               operating travel             controller communicatively
 axle driving apparatus           operating travel direction   controller communicatively coupled
 antenna                          wheel configured             air cart
 robotic arm                      operative control            perimeter wall
 flexible cutterbar assembly      rolling basket               upright axes spaced
 modular disc cutterbar           teatcup liner                residue spreader
 modular disc                     foot platform                crop residue spreader
 cutterbar assembly flexes        position based               rotary milking
 fore-and-aft draper              receiving data               pin configured
 flexible draper                  meter roller                 aeration tine
 trimmer head assembly            robotic attacher             aeration pockets
 non-transitory computer          axle driving unit            energy storage device
 computer readable                agricultural row unit        wireless communication
 computer readable medium         forward working direction    crop throughput
 non-transitory computer readable zero radius turning          residue chopper
 computer program product         approximate zero             aeration tines
 product tank                     grain cart                   tool coupled
 gps receiver                     ecu                          imaging device
 seed metering system             pump mounting surface        inductor box
 location-determining receiver    rotary cutting deck          output device
 location-determining             computer-readable            distribution lines
 gnss receiver                    location information         horizontal cutter disks
 gnss                             motor mounting surface       generally horizontal cutter
                                                               positions spaced transversely
 CONSENSUS (excluded in robustness check)
 controller configured          system based                   module configured
 actuator configured            controllably operable          plate configured
 apparatus configured           control unit configured        belt configured
 dairy livestock                vehicle position               sensor arrangement
 arm configured                 agricultural working machine   processor configured
 cutterbar assembly attached    valve configured               manner selected
 assembly flexes                motor configured               conveyor configured
 sickle assembly supported      characteristic data            units configured
 controller operable            controller receiving           adjustment mechanism configured
 opening configured             chamber configured             controller controlling
 harvesting header operable     headland                       crop inputs
 readable medium                executable                     evaluate




                                                   68
Table A18: Top 118 Text-Novel Plant Concepts
 UNANIMOUS (included in robustness check)
 transgene                  modified carbohydrate metabolism   genetic material
 transgene encoding         acid metabolism                    glyphosate
 transgene encodes          phenoxy proprionic acid            glufosinate
 locus conversion           phenoxy                            sulfonylurea
 single locus               phenoxy proprionic                 transgenic
 single locus conversion    proprionic                         benzonitrile
 backcross conversion       proprionic acid                    triazine
 backcross                  nucleic acid                       backcrossing
 backcross progeny          nucleic                            tissue cultures
 progeny plants             altered fatty                      bacillus
 selected progeny           altered                            bacillus thuringiensis
 trait selected             altered phosphorus                 thuringiensis
 selected progeny plants    phosphorus                         bacillus thuringiensis endotoxin
 herbicide selected         altered carbohydrates              endotoxin
 selected backcross         carbohydrates                      thuringiensis endotoxin
 produce selected           altered fatty acids                pest resistance
 selected backcross progeny fatty acids                        dicamba
 backcross progeny plants   altered antioxidants               herbicide resistant
 higher backcross           antioxidants                       imidazolinone
 higher backcross progeny   altered essential amino            transgenes
 transformation             amino                              insect resistant
 f1 progeny                 amino acids                        fungal
 insect resistance          essential amino                    waxy starch
 plant derived              essential amino acids              pistil
 soybean hulls              modified protein                   root tip
 modified fatty acid        protein concentrate                bacterial
 modified fatty             protein isolate                    viral disease
 fatty acid metabolism      herbicide tolerance                hypocotyl
 metabolism                 abiotic stress                     introgressed
 carbohydrate metabolism    abiotic                            traits introgressed
 carbohydrate               abiotic stress tolerance
 modified carbohydrate      herbicide resistance

 CONSENSUS (excluded in robustness check)
 transgene confers        produce backcross progeny            isolate
 encoding                 locus confers                        subsequent generation
 transgene conferring     single locus confers                 environmental conditions
 conversion               plant product                        site-specific recombination
 locus                    commodity plant                      recombination
 locus conversion confers commodity plant product              waxy
 desired trait            hulls                                tip
 produce backcross        concentrate                          corn variety




                                                  69
Table A19: Top 122 Text-Novel Research Input Concepts
 UNANIMOUS (included in robustness checks)
 clustal alignment method              hairpin rna                              abiotic stress tolerance
 clustal method                        amplicon                                 seed-preferred
 novel nucleotide                      elongase                                 hemp
 single nucleotide                     antibody compositions                    digestibility
 sequence identity based               nitrogen use efficiency                  pufas
 identity based                        increased biomass                        biofuel
 gene silencing                        increased seed yield                     colloid
 transcribable polynucleotide          increased oil                            agr
 transcribable polynucleotide molecule switchgrass                              schizochytrium
 isolated polynucleotides              agrobacterium -mediated                  transcription factors
 chimeric gene results                                  #NAME?                  lyophilization
 pesticidal polypeptide                agrobacterium -mediated transformation   poaceae
 polyunsaturated fatty acids           olive                                    sirna
 oilseed plant                         isolated polypeptides                    salinity
 plant biomass                         diacylglycerol                           epa
 nucleic acid segments                 diacylglycerol acyltransferase           dalapon
 eicosapentaenoic acid                 mirna                                    fescue
 eicosapentaenoic                      salix                                    thraustochytrium
 docosahexaenoic acid                  salix species                            pathogen-inducible promoter
 docosahexaenoic                       crucifers                                dehalogenase
 acid metabolism                       heterologous nucleotide sequences        hppd
 acid segments                         molecular markers                        castor bean
 fatty acid metabolism                 stress-related protein                   coconut palm
 wild type variety                     carbohydrate metabolism                  snp
 rnai                                  fluorescent protein                      silage
 turfgrass                             green fluorescent                        starch branching
 double-stranded rna                   green fluorescent protein                frt
 rna interference                      vicia species                            cosmetics
 CONSENSUS (excluded in robustness checks)
 clustal                               polynucleotide operably                  nitrogen use
 clustal v method                      isolated polynucleotides encoding        polypeptides encoded
 clustal v                             coding nucleic                           food product
 alignment method                      coding nucleic acid                      primer pair
 clustal alignment                     acid molecules encoding                  stress-related
 pairwise alignment                    acid molecule operably                   gene involved
 one regulatory sequence               type variety                             full complement
 provides recombinant expression       corresponding wild                       element operably linked
 silencing                             full-length complement                   agronomic interest
 polynucleotide selected               representative seed                      recombination sites
 isolated polynucleotide selected      encodes seq                              orientation relative
 one polynucleotide                    encodes seq id                           increasing resistance
 polynucleotide operably linked        use efficiency




                                                    70
