                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING

                                         Peter J. Klenow
                                            Huiyu Li

                                      Working Paper 27015
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27015


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




We thank Mark Bils, John Haltiwanger, Hugo Hopenhayn, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Erik Hurst and
Chad Jones for useful comments. We also thank Amber Flaharty and Gladys Teng for
excellent research assistance. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau or the Federal
Reserve System. This research was performed at a Federal Statistical Research Data Center
under FSRDC Project Number 1440. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no
confidential information is disclosed. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Peter J. Klenow and Huiyu Li. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Innovative Growth Accounting
Peter J. Klenow and Huiyu Li
NBER Working Paper No. 27015
April 2020
JEL No. O3,O4,O5

                                         ABSTRACT

Recent work highlights a falling entry rate of new firms and a rising market share of large firms
in the United States. To understand how these changing firm demographics have affected
growth, we decompose productivity growth into the firms doing the innovating. We trace how
much each firm innovates by the rate at which it opens and closes plants, the market share of
those plants, and how fast its surviving plants grow. Using data on all nonfarm businesses from
1982­2013, we find that new and young firms (ages 0 to 5 years) account for almost one-half of
growth ­ three times their share of employment. Large established firms contribute only one-
tenth of growth despite representing one-fourth of employment. Older firms do explain most of
the speedup and slowdown during the middle of our sample. Finally, most growth takes the form
of incumbents improving their own products, as opposed to creative destruction or new varieties.


Peter J. Klenow
Department of Economics
579 Jane Stanford Way
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
Klenow@Stanford.edu

Huiyu Li
101 Market Street, MS 1130
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
San Francisco, CA 94105
United States
tohuiyu@gmail.com




Slides are available at http://klenow.com/Innovative_Growth_Accounting_Klenow-Li_Slides.pdf
2                                        KLENOW AND LI


1.         Introduction

Solow (1956) famously decomposed output growth into contributions from cap-
ital, labor, and productivity. Mankiw, Romer and Weil (1992) further decom-
posed productivity into human capital versus residual productivity. We take this
residual productivity, routinely calculated by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics,
as our starting point. We attribute productivity growth to innovation and ask:
what form does the innovation take, and which firms do most of the innovation?
        Innovation can take the form of a stream of new varieties that are not close
substitutes for any existing varieties (Romer, 1990). Alternatively, growth could
be driven by creative destruction of existing products as in Aghion and Howitt
(1992). Examples include Walmart stores driving out mom-and-pop stores or
Amazon stealing business from physical stores. Yet another possibility is that
growth takes the form of existing producers improving their own products (e.g.,
successive generations of Apple iPhones or new car models). Even conditional
on the form of innovation, growth could be led by entrants and young firms
(e.g., Uber or Netflix) or by older and larger firms (e.g., Intel or Starbucks).
        U.S. productivity growth has been lackluster in recent decades, except for
a decade-long surge from the mid-1990s through the mid-2000s.1 At the same
time, firm entry rates have fallen and reallocation of labor across incumbent
firms has slowed -- coined "declining business dynamism" by papers such as
Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin and Miranda (2014). Large, established superstar
firms have captured a bigger share of markets. Is this declining dynamism and
rising concentration responsible for the growth slowdown? Have superstar firms
helped growth or hindered it?
        We offer a new growth decomposition to shed light on these questions. We
decompose growth into three types of innovation: creative destruction, brand
new varieties, and innovation by incumbents on their own products. We further
decompose each of these sources into contributions by firm age and size.

    1
        See Fernald (2015) for discussion on the timing of the productivity speedup and slowdown.
                            INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                                      3


       We exploit firm and plant data on employment at all nonfarm businesses
from 1983­2013 in the U.S. Census Bureau's Longitudinal Business Database
(LBD). We treat each plant as a unique product (or set of products). This en-
ables us to observe the rate and importance of product entry and exit across
firms. We rely on a model in which employment at a plant is isoelastic with
respect to the quality of products produced at the plant.2 We use the size of
entering versus exiting plants to gauge the quality of brand new products and
the quality improvements made through creative destruction. We assess qual-
ity improvements by firms on their own products using changes in employment
over time at surviving incumbent plants. We also allow the lowest quality prod-
ucts (plants) to exit due to obsolescence (i.e, inability to keep up with overall
quality and variety growth) as in Hopenhayn (1992).3
       We preview our findings as follows. Some 60% of growth on average comes
from incumbent innovations on their own products, whereas about 27% comes
from new varieties and 13% from creative destruction. Many exiting plants are
quite small, suggesting much of exit is due to obsolescence rather than creative
destruction. And new plants are smaller than incumbent plants on average,
making us infer that most plant entry takes the form of new varieties rather
than creative destruction.
       We find that own innovation drove both the mid-1990s speedup and the
mid-2000s slowdown of growth. TFP growth averaged 1.15% per year from 1982­
1995, then sped up to 2.82% per year from 1996­2005 before falling back to
1.03% per year from 2006­2013. Own innovation accounted for 148 of the 167
basis point acceleration, and 144 of the 179 basis point deceleration. Even
though entry and job reallocation fell throughout the sample, growth from cre-
ative destruction accelerated modestly from 1996­2005 versus 1982­1995.

   2
     We model product heterogeneity as coming from quality differences, but these will be iso-
morphic to differences in process efficiency in our model setting.
   3
     We do not model the arrival rates and step sizes of innovation, but rather back them out
from data moments in the LBD. We allow them to vary over time and across firms. In this sense,
we are not assuming these arrival rates and step sizes are exogenous. Instead, we are estimating
and carrying out a model-based growth decomposition.
4                                KLENOW AND LI


    New firms in a given year account for about 1/3 of growth on average. New
and young firms (ages 0­5 years) together contribute roughly 1/2 of all growth,
despite employing less than 1/5 of all workers. Older incumbents (ages 6 and
above) contribute the other half of growth. Such established firms played a big-
ger role in the speedup and slowdown of growth, however, accounting for 80%
of the pickup and 70% of the dropoff.
    The largest firms -- those with 5,000 or more workers -- accounted for only
11% of growth on average. This is less than half of their 25% share of employ-
ment. Small firms, with fewer than 20 employees, explain over 60% of growth
despite employing only 21% of all workers. This is very much in the spirit of
Haltiwanger, Jarmin and Miranda (2013), who emphasize the outsized contri-
bution of young, small fast-growing firms ("gazelles") to gross job creation.
    The speedup and slowdown of growth occurred uniformly across the size
distribution. In particular, firms with (i) less than 20 employees, (ii) between 20
and 249 employees, (iii) between 250 and 4999 employees, and (iv) 5000 or more
employees, each produced a speedup and slowdown of around 40 basis points.
Thus, in this accounting, superstar firms did not generate the bulk of the boom
or bust. Focusing on the role of superstars in creating or hindering growth --
at least directly -- seems misplaced. It is possible, of course, that the rise of
superstar firms discouraged innovation by other firms, as in Aghion, Bergeaud,
Boppart, Klenow and Li (2020).
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 relates our paper to the
existing literature. Section 3 lays out the model we use to do innovation ac-
counting. Section 4 presents the mapping from model parameters to the mo-
ments in the LBD. Section 5 provides our main results. Section 6 discusses fur-
ther results and directions for future research. Section 7 concludes.
                        INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                           5


2.     Related Literature

The classic reference on creative destruction models is Aghion and Howitt (1992).
Klette and Kortum (2004) developed potential implications of creative destruc-
tion for firm dynamics. Lentz and Mortensen (2008) formally estimated a gen-
eralization of the Klette-Kortum model using data on Danish firms. See Aghion,
Akcigit and Howitt (2014) for a survey of the literature on both models and evi-
dence of creative destruction. Aghion, Bergeaud, Boppart, Klenow and Li (2019)
analyze how creative destruction can be missed in measures of aggregate pro-
ductivity growth. Hsieh, Klenow and Nath (2019) develop and calibrate a two-
country version of the Klette-Kortum model.
     Romer (1990) is the seminal paper on expanding variety models. Rivera-
Batiz and Romer (1991) followed up with a two-economy version. Acemoglu
(2003) and Jones (2016) are two of many subsequent models built around va-
riety growth. Chapter 12 of Acemoglu (2011) provides a textbook treatment.
Feenstra (1994) and Broda and Weinstein (2006) estimate variety gains from im-
ports. Broda and Weinstein (2006) estimate growth in the range of consumer
products available.
     Krusell (1998) was an early paper modeling innovation by incumbent firms
on their own products. Lucas and Moll (2014) can be interpreted to be in this
vein. See chapter 12 of Aghion and Howitt (2009) and chapter 14 of Acemoglu
(2011) for models combining own innovation with creative destruction. Other
papers with multiple types of innovation include Luttmer (2011), Akcigit and
Kerr (2018), and Peters (2019). Atkeson and Burstein (2019) analyze optimal
policy in the presence multiple innovation channels. They emphasize that the
social return to creative destruction is smaller than to own innovation or to the
creation of new varieties. From a policy perspective, therefore, we care about
the importance of each type of innovation in overall growth.
     Perhaps the closest paper to ours is Garcia-Macia, Hsieh and Klenow (2019).
They too use LBD data to infer the types of innovation behind U.S. growth in
6                                 KLENOW AND LI


recent decades. The key distinction is that they look only at firms. By exploit-
ing data on plants and assuming plants proxy for varieties produced by a firm,
we are able to directly infer the sources of growth. Garcia-Macia et al. resort
to indirect inference, and also make simplifying assumptions such as that the
step-size of innovations is the same for own innovation and creative destruc-
tion. We are able to relax this assumption, and even allow step sizes for all types
of innovation to differ by the size and age of firms.
    Our model also features exit of the lowest quality products due to obsoles-
cence. Hopenhayn (1992) is a pioneering model with this feature. Hopenhayn,
Neira and Singhania (2018) is a recent application to understand the falling en-
try rate. Akcigit and Ates (2019) and Peters and Walsh (2019) analyze the causes
of both falling entry and falling growth. Other efforts to explain lackluster recent
growth include Engbom (2017) and Liu, Mian and Sufi (2019).
    Our approach builds on Feenstra (1994), which infers quality and variety
growth from a product's market share. Feenstra showed that one can back out
underlying quality and variety using a CES demand elasticity and the market
share of a product. Hottman, Redding and Weinstein (2016) follow the Feen-
stra approach, and have the advantage of directly seeing products at a detailed
level. They also observe prices and quantities, so they can adjust for markups
when inferring a product's quality. Due to data constraints, we abstract from
markup dispersion across products. The tradeoff is that we look beyond con-
sumer packaged goods to the entire nonfarm business sector.
    With data on prices and quantities and products, one could adjust not only
for markups but for other factors driving a wedge between a plant's employ-
ment and the quality and variety of its products. This includes adjustment
costs, financial frictions, and capital intensity of production. One could fo-
cus more narrowly on U.S. manufacturing and control for such factors. Follow-
ing Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson (2008), one could separate "TFPQ" from
"TFPR" by netting out the influence of markups, adjustment costs, factor inten-
sity and so on -- and then apply our direct inference to TFPQ data to determine
                          INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                                    7


the sources of innovation. See Hsieh and Klenow (2009, 2014) and Eslava and
Haltiwanger (2019) for efforts along these lines.
      Just as growth accounting does not require that capital or labor be deter-
mined exogenously, our innovative growth accounting does not require that in-
novation rates be exogenous. For this reason, our accounting is not inconsistent
with the literature arguing that innovation rates are sustained only because of
growth in research efforts. See, for example, Jones (1995) and Bloom, Jones,
Van Reenen and Webb (2017).
      Less consistent with our approach are decompositions of productivity growth
into within-firm, reallocation, and entry-exit terms by Baily, Hulten and Camp-
bell (1992), Griliches and Regev (1995), Olley and Pakes (1996), and Melitz and
Polanec (2015). A prominent implementation is Foster, Haltiwanger and Krizan
(2001), and more recent versions are Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin and Miranda
(2017) and Guti´
               errez and Philippon (2019). Baqaee and Farhi (2020) show that
such statistical decompositions are not derived from explicit general equilib-
rium models. Thus, although these decompositions provide useful moments
that models should match, they do not provide a direct way to infer the sources
of innovation and growth.
      In particular, the above decompositions use growth in firm labor productiv-
ity to evaluate innovation within firms. Figures 1 and 2 compare growth in rev-
enue per worker (labor productivity) to growth in employment for Walmart and
Amazon based on Compustat data.4 For Walmart, employment grew rapidly
while labor productivity grew comparatively little. For Amazon, revenue pro-
ductivity did grow markedly, but employment growth was much faster still. Fig-
ures 3 through 7 in the Appendix cover Microsoft, Google, Facebook, Apple and
Starbucks. In all of these firms employment growth dwarfed growth in revenue
per worker. All of these firms were famously innovative. The consistent byprod-

  4
    The Census LBD, which we use for almost all of our estimates, does not have data on rev-
enue, and the U.S. Census Bureau forbids us from revealing the identity of firms. Hence we
compare measures of revenue labor productivity with employment growth for innovative firms
in Compustat.
8                                  KLENOW AND LI



                                  Figure 1: Walmart




                                  Figure 2: Amazon




Source: WRDS Compustat and BEA Table 1.1.9. Revenue per worker = "REVT / (GDP Deflator x
EMP)", Employment = "EMP" and Year = "FYEAR". The graph displays revenue per worker and
employment relative to the first year when both series are available for the firm.
                        INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                            9


uct of their innovation would appear to be swift employment growth rather than
revenue productivity growth. This suggests their innovation may have taken
the form of adding more markets and products (which would could show up
in employment rather than necessarily boosting their price-cost markups and
showing up in revenue productivity).
     In our framework, revenue productivity is actually the same across plants
and firms, as each plant chooses labor input to equate marginal revenue with a
common marginal cost of labor. Hence, in our setup, a firm's revenue produc-
tivity does not contain any information about a firm's contribution to growth.
Instead, a firm's contribution to growth will manifest in its rising market share
(which we proxy with employment, as it is easy to observe and measure). From
this perspective, the rising market share of Walmart, Amazon, and other su-
perstar firms is consistent with their outsized innovation and contribution to
growth.
     As stressed by Hsieh and Klenow (2017) and Garcia-Macia et al. (2019), how-
ever, not all market share gains are equal when it comes to their contribution to
growth. Creative destruction entails more job creation than growth, since only
the net improvement beyond existing technology adds to growth. For this rea-
son we are keen to use the entry and exit of plants to disentangle a firm's own
innovation and variety creation versus from its creative destruction.




3.     Innovation accounting

This section lays out a model wherein aggregate productivity growth comes
from innovation by firms. The model connects a firm's growth contribution to
the market share of its entering, surviving, and exiting products. The market
share dynamics of its surviving products shed light, in particular, on the rate at
which the firm improves it's own products.
10                                   KLENOW AND LI


3.1.    Final goods production

There is a continuum of intermediate products i  [0, Nt ], with Nt denoting the
total measure of varieties in period t. Nt can change over time due to the intro-
duction of new varieties and the obsolescence of low quality products. Omit-
ting time subscripts, aggregate output Y in a given period is a CES aggregate of
intermediate varieties:
                                                                            
                                             N                   -1
                                                                            -1

                              Y =                [q (i)y (i)]         di         ,
                                         0


where y (i) is the quantity of variety i and q (i) is its quality. Parameter  > 1 is
the elasticity of substitution between varieties.
     Profit maximization by competitive final goods producers generates the de-
mand function for variety i:

                                                         -
                                                 P (i)
                               y (i) =                          q (i)-1 Y,               (1)
                                                  P

where P (i) is the price of variety i and P is the aggregate price index

                                                                            1
                                         N                                 1-
                                                                1-
                             P =             [P (i)/q (i)]            di             .   (2)
                                     0


              P (i)
Let p(i) :=    P
                      denote the relative price of good i. Demand for a product in-
creases with its quality and decreases with its price.



3.2.    Intermediate goods production

Each intermediate good i can be produced by a monopolistically competitive
producer at a constant marginal cost equal to the competitive wage W . The
profit-maximizing price given demand (1) is the familiar constant markup over
marginal cost:
                                         P (i) = µ · W,
                          INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                                      11

              
where µ :=    -1
                   > 1. The markup is lower when products are closer substitutes.
We can also write the relative price as


                                            p(i) = µ · w


where w := W/P is the real marginal cost.
   Substituting the aggregate price index (2) and the profit-maximizing price
into (1) yields the expenditure share (and employment share) of a product:

                                P (i)y (i)   l(i)                          q (i)-1
                       s(i) =              =      =                 N
                                                                                        .   (3)
                                   PY         L                            q (i)-1 di
                                                                   0


We can define an aggregate quality index as

                                                                        1
                                                  N                     -1

                                Q :=                  q (i)-1 di              .
                                              0


Substituting this definition into (3), a product's market share can be written as

                                                                  -1
                                                       q (i)
                                        s(i) =                         .
                                                        Q

The market share of a product increases with its relative quality with elasticity
 - 1.
   Growth in this model is due to growth in the aggregate quality index Q. Using
y (i) = s(i)L in the aggregate production function, aggregate output is
                                                                  
                                    N                             -1
                                                       -1
                       Y =              (q (i)s(i))         di         L = Q · L.
                                0


We are interested in the growth rate of aggregate productivity Y /L:

                                          Yt      Yt-1       Qt
                             gt := ln        - ln      = ln
                                          Lt      Lt-1      Qt-1
12                                 KLENOW AND LI


3.3.     Innovation

We next describe the innovation process that drives the growth in Q. We are in-
terested in attributing growth to groups of firms or individual firms. Let Mt de-
note the set of all firms in the economy in period t. The set of firms can change
over time from entry of new firms and exit of firms that lose all of their prod-
ucts. Let Et and Xt-1 denote the set of firms entering and exiting between t - 1
and t. Let Ct,t-1 denote the set of continuing firms that operate in both t and
t - 1. By construction, the set of firms in t is the union of new and continuing
firms Mt = Et  Ct,t-1 , and the set of firms in t - 1 is the union of exiting and
continuing firms Mt-1 = Xt-1  Ct,t-1 .
     We denote the set of products produced by firm f in period t as Nf t set
of products. The complete set of products produced in t is therefore Nt =
{Nf t }f Mt . The set of products produced by a firm and the quality of those
products can change due to innovation. There are three types of innovation: 1)
creative destruction, 2) own-innovation and 3) new varieties. With creative de-
struction, the producer of an existing product is replaced by a better producer.
With own-innovation, a producer innovates on one of its own products. A new
variety expands the set of products. We allow the arrival rate and step size of
each type of innovation to depend on the innovating firm. In addition, prod-
ucts disappear due to obsolescence when their quality is below a threshold t .
     Let N V t , CDt , OI t and Ot-1 denote the set of new varieties, creatively de-
stroyed products, products experiencing own innovation, and those becom-
ing obsolete between t and t - 1, respectively. Let St denote the set of prod-
ucts that are produced in t and t - 1 with constant quality. The set of prod-
ucts in t is Nt = N V t  CDt  OI t  St , while the set of products in t - 1 is
Nt-1 = Ot-1  CDt  OI t  St .
     The timing of events in a period is as follows: firms hire labor and produce,
then obsolete products exit, then new varieties are created and existing prod-
ucts are creatively destroyed, and finally own-innovation occurs on surviving
incumbent products. Quality levels after innovation apply to production in the
                         INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                               13


next period. Our assumption that obsolete products exit before innovation en-
sures that firms only carry out innovation on products that are not obsolete.
   More precisely, after production products with quality qt-1 < t become
obsolete and exit the market. Let xO
                                   f,t-1 denote the share of products of firm

f  Mt-1 that exit due to obsolescence:

                            iNf,t-1
                                      1{qt-1 (i) < t }di
                 xO
                  f,t-1 =                                   =: Gf,t-1 (t )
                                       Nf,t-1

where Gf,t-1 (q ) is the cumulative distribution of quality for firm f in period t - 1.
   After exit of obsolete products, each surviving firm and new firm f  Mt
brings in f t Nt-1 new varieties for production in period t. The quality of a new
variety is drawn from the distribution of non-obsolete varieties in period t - 1
with a step size Vf t . These firms may also replace existing producers of f t Nt-1
non-obsolete products by improving on the quality of those products by step
size f t . If the firm f was active in period t - 1, then it loses some of the products
it produced in t - 1 to creative destruction and obsolescence. For the products
it keeps, it randomly innovates on share of t with step size Of t .
   Let N V f t , CDf t and OI f t denote the set of products of firm f that are new va-
rieties, acquired through creative destruction, or have enjoyed own-innovation,
                   CD          O
respectively. Let Xf,t -1 and Xf,t-1 denote the set of products which firm f loses

through creative destruction and obsolescence, respectively. Finally, let Sf t de-
note the set of products that f produces in both t and t - 1 with constant quality.
The set of products f produces in t is therefore Nf t = N V f t  CDf t  OI f t  Sf t ,
                                                CD       O
while the set it produces in t - 1 is Nf,t-1 = Xf,t -1  Xf,t-1  Sf t . A firm exits the

market when it does not have any products.
   Thus, the share of products in t - 1 that is subject to creative destruction is


                                 t :=             f t df.
                                           f Mt
14                                        KLENOW AND LI


Similarly, the rate of arrival of new varieties between t - 1 and t is


                                        t :=            f t df.
                                                 f Mt


     We need to specify how firms lose their products to creative destruction. Let
xCD
 f,t-1 Nf,t-1 be the number of products a firm active in t - 1 loses between t - 1

and t due to creative destruction. In equilibrium, the arrival rate of creative de-
struction equals the sum of the rate of product exit due to creative destruction.
That is,
                                               Nf,t-1
                   t =                xCD
                                       f,t-1          df =             xCD
                                                                        f,t-1 df,
                           f Mt-1              Nt-1           f Mt-1

                         Nf,t-1
where xCD        CD
       f,t-1 := xf,t-1   Nt-1
                                .   For simplicity we assume creative destruction is ran-
dom so that all firms lose the same fraction of non-obsolete products, denoted
by t . This implies that, for all firms in t - 1,


                                    xCD
                                     f,t-1 = t [1 - Gf,t-1 (t )] .



Therefore, the share of products of a firm in t - 1 that are not produced by the
firm in t is


               xf,t-1 = xO        CD
                         f,t-1 + xf,t-1 = Gf,t-1 (t ) + t [1 - Gf,t-1 (t )] ,



and the aggregate exit rate of product from producers at the end of t - 1 is

                                        Nf,t-1
           xt-1 =             xf,t-1           df = t [1 - Gt-1 (t )] + Gt-1 (t ).
                     f Mt-1             Nt-1

     The net growth rate in the number of varieties Nt is the difference between
the rate of new variety arrival and the rate of obsolescence:


                             Nt = [1 + t - Gt-1 (t )] · Nt-1 .


     Recall that of t is the fraction of the products that survive both creative de-
                               INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                                       15


struction and obsolescence which experience own innovation by incumbent
firm f . I.e., the share of products of firm f that experience own innovation is


                of t · (1 - xCD       O
                             f,t-1 - xf,t-1 ) = of t · (1 - t ) · [1 - Gf,t-1 (t )]



and the share of all products in t - 1 that experience own innovation is

                                                                      Nf,t-1
                         (1 - t )            of t [1 - Gf,t-1 (t )]          df.
                                    f Mt-1                            Nt-1


3.4.     Aggregate productivity growth

Having laid out the innovation process, how does this process translate into
aggregate productivity growth? Using Nt = N V t  CDt  OI t  St , we can de-
compose growth gt = ln QQ t
                        t-1
                            into innovation types:

                                       1
                  q (i)-1 di
               iNt t
                                       -1

eg =                                                                                                    (4)
            iNt-1
                    qt-1 (i)-1 di
                                                                                                         1
                  q (i)-1 di +
            iN V t t
                                           q (i)-1 di +
                                      iCD t t
                                                                    q (i)-1 di +
                                                               iOI t t
                                                                                        q (i)-1 di
                                                                                     iSt t
                                                                                                         -1

    =
                                                iNt-1
                                                        qt-1 (i)-1 di

The first term on the right hand side captures new varieties. Since the quality
of new varieties is drawn randomly from the distribution of non-obsolete prod-
ucts (plus a firm-specific step size), this term simplifies to

                                                (Vf Qt-1 )-1                                       -1
        q (i)-1 di
  iN V t t
                                     N
                                f Mt f t-1          Nt-1
                                                             df                               Q
                           =                   -1                 =             f Vf-1   df             ,
 iNt-1
         qt-1 (i)-1 di                       Qt-1                        f Mt                 Q


where Q-1 := Nt-1 EGt-1 (q -1 | q  t ). Q is the aggregate quality of non-
obsolete products. Since Q  Q, a given arrival rate of innovation (t ) generates
more growth when the innovation happens on non-obsolete products. Hence,
we will refer to
                                                   f Vf-1 df
                                            f Mt
16                                             KLENOW AND LI


as the growth contribution of new varieties and refer to
                                                                                  
                                                                          -1

                                           f Vf-1 df            Q              - 1
                                 f Mt                           Q


as the contribution of obsolescence to growth. This Hopenhayn term is the in-
teraction of selection of obsolete products and innovation on the non-obsolete
products.
     With the assumption that creative destruction is random, we can simplify
the second term in (4) to

                 -1                                                                             -1
        f Mt
               f              q (i)
                       iCD f t t-1
                                             -1
                                                  di df                                   Q
                                                                             -1
                          -1                               =             f f       df
                        Qt-1                                      f Mt                    Q

     The third term in (4) is due to incumbent own innovation. This is a randomly
drawn of t fraction of incumbent f 's products that survived obsolescence and
creative destruction. Therefore, the third term in (4) only applies to continuing
firms and is equal to

                                                                    -1
                                  -1                              qt -1 (i)
       (1 - t )           of t O f                                     -1 di df
                   f Ct,t-1                 iNf t-1 ,qt-1 (i)t     Q  t-1
                          -1
                   Q                                                    -1
                                                                               Nf,t-1 EGf,t-1 (q -1 |q  t )
  = (1 - t )                                of t (1 -     Gf,t-1 (t ))Of                    -1
                                                                                                              df
                   Q            f Ct,t-1                                                  Qt-1
              -1
         Q                             -1
                                            EGf,t-1 (q -1 |q  t )
  =                            o f t Of                           df
         Q          f Ct,t-1                EGt-1 (q -1 |q  t )

                                               Nf,t-1
where of t := of t (1 - t )(1 - Gf,t-1 )       Nt-1
                                                          denotes the arrival rate of own innovation
by f relative to the total number of products in t - 1.
                                      INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                                               17


       The fourth term in (4) contains products that survive creative destruction
and obsolescence but do not experience own innovation. This term is equal to

                                                                        -1
                                                                      qt -1 (i)
          (1 - t )                 (1 - of t )                             -1 di df
                        f Ct,t-1                 iNf t-1 ,qt-1 (i)t    Q  t-1
                   -1
              Q                                       (1 - Gf,t-1 )Nf,t-1 EGf,t-1 (t ) (q -1 |q  t )
     =                  (1 - t )          (1 - of t )                                                df.
              Q                  f Ct,t-1                   Nt-1           EGt-1 (q -1 |q  t )

The third and fourth terms in (4) combined equal the net change in quality of
products that are produced by the same producer in t and t - 1:

                                      -1
                             Q                                 -1
                                                                         EGf,t-1 (q -1 |q  t )
                                                       of t (Of   - 1)                         df
                             Q              f Ct,t-1                     EGt-1 (q -1 |q  t )
                                      -1
                             Q
                     +                     (1 - Gt-1 (t ) - t )
                             Q

       Combining our derivations for the right hand side terms of (4), we can ex-
press aggregate growth in terms of arrival rates and step sizes. Using

                                                                                      Nf,t-1
                     t =               f t df = t                 [1 - Gf,t-1 (t )]          df
                                f Mt                     f Mt-1                       Nt-1

we can write the growth rate as

                                                                                                           EGf,t-1 (q -1 )
e   g ( -1)
              = 1+                   f Vf-1      +   f (f
                                                          -1
                                                               - 1) df +                         -1
                                                                                         of t (Of     - 1)                 df
                            f Mt                                              f Ct,t-1                     EGt-1 (q -1 )
                                                                                            
                                                                                   -1

              +                 f Vf-1 + f (f
                                              -1
                                                 - 1) df                  Q              - 1
                        f Mt                                              Q

                                        -1
                                                     EGf,t-1 (q -1 |q  t ) - EGf,t-1 (q -1 )
              +                 of t (Of   - 1)                                              df
                     f Ct,t-1                                      EGt-1 (q -1 )
                                                              
                                       -1
                                Q
              - 1 -                         [1 - Gt-1 (t )] .                                                            (5)
                                Q


The first line of the right hand side of equation (5) is the sum of the growth con-
18                                   KLENOW AND LI


tributions from new varieties, creative destruction, and own innovation. The
second and third lines on the right hand side of equation (5) are positive contri-
butions from obsolescence through selection, while the last line is the negative
contribution based on the market share in t - 1 of varieties lost to obsolescence.


3.5.    Firm contribution to growth

In addition to decomposing growth into types of innovation and obsolescence,
we are also interested accounting for the contribution of firms or groups of
firms. Define the contribution of firm f  Mt  Xt-1 to growth between t and
t - 1 as


  gf := f Vf-1 + f (f
                      -1
                         - 1)
                      -1
       + of t Nt-1 (Of   - 1)EGf,t-1 [st-1 ]
                       -1
       + of t Nt-1 (Of    - 1) EGf,t-1 [st-1 | q  t ] - EGf,t-1 [st-1 ]
                                                                   
                                                           -1
                                                      Q                 Gf,t-1 (t )Nf,t-1
       +            j Vj-1 + j (  j
                                    -1
                                        - 1) dj               - 1
              j Mt                                    Q                  Gt-1 (t )Nt-1
       - EGf,t-1 [st-1 | q < t ]Gf,t-1 (t )Nf,t-1 ,                                     (6)


where st-1 is the market share of a product in t-1. The first two lines on the right
hand side of (6) are firm f 's contribution through new varieties, creative de-
struction and own-innovation. The third line is the positive contribution from
own-innovation focusing on non-obsolete products. The fourth line captures
the contribution of obsolescence through improving the quality distribution
that new varieties and creative destruction build upon. To attribute the aggre-
gate contribution of obsolescence to individual firms, we multiply the fourth
line by firm f 's share of obsolete products. The final line is firm's f 's negative
contribution to growth from losing its obsolete varieties.
                          INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                                         19


     For new firms, gf simplifies to their contributions from new varieties and
creative destruction, respectively:


                           gf = f Vf-1 + f (f
                                              -1
                                                 - 1).


     Firms that exit, meanwhile, contribute only through obsolescence:
                                                                          
                                                                  -1
                                               Q                           Gf,t-1 (t )Nf,t-1
  gf =               j Vj-1 + j (j
                                   -1
                                      - 1) dj                          - 1
                j Mt                           Q                            Gt-1 (t )Nt-1
       - EGf,t-1 [st-1 |q < t ]Gf,t-1 (t )Nf,t-1


     Using ln(1 + x)  x, we can approximate the growth rate by

                1                                         1
          g =      ln 1 +                   gf df                                  gf df.
                -1              f Mt Xt-1                 -1           f Mt Xt-1


This allows us to define the share of growth coming from firm f as

                                               gf
                                cf :=                        .
                                        f Mt Xt-1
                                                    gf df

Similarly, we define the contribution of a group of firms F  (Mt  Xt-1 ) as

                                            f F
                                                  gf df
                                cF :=                        .
                                        f Mt Xt-1
                                                     gf df


4.     Calibration
In the previous section, we laid out our model of how product innovation con-
tributes to growth. In this section we will describe how to relate the arrival rates
and step sizes of innovation to moments we will observe in the data.
20                                            KLENOW AND LI


     Let k be any non-negative number. For any group of products P , define the
k th noncentral moment of market share to be
                                                                              k( -1)
                     {k}                                            qt (i)
                   SP t :=              st (i)k di =                                   di.
                                   iP                        iP      Qt

     Given that CDf t is the group of products that firm f creatively destroyed be-
tween t - 1 and t with step size ,

                                                                        ( -1)k
                    {k}                          qt-1 (i) Qt-1
                   SCDf t =                                                      di
                                    iCD f t      Qt-1 Qt
                                              ( -1)k                            ( -1)k
                                                                   qt-1 (i)
                               =                                                         di
                                     eg                iCD f t      Qt-1
                                              ( -1)k
                                     
                               =                                 st-1 (i)k di
                                     eg                iCD f t
                                                ( -1)k
                                          
                               = f                       EGt-1 (sk
                                                                 t-1 | q  t )Nt-1
                                          eg

The second-to-last equality holds because, conditional on non-obsolescence,
the arrival of creative destruction innovation is independent of qt-1 (i).
     Using that N V f t is the set of new varieties introduced by firm f ,

                                                ( -1)k
                   {k}                    Vf
                  SN V f t = f                           EGt-1 (sk
                                                                 t-1 | q  t )Nt-1 .
                                          eg

     For a group of firms F , assume they have the same arrival rate and step size
for creative destruction and new varieties. Let EF t be the set of new products
introduced by these firms. Applying the above derivations, we map the k th mo-
ments of the employment share of these products to

                         {k}            {k}            {k}
                     SEF t = SN V F t + SCDF t
            {k}                                               ( -1)k                           ( -1)k
          SEF t /EF t                   Nt-1 F         VF                Nt-1 F           F
                           =                                           +                                , (7)
      EGt-1 (sk
              t-1 | q  t )               EF t          eg                 EF t            eg

where EF t is the number of new products introduced by F .
                          INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                                        21


   Equation (7) says the non-centered k th moment of entering products of firm
group F relative to the non-centered k th moment of all non-obsolete products
in the previous period is equal to the average step size of these products' in-
novation relative to the aggregate growth rate. A group of products that have
higher innovation step size has higher relative k th moment. This relationship
holds for all k . We will use data on g (the aggregate TFP growth rate) and on S k
moments for k = 0, 1, 2, 3, plus the restrictions VF > 0 and F > 1, to infer F ,
VF , F , and F .
   To estimate the contribution of an incumbent's own innovation, let Pf be
the set of products that f produces in both t - 1 and t. The market share growth
for these products is

                                            -1
  SPf t          iP
                    qt (i)-1 di     Qt-1
           =
 SPf,t-1           q (i)-1 di
                 iP t-1
                                     Qt
                          -1
               (1 + of (Of   - 1))(1 - t )       iNf,t-1 ,qt-1 (i)t
                                                                      qt-1 (i)-1 di   Qt-1
                                                                                              -1
           =
                         (1 - t )                        qt-1 (i)-1 di                 Qt
                                    iNf,t-1 ,qt-1 (i)t
                         -1
             1 + of t (Of   - 1)
           =                     .                                                            (8)
                  eg(-1)

The market share of the firm's continuing products grows if their realized aver-
age quality improvement exceeds the aggregate growth rate.
   To estimate the negative contribution of obsolescence, we need to distin-
guish product exits due to obsolescence from product exits due to creative de-
struction. The share of firm f 's products that it loses to obsolescence or creative
destruction is

                    xf,t-1 Nt-1
                                = t [1 - Gf,t-1 (t )] + Gf,t-1 (t ).                          (9)
                      Nf t-1

The share of firm f 's sales that belong to products it loses to obsolescence or
22                                     KLENOW AND LI


creative destruction is

                   SXf,t-1                              EG       (st-1 | q  t )
                                   = t [1 - Gf,t-1 (t )] f,t-1
            Nf,t-1 EGf,t-1 (st-1 )                          EGf,t-1 (st-1 )
                                                  EG     (st-1 | q < t )
                                     + Gf,t-1 (t ) f,t-1                                    (10)
                                                       EGf,t-1 (st-1 )

Since creative destruction is random while obsolescence is selected, the share
of firm f 's sales belonging to products it loses is smaller than the share of prod-
ucts it loses when it loses some its products to obsolescence. The gap increases
with the share of exit that is obsolescence. This relationship helps us to distin-
guish between creative destruction and obsolescence.
     Summing the exit rates across firms and summing the exiting product mar-
ket shares across firms yield the aggregate exit rate and aggregate market share
of exiting products:

                                                   Nf t-1
     xt =             t + (1 - t )Gf,t-1 (t )             df = t + (1 - t )Gt-1 (t )        (11)
            f Mt-1                                 Nt-1

                                                                t
                  SX ,t-1 = t                   st-1 (i) di +           st-1 (i) di.        (12)
                                iNt-1 qt-1 >t                   iNt-1

Using equation (11), the exit rate can be rewritten as

                                           xt - Gt-1 (t )
                                     t =                  .
                                           1 - Gt-1 (t )

Substituting this expression into (12) yields
                                                                     t
                   xt - Gt-1 (t )
       SX ,t-1   =                                   st-1 (i) di +           st-1 (i) di.   (13)
                   1 - Gt-1 (t )    iNt-1 ,qt-1 >t                   iNt-1


Holding fixed the exit rate, increasing t lowers the market share of products ex-
iting due to obsolescence or creative destruction. Instead of randomly replac-
ing a fraction of the producers, making t positive removes products with the
smallest market share. Conditional on t , we can use (9) to back out Gf,t-1 (t ).
                        INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                             23


   Since the t - 1 market share of a firm's continuing products is


                (1 - t ) [1 - Gf,t-1 (t )] Nf,t-1 EGf,t-1 (st-1 | q  t ),


we can use data on the t - 1 market share of a firm's continuing products and
(10) to infer the market share of obsolete products of firm f and hence calculate
the negative contribution to growth from the firm.
   We also need Q/Q to calculate the positive contribution of obsolescence.
This term can be rewritten as

                      Nt-1 [1 - Gt-1 (t )] EGt-1 (st-1 | q  t )
                                                                                (14)
                                   1 - Gt-1 (t )

This is none other than the market share of non-obsolete products divided by
the share of non-obsolete products. This can be calculated using t , Gt-1 (t )
and data on the t - 1 market share of incumbent firms continuing products.


4.1.   Measuring products

We calibrate the model to the Longitudinal Business Dynamics (LBD) plant-
level data from the Census Bureau. To make progress, we assume that each
plant produces one product and that all new varieties and creative destruction
occur through new plants. This enables us to use plant entry and exit to mea-
sure the arrival rate of new varieties and creative destruction within firms.
   We partition firms in each period into groups. For example, a group can be
new firms (age 0) with less the 20 employees. Then the set of new and exiting
products by the firm group, EF ,t and XF ,t-1 respectively, maps into the set of new
and exiting plants of the firm group in the data. The set of all products Nt maps
to the total set of plants in the data. The arrival rates in the model map to the
arrival rate of plants in the data. The market share of products map into to the
employment shares of plants in the data. Table 1 summarizes the parameters
for calibration and the data targets.
24                                        KLENOW AND LI




                                Table 1: Parameters and data targets

                                          Calibrated parameters
       F              Arrival rate of NV by firm group F
       VF             Step size of NV by firm group F
       F              Arrival rate of CD by firm group F
       F              Step size of CD by firm group F
       -1
 oF (OF   - 1)        Contribution of OI by firm group F
                      Cutoff quality of obsolescence
                      Total rate of creative destruction


                                           Assigned parameter
                      Elasticity of substitution


                                               Data targets
      EF t
      Nt-1
                      # of new plants by firm group F
     XF ,t-1
      Nt-1
                      # of exiting plants by firm group F in t - 1
      SEF t           employment share of new plants by firm group F in t
     SXF ,t-1         employment share of exiting plants by firm groups F in t - 1
      SCF t
     SCF t-1
                      growth in employment share of continuing plants by firm group F
        {2}
      SEF t           2nd moment of employment share of new plants by firm group F in t
        {3}
      SEF t           3rd moment of employment share of new plants by firm group F in t
      {k}
     SNt-1            k th moment of employment share of all plants in t - 1 for k = 0, 1, 2, 3
        g             TFP growth rate
        {k}
Notes: SP t :=   P
                     sk
                      t (i)di
                             INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                                        25


       We carry out calibration in four steps. First, we use (8) plus the change in
the employment share of surviving plants to calibrate the own innovation pa-
rameters relative to the aggregate growth rate. Given g and  , these moments
map directly into the composite arrival rate and step size of own innovation by
                            -1
a group of firms: (1 + oF OF   - 1 )/eg(-1) . Second, we calibrate the arrival
rate and step size of new varieties and creative destruction vF , F , V
                                                                      eg
                                                                        F F
                                                                         , eg                    to
fit the employment share moments of entering plants in (7) for k = 0, 1, 2, 3.5
Third, we sum the calibrated F across F to arrive at the aggregate rate of cre-
ative destruction  . We substitute  into the aggregate exit rate and exiting plant
employment share equations (11) and (13) to back out the rate of obsolescence
and the employment share associated with obsolescence. Fourth and finally,
we recover the level of step sizes by multiplying the relative step sizes by the
measured aggregate TFP growth rate in the data. When a resulting step size vio-
lates a minimum boundary condition, for example when it is negative or when
F < 1, we set that particular step size to the minimum. We check the validity
of our estimates by comparing the fit of the model to the growth rate.6




   5
     We minimize the L2 distance between the k th moments in the data and that implied by (7)
for k = 0, 1, 2, 3. We fit the k = 0 and k = 1 moments exactly while giving equal weight to k = 2, 3
moments. Note that (7) by itself is symmetric in the new variety and creative destruction param-
                                                                                             ¯F 
                                                                                        ¯F , V    ¯F
eters and hence only identifies a pair of values. That is, vF , F , V      F
                                                                      eg , eg
                                                                       F
                                                                               = v ¯F ,      eg , eg
              V             ¯F , v ¯   ¯
and vF , F , eg f
                  , F
                   eg  =         ¯F ,      VF
                                      eg , eg
                                       F
                                              generate the same distance. Given the growth rate in
the data, restrictions F > 1 and VF > 0 break the symmetry and help us choose between the
two specifications. This identification does not work if both F and VF exceed 1. Then we use
the aggregate exit rate for identification.
   6
     We fit the growth rate by construction when the boundary conditions are not violated. Any
gaps between the model-implied growth rate and the growth rate in the data reflect the extent
to which we run into corners.
26                                    KLENOW AND LI


5.         Results

5.1.        Data

We use the Longitudinal Business Dynamics (LBD) data from the Census Bu-
reau to calculate moments related to firms. We use the BLS multifactor produc-
tivity series to calculate productivity growth. We have access to the LBD data
from 1977 to 2013. We partition the firms into age and size bins, where age is
the number of years since the first plant of the firm enters the dataset and size is
the total employment across all of plants of the firm in the previous year.7 The
age bins are 0, 1­5, 6­10 and 11+ while the size bins are 0, 1­19, 20­249, 250­999,
1000­4999, 5000­9999 and 10000+. New firms are in the age 0 and size 0 bin.
         To observe firms aged 6+, the earliest year we can start is 1982. Productiv-
ity growth in the U.S. experienced a burst of high growth around the 1995 to
2005 period. Hence we divide the years into subperiods before the burst (1982­
1995, average 1.15% per year), the burst (1996­2005, average 2.82% per year)
and slowdown (2006­2013, average 1.03% per year). We target averages of en-
try, exit, productivity growth and so on over each subperiod.



5.2.        Results: parameter estimates and model fit

Table 2 presents some of the key data moments from the LBD that we use to es-
timate estimate arrival rates and step sizes. For conciseness, we average them
across all years in the Table. The moments shown include the plant entry rate,
the employment share of new plants, and the employment share of continu-
ing plants in the current year relative to their share in the previous year. Size 0
plants are those of new firms.
         Table 3 presents the parameters we estimate based on the moments in Table
2. As above, the lower cases are arrival rates and upper cases are step sizes. The
     7
    We keep ownership of a plant to the firm that first owns the plant. We use employment in
the previous year because the current year employment is affected by innovation.
                            INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                                      27



               Table 2: Data moments by age-size groups, 1982­2013


                                              Entry          2
                                                            SE            3
                                                                         SE
 Age             Size             Entry                                            Survivor
                                              emp.           2            3
                                   rate                     SN           SN         growth
                                              share

 0               0                 8.99        3.10         2.54        3.52           NA
 1­5             1­19              0.12        0.06         0.04        0.05          1.15
 1­5             20­249            0.11        0.10         0.02        0.01          1.00
 1­5             250­999           0.04        0.06         0.02        0.00          0.97
 1­5             1k­4999           0.03        0.04         0.04        0.02          0.95
 1­5             5k­9999           0.01        0.02         0.05        0.08          0.86
 6­10            1­19              0.11        0.05         0.09        0.17          0.99
 6­10            20­249            0.07        0.06         0.02        0.02          0.91
 6­10            250­999           0.04        0.04         0.01        0.00          0.90
 6­10            1k­4999           0.03        0.04         0.04        0.04          0.91
 6­10            5k­9999           0.01        0.02         0.01        0.01          0.89
 6­10            10k+              0.01        0.02         0.04        0.05          0.89
 11+             1­19              0.26        0.18         0.39        0.74          0.98
 11+             20­249            0.18        0.14         0.07        0.10          0.91
 11+             250­999           0.15        0.15         0.06        0.09          0.91
 11+             1k­4999           0.23        0.26         0.19        0.21          0.91
 11+             5k­9999           0.13        0.14         0.15        0.22          0.91
 11+             10k+              0.58        0.76         0.72        0.87          0.90

Source: Census LBD. Firm size is the sum of employment across all of its plants. Firm age is the
difference between the year of observation minus the birth year of the firm's first plant. "Entry
rate" = Number of new plant divided by lagged total number of plants, "Entry emp. share" =
                                   Sl
Employment share of new plants, " S E
                                    k " = new plant k th moment relative to all plants. Units are
                                    N
%. "Survivor growth" = continuing plants employment share in t over employment share in t - 1
28                                KLENOW AND LI


Table provides these statistics by age-size group.
     In Table 4 we compare the growth rate in the data to that in our model. When
we do not hit any corners, our calibration strategy fits the growth rate by con-
struction. The Table shows that we deviate slightly from the actual growth rates.
This is because some parameters hit corner values (such as step sizes being no
lower than 1 for creative destruction). Overall, the deviation is small and the
model fits the data well. The largest deviation is in the 1982­1986 period.


5.3.     Results: types of innovation

We first decompose growth by innovation type over the entire 1982­2013 period
in Table 5. We estimate that, on average, 60% of growth comes from own inno-
vation while new varieties contribute about 27% and creative destruction the
remaining 13%.
     When we look at subperiods in Table 6, we see that own innovation gener-
ated close to 50% of growth in the slow-growth periods early on (1982­1995)
and more recently (2006­2013), but surged to 70% of growth in the high-growth
middle period (1996­2005). Table 7 shows that all three sources of growth rose
in the 1996­2005 period and fell back again afterward. But the bulk of the accel-
eration (91%) and the subsequent slowdown (82%) were due to innovation by
incumbent firms on their own products.


5.4.     Results: firm age groups

Table 8 displays the contribution of each firm age group to growth. Age 0 firms,
who are in their first year of operation, contribute almost 1/3 of growth on av-
erage despite employing only 3% of workers. Firms ages 1­5 and 6­10 generate
similar amounts of growth as their share of employment. Firms age 11+, in con-
trast, contribute much less growth (41%) than their share of employment (72%).
     Table 9 looks at growth contributions, in percentage points per year, for firm
age groups by subperiod. All age groups contributed to the acceleration of
                            INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                                     29




     Table 3: Calibrated innovation parameter by age-size groups, 1982­2013


 Age            Size                vf          Vf          f           f        ~f (Of - 1)
                                                                                 o

 0              0                 0.081       0.602       0.009        1.184        0.000
 1­5            1­19              0.001       0.657       0.000        1.032        0.213
 1­5            20­249            0.001       0.985       0.001        1.009        0.056
 1­5            250­999           0.000       1.113       0.000        1.116        0.027
 1­5            1k­4999           0.000       1.210       0.000        1.211        0.013
 1­5            5k­9999           0.000       0.916       0.000        1.351        0.000
 6­10           1­19              0.001       0.301       0.000        1.193        0.123
 6­10           20­249            0.001       0.929       0.000        1.046        0.039
 6­10           250­999           0.000       1.071       0.000        1.070        0.027
 6­10           1k­4999           0.000       1.202       0.000        1.102        0.033
 6­10           5k­9999           0.000       1.297       0.000        1.184        0.014
 6­10           10k+              0.000       0.956       0.000        1.259        0.017
 11+            1­19              0.002       0.028       0.001        1.232        0.104
 11+            20­249            0.001       0.943       0.001        1.222        0.036
 11+            250­999           0.000       0.994       0.001        1.020        0.037
 11+            1k­4999           0.000       1.183       0.002        1.059        0.037
 11+            5k­9999           0.000       1.280       0.001        1.039        0.035
 11+            10k+              0.000       1.164       0.006        1.119        0.029

Source: Census LBD. Firm size is the sum of employment across all of its plants. Firm age is the
difference between the year of observation minus the birth year of the firm's first plant.
30                                    KLENOW AND LI


                                  Table 4: Fit of model


               Period                      Data g               Model g

               1982­1986                    1.25                  1.33
               1987­1995                    1.10                  1.13
               1996­2005                    2.82                  2.83
               2006­2013                    1.03                  1.03

              Source: BLS Multifactor Productivity series. Percentage points
              of average yearly productivity growth within the specified period.
              Yearly growth is the sum of R&D and IP contributions to BLS MFP
              growth, converted into labor augmenting form.



growth from 1982­1995 to 1996­2005, as well as the subsequent deceleration
from 2006­2013. But, as displayed in Table 10, older firms drove the speedup
(70%) and the slowdown (59%). This is still smaller than their share of employ-
ment, but much larger than their share of growth in the slow-growth periods.
The growth slowdown did not stem from a falling rate of innovation by entering
and young firms, but rather by older established firms.



5.5.    Results: firm size groups

Table 11 displays the contribution of each size group to growth. Size is based
on employment in the previous year. Size 0 firms are hence new firms. The
Table shows four firm size groups, each with roughly one-fourth of all employ-
ment: those with 0­19 employees in the prior year, 20­249 workers, 250­4,999
workers, and 5,000+ workers. The smallest firms account for over 60% of growth
on average. Each of the other size groups account for about one-half as much
growth as they do employment.
     In Table 12 we show that small firms play an outsized role in all subperiods.
All size groups accelerated and decelerated along with aggregate TFP. In fact,
                           INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                                          31



                Table 5: Growth by innovation type, 1982­2013


 g                                CD                  NV                      OI

 1.64                          0.21                   0.38                   1.06
                              13.0%                  27.2%                  59.8%

Source: BLS Multifactor Productivity series. Percentage points of average yearly produc-
tivity growth within the specified period. Yearly growth is the sum of R&D and IP contri-
butions to BLS MFP growth, converted into labor augmenting form. All other variables
are calculated using the Census LBD. CD = Creative Destruction, NV = New Varieties, and
OI = Own Innovation (incumbents improving on their own varieties).



               Table 6: Growth by innovation type, subperiods

 Period                       g                 CD                   NV              OI

 1982­1995                  1.15               0.16                  0.42           0.57
 1996­2005                  2.82               0.33                  0.41           2.09
 2006­2013                  1.03               0.13                  0.28           0.62

Source: BLS Multifactor Productivity series. Percentage points of average yearly productivity
growth within the specified period. Yearly growth is the sum of R&D and IP contributions to
BLS MFP growth, converted into labor augmenting form. All other variables are calculated us-
ing the Census LBD. CD = Creative Destruction, NV = New Varieties, and OI = Own Innovation
(incumbents improving on their own varieties).



        Table 7: Share of the change in TFP growth from innovation types

 Period                                       g               CD             NV             OI

 1982­1995 vs 1996­2005                      1.67            9.8%           -0.5%      90.8%
 1996­2005 vs 2006­2013                      -1.79           11.0%          7.1%       81.9%

Source: BLS Multifactor Productivity series. Percentage points of average yearly productivity
growth within the specified period. Yearly growth is the sum of R&D and IP contributions to BLS
MFP growth, converted into labor augmenting form. All other variables are calculated using the
Census LBD. CD = Creative Destruction, NV = New Varieties, and OI = Own Innovation (incum-
bents improving on their own varieties).
32                                    KLENOW AND LI




                   Table 8: Growth by firm age groups, 1982­2013


                                      Age 0         Age 1­5        Age 6­10        Age 11+

 % of growth                          30.3%          18.9%            9.7%          41.1%
 % of employment                       3.3%          13.4%           11.2%          72.1%
 % of firms                           10.7%          31.1%           18.5%          39.6%

Source: Census LBD. Average growth rate over the entire period is 1.66%. Firm age is the differ-
ence between the year of observation minus the birth year of the firm's first plant.



                   Table 9: Growth by firm age groups, subperiods

 Period                     g            Age 0         Age 1­5        Age 6­10        Age 11+

 1982­1995                1.15            0.45           0.25            0.10            0.35
 1996­2005                2.82            0.52           0.47            0.31            1.51
 2006­2013                1.03            0.31           0.17            0.09            0.46

Source: BLS Multifactor Productivity series. Percentage points of average yearly productivity
growth within the specified period. Yearly growth is the sum of R&D and IP contributions to BLS
MFP growth, converted into labor augmenting form. All other variables are calculated using the
Census LBD. Firm age is the difference between the year of observation minus the birth year of the
firm's first plant.



              Table 10: Share of the change in TFP growth by age group

 Period                                  g           Age 0       Age 1­5        Age 6­10     Age 11+

 1982­1995 vs 1996­2005                 1.67         4.4%         13.4%          12.6%          69.6%
 1996­2005 vs 2006­2013                -1.79         11.8%        17.0%          12.3%          58.9%

Source: BLS Multifactor Productivity series. Percentage points of average yearly productivity growth
within the specified period. Yearly growth is the sum of R&D and IP contributions to BLS MFP growth,
converted into labor augmenting form. All other variables are calculated using the Census LBD. Firm age
is the difference between the year of observation minus the birth year of the firm's first plant.
                           INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                                33



                    Table 11: Growth by firm size groups, 1982­2013


                                     Small         Medium            Large          Mega
                                     (0­19)        (20­249)       (250­4999)       (5000+)

 % of growth                         62.2%           15.0%          12.2%           10.7%
 % of employment                     21.4%           26.3%          26.9%           25.4%
 % of firms                          88.0%           11.2%           0.8%           0.03%

Source: Census LBD. Average growth rate over the entire period is 1.66%. Firm size is the sum of
employment across all of its plants.




each size group contributed more or less equally to the speedup and slowdown
in Table 13. Thus the performance of mega firms does not directly explain the
rise and fall of growth.
   Tables 14 and 15 focus on the prominent role played by new firms vs. small
young firms -- and, for contrast, small old firms. Here we define young as ages
1­5 and small as having 1­19 employees. Small young firms contribute twice as
much to growth relative to their share of employment. Older small firms also
contribute more to growth than their share of employment, but the difference
is much less pronounced. This is reminiscent of the finding by Haltiwanger et
al. (2013) that, even conditional on size, young firms grow faster than old firms.



5.6.    Results: innovation type for each age and size group

We know from Table 8 that new firms contribute disproportionately to growth
relative to their employment share. And we know they do no own innovation,
by definition. But they do contribute via creative destruction or new varieties?
Table 16 says that new firms mostly enter with new varieties. This seems in-
tuitive in that it might be hard for new firms to eclipse existing products. At
the other extreme, older firms (age 11+) contribute 40% of average growth, and
34                                    KLENOW AND LI




                       Table 12: Growth by firm size groups, subperiods


 Period                                    Small            Medium          Large           Mega
                             g
                                           (0­19)           (20­249)     (250­4999)        (5000+)

 1982­1995                 1.15             0.85              0.14           0.08            0.08
 1996­2005                 2.82             1.30              0.55           0.51            0.46
 2006­2013                 1.03             0.63              0.15           0.14            0.10

Source: BLS Multifactor Productivity series. Percentage points of average yearly productivity growth
within the specified period. Yearly growth is the sum of R&D and IP contributions to BLS MFP growth,
converted into labor augmenting form. All other variables are calculated using the Census LBD. Firm size
is the sum of employment across all of its plants.




                    Table 13: Share of the change in TFP growth by size group


 Period                                            Small        Medium           Large          Mega
                                     g
                                                   (0­19)       (20­249)      (250­4999)       (5000+)

 1982­1995 vs 1996­2005             1.67           27.0%         24.7%             25.5%        22.7%
 1996­2005 vs 2006­2013            -1.79           37.5%         22.2%             20.2%        20.1%

Source: Census LBD. Firm size is the sum of employment across all of its plants.
                          INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                                      35




Table 14: Contribution of new, young-small and old-small firms, 1982-2013


                                          New           Young small          Old small

 % of growth                              29.9                14.1              11.6
 % of employment                           3.3                6.1                8.3
 % of firms                               10.7                28.8              32.0

Source: Census LBD. "New" = age 0, "Young" = age 1­5 and "Small" = employment 1­19.
Firm age is the difference between the year of observation minus the birth year of the firm's
first plant. Firm size is the sum of employment across all of its plants.




Table 15: Contribution of new, young-small, and old-small firms by period


  Period                         New              Young small             Old small

  1982­1995                      37.9                  17.1                   10.8
  1996­2005                      18.5                  10.9                   11.3
  2006­2013                      30.1                  12.8                   13.2

Source: Census LBD. "New" = age 0, "Young" = age 1­5 and "Small" = employment 1­19.
Firm age is the difference between the year of observation minus the birth year of the
firm's first plant. Firm size is the sum of employment across all of its plants.
36                                    KLENOW AND LI




        Table 16: Growth by innovation type for each age group, 1982­2013


 Age                    CD             NV               OI            Total       % of Emp

 0                      7.2           23.0              0.0           30.3           3.3
 1­5                    0.7            1.2              17.1          18.9           13.4
 6­10                   0.7            0.9              8.1            9.7           11.2
 11+                    4.4            2.1              34.6          41.1           72.1

Source: Census LBD. CD = Creative Destruction, NV = New Varieties, and OI = Own Innovation
(incumbents improving on their own varieties). Firm age is the difference between the year of
observation minus the birth year of the firm's first plant.



 Table 17: Growth contribution by innovation type and age groups, subperiods

 Period               Age               CD        NV           OI     Total    % of Emp

 1982­1995            0                 7.8      31.0          0.0     38.8        3.9
                      1­5               0.9       1.9          19.0    21.8       15.5
                      6­10              0.4       1.5          7.2     9.1        12.1
                      11+               5.1       1.9          23.4    30.4       68.5
 1996­2005            0                 5.1      13.4          0.0     18.5        3.1
                      1­5               0.8       0.1          15.9    16.8       12.7
                      6­10              1.0       0.6          9.5     11.2       11.1
                      11+               4.6       0.4          48.5    53.5       73.0
 2006­2013            0                 8.9      21.2          0.0     30.1        2.5
                      1­5               0.1       1.2          15.3    16.6       10.6
                      6­10              0.7       0.4          8.0     9.1         9.5
                      11+               2.9       4.5          36.9    44.2       77.3

Source: Census LBD. CD = Creative Destruction, NV = New Varieties, and OI = Own Innovation
(incumbents improving on their own varieties). Firm age is the difference between the year of
observation minus the birth year of the firm's first plant.
                          INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                       37


more than 3/4 of this comes from their efforts to improve their own products.
They do comparatively little creative destruction and variety creation. The pic-
ture that emerges is that old firms improve their own products and new firms
introduce new varieties. Creative destruction is more evenly split among en-
trants and older firms.
   Table 17 breaks the growth contribution of each age group into each innova-
tion type for each subperiod. Old firms were evidently responsible for the bulk
of the growth acceleration and slowdown. In Table 18 we assess the type of in-
novation pursued by each firm size group. For every group other than entrants
-- from firms with 1­19 up through 10,000 or more employees -- their main
source of growth is own innovation. Table 19, which gives contributions by in-
novation type and size groups in subperiods, reveals some interesting patterns.
The surge in own innovation from 1996­2005 occurred in firms with 20 or more
employees. Even though young firms typically do a lot of own innovation, this
increased relatively little in this fast-growth subperiod.
38                                    KLENOW AND LI




Table 18: Growth contribution by innovation type for each size group, 1982­2013


 Size                  CD              NV             OI            Total        % of Emp

 0                      7.2           23.0            0.0           30.3             3.3
 1­19                   1.3            0.6           30.0           31.9            18.1
 20­249                 0.1            2.8           12.1           15.0            26.3
 250­999                0.4            0.5            4.9            5.8            12.8
 1k­4999                0.8            0.1            5.5            6.4            14.1
 5k­9999                0.5            0.1            1.9            2.5             5.8
 10k+                   2.6            0.1            5.5            8.2            19.6

Source: Census LBD. CD = Creative Destruction, NV = New Varieties, and OI = Own Innovation
(incumbents improving on their own varieties). Firm size is the sum of employment across all of
its plants.
                          INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                                   39


Table 19: Growth contribution by innovation type and size groups, subperiods


 Period               Size             CD        NV         OI      Total     % of Emp

 1982­1995            0                7.8       31.0      0.0       38.8         3.9
                      1­19             0.5       1.2       33.5      35.2         19.0
                      20­249           0.1       3.7       8.1       11.9         25.8
                      250­999          0.5       0.0       2.5        3.0         12.0
                      1k­4999          1.0       0.1       2.9        4.0         13.5
                      5k­9999          0.7       0.1       0.8        1.5         5.8
                      10k+             3.6       0.2       1.8        5.6         19.9
 1996­2005            0                5.1       13.4      0.0       18.5         3.1
                      1­19             1.8       0.1       25.9      27.8         17.8
                      20­249           0.1       0.6       18.8      19.5         26.9
                      250­999          0.6       0.0       7.7        8.4         13.2
                      1k­4999          1.1       0.0       8.5        9.6         14.3
                      5k­9999          0.3       0.3       3.0        3.6         5.8
                      10k+             2.6       0.1       10.0      12.7         18.9
 2006­2013            0                8.9       21.2      0.0       30.1         2.5
                      1­19             2.2       0.2       28.9      31.4         17.0
                      20­249           0.1       3.9       10.7      14.7         26.3
                      250­999          0.1       1.8       5.4        7.3         13.4
                      1k­4999          0.4       0.0       6.3        6.7         15.0
                      5k­9999          0.2       0.0       2.5        2.7         5.8
                      10k+             0.7       0.1       6.3        7.1         19.9

Source: Census LBD. CD = Creative Destruction, NV = New Varieties, and OI = Own Innovation
(incumbents improving on their own varieties). Firm size is the sum of employment across all
of its plants.
40                                         KLENOW AND LI


5.7.         Obsolescence

As we described, our model features exit of the lowest quality products each
period. In the data, we observe both the exit rate of plants and the average
employment of exiting plants. We can calculate these moments separately by
firm age and size, as well.
         How do we distinguish the rate of creative destruction -- which also pro-
duces plant exit -- from obsolescence? The key is our assumption that creative
destruction is undirected, or just as likely for how and high quality products. For
this reason, creatively destroyed plants should be of average size. In the data, in
contrast, exiting plants are smaller on average than plants operating in the pre-
vious year. As a result, we can infer the the fraction of exiting plants from the
size and number of plants in the left tail plus the difference between the average
size of exiting plants and all plants.
         From the point of view of our accounting, these are "lost varieties" which
detract from growth.8 We do not subtract this obsolescence from any particular
innovation channel, but instead from all channels in equal proportion to their
contribution to growth. Table 20 provides our estimates of the fraction of plants
exiting due to obsolescence, and their share of employment. We infer that 3-4%
of employment is at the 9-10% of plants who will exit due to obsolescence in the
next year. These rates show no clear trend across subperiods.
         Tables 22 and 23 trace the obsolescence to plants of varying ages and sizes.
There is no obsolescence among entering plants (age=0, size=0) by construc-
tion. Roughly one-half of obsolescence occurs at plants 6+ years old, and the
other half at plants 1­5 years old. Not surprisingly, most of obsolescence in-
volves the smallest plants, with 1­19 employees.




     8
         A structural model might feature overhead labor to explain such exit.
                        INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                              41


                              Table 20: Obsolescence


             Period          % of Emp        % of Plants       contrib OB

           1982­1995            4.15             10.34             -1.06
           1996­2005            2.93             8.53              -0.29
           2006­2013            2.83             9.01              -0.84

        Source: Census LBD. Entries are percent of all employment or percent of
        the overall number of plants.




6.     Further results and future applications

6.1.   Treating all 0­5 year old firms as entrants

In Table 16, we show that new firms mostly contribute by introducing new vari-
eties, while young firms aged 1 to 5 contribute mostly through own-innovation.
In the presence of adjustment costs, however, what we infer as own innovation
by young firms may actually be the dynamics of accumulating inputs and ac-
quiring customers. We therefore check the robustness of our findings to treat-
ing age 1 to 5 firms as new firm. Doing so reinterprets the growth of young
firms to come from creative destruction and new varieties rather than own in-
novation. Table 21 displays the results. We find that new firms (aged 0 to 5) now
account for 49 percent of all growth, up from 30 percent. The contribution of
own innovation falls from 60 percent to 43 percent. That from creative destruc-
tion increases from 13 to 17 percent, while the contribution from new varieties
increases from 27 to 40 percent.



6.2.   Contribution of superstar firms

One advantage of our method is that it can be used to quantify the contribu-
tion of individual firms to aggregate growth. Since we cannot reveal the identity
42                                      KLENOW AND LI


                  Table 21: Treating all 0­5 year old firms as entrants


  Age                  CD              NV               OI             Total        % of Emp

  0­5                 12.0             37.2             0.0            49.2             16.7
  6­10                 0.7             0.9              8.1             9.7             11.2
  11+                  4.4             2.1             34.6            41.1             72.1
  Total               17.1             40.2            42.7

 Source: Census LBD. CD = Creative Destruction, NV = New Varieties, and OI = Own Inno-
 vation (incumbents improving on their own varieties). Firm age is the difference between
 the year of observation minus the birth year of the firm's first plant. Entries are percent of all
 employment or percent of the overall number of plants.



of individual firms in the Census data, we apply our method to the National
Establishment Time-Series (NETS) Database, which ranges from 1990 to 2014.
The unit of observation is an establishment. As in the Census, we define entry
of an establishment as the first time an establishment is observed in a location
in the data. We define exit as when an establishment ceases to operate in a
location. For each establishment, we observe its employment and, mostly im-
portantly, the identity of its headquarter plant and therefore its firm identity.9
Finally, we restrict the time period to 1996­2005 because this period is compa-
rable to the high growth period in our calculations with the Census data, and
the post-2005 NETS data displays large swings in the entry and exit of plants
that are inconsistent with the Census data.
         As a demonstration of our method, we used the NETS 1996­2005 data to
calculate the contribution of Amazon and Walmart. We find that, while both
companies grew during this window, their contribution to overall growth was
quite modest. Amazon accounted for only 0.0041% of growth (less than 1%
     9
    We do not use NETS sales data because it is imputed at the establishment level from es-
tablishment employment and firm-level sales. Also, like what we did for the Census data, we
remove mechanical effects from mergers and acquisitions by defining the owner of an estab-
lishment as the firm that owns the establishment at the time of entry.
                       INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                           43


of all growth), while Walmart contributed 0.80% (closer to 1% of all growth, or
over 2 basis points of annual TFP growth). Nonetheless, Amazon's contribution
was three times its employment share, while Walmart's growth contribution was
twice its employment share.



6.3.   Future applications

Our innovation accounting is distinct from gross job creation, gross job destruc-
tion, or net job creation. It can therefore be helpful to contrast our results to
these statistics, which have garnered substantial attention. For example, young
fast-growing firms -- so-called "gazelles" -- are responsible for a notable frac-
tion of gross and net job creation. How much growth do they generate on aver-
age? And how much of gross job destruction is due to creative destruction, as
opposed to obsolescence?
   We could carry out several important robustness checks. We could follow
Aghion, Bergeaud, Boppart, Klenow and Li (2019) and distinguish between mea-
sured and true growth. They argue that measured growth mostly captures own
innovation by incumbents, and misses most growth from new varieties and cre-
ative destruction. We could re-estimate parameters under this hypothesis.
   For manufacturing the Census has data on revenue and capital as well as
labor at the plant level. Thus for manufacturing we could back out underlying
productivity, rather than assume sales are proportional to employment and the
absence of adjustment costs and distortions. We could apply our innovation
accounting on directly to this underlying productivity measure, and see how
our inference compares to that with employment alone.
   Future work could implement our approach to assess the contribution of
locations (states, cities) to aggregate growth. It could also decompose growth
within industries such ICT or retail. One could also look at which cohorts of
entering firms have contributed the most to growth. Our method does not me-
chanically count firm employment growth due to mergers and acquisitions as
44                                 KLENOW AND LI


contributing to growth. But one could investigate whether targets of M&A activ-
ity become more innovative after they are taken over. This could obtain results
at odd with existing analyses, which focus on revenue productivity.



7.     Conclusion

We exploited U.S. Census data on employment at plants across all firms in the
nonfarm business sector from 1982­2013. We traced aggregate TFP growth to
the innovation efforts of firms by their size and age. We arrived at three main
findings. First, young firms (ages 0 to 5) generate one-half of growth, roughly
three times more than their share of employment might suggest. Second, large
firms are at the other end of the spectrum, contributing notably less to growth
than their share of employment. Third, a majority of growth takes the form of
quality improvements by incumbents on their own products. New varieties and
creative destruction contribute less, but are still important. Such own innova-
tion accounts for the bulk of the growth speedup and slowdown in the middle
of our sample.
     Our study comes with many caveats that we hope future work, with better
data, can address. We used a plant as a proxy for a product. With more de-
tailed data on products sold within plants, this can be relaxed. See, for exam-
ple, Bernard, Redding and Schott (2010) on manufacturing and Hottman et al.
(2016) on packaged consumer goods.
     We gauged a plant's size by its employment rather than its sales and com-
bined plants with a CES aggregator. Though they are highly correlated in man-
ufacturing, where we can see both, some innovation surely tilts toward capital
and away from labor (automation). And a richer analysis could place industries
into CES nests and entertain non-CES aggregation.
     Even under CES aggregation, a plant's sales are a perfect reflection of its un-
derlying productivity only in the absence of adjustment costs and distortions
such as markups, markdowns, and financial frictions. Adjustment costs could
                        INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                             45


include those for inputs, or to acquiring a customer base. We could be overstat-
ing the importance of young firms for innovation (overall and by incumbents on
their own products) if their fast growth is due, in part, to adjusting their inputs
and stock of customers.
   We assumed that creative destruction was untargeted. That is, higher quality
products are just as likely to be creatively destroyed as lower quality products.
One can think of a priori reasons why creative destruction would target higher
quality products (more sales to gain) or lower quality products (perhaps easier
to improve upon).
   We made the arrival rates and step sizes of innovation depend only on the
size and age of innovating firms . Studies such as Akcigit and Kerr (2018) have
argued that innovation by new and young firms generates bigger spillovers. This
would reinforce our conclusion that younger firms punch above their weight
class in terms of growth.
   Our innovation accounting is silent on the determinants of arrival rates and
step sizes of innovation. Knowing the structural parameters that drive these
variables is vital for drawing policy lessons. See Atkeson and Burstein (2019).
One key question for future research is whether creative destruction is a strate-
gic complement or substitute for own innovation by incumbents. If they are
substitutes, as in Peters (2019) and Akcigit and Ates (2019), then a falling rate of
creative destruction may be offset by a rising rate of own innovation. If they are
complements, however, then perhaps the threat of creative destruction spurs
innovative efforts by incumbents. This is the spirit of the model in Aghion,
Bloom, Blundell, Griffith and Howitt (2005) in which the threat of being over-
taken by followers or entrants leads to more innovation by leaders.
46                                 KLENOW AND LI


8.    Appendix with Extra Figures and Tables

                                 Figure 3: Microsoft




Source: WRDS Compustat and BEA Table 1.1.9. Revenue per worker = "REVT / (GDP Deflator x
EMP)", Employment = "EMP" and Year = "FYEAR". The graph displays revenue per worker and
employment relative to the first year when both series are available for the firm.
                         INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                                47


                                  Figure 4: Google




Source: WRDS Compustat and BEA Table 1.1.9. Revenue per worker = "REVT / (GDP Deflator x
EMP)", Employment = "EMP" and Year = "FYEAR". The graph displays revenue per worker and
employment relative to the first year when both series are available for the firm.


                                 Figure 5: Facebook




Source: WRDS Compustat and BEA Table 1.1.9. Revenue per worker = "REVT / (GDP Deflator x
EMP)", Employment = "EMP" and Year = "FYEAR". The graph displays revenue per worker and
employment relative to the first year when both series are available for the firm.
48                                 KLENOW AND LI



                                   Figure 6: Apple




Source: WRDS Compustat and BEA Table 1.1.9. Revenue per worker = "REVT / (GDP Deflator x
EMP)", Employment = "EMP" and Year = "FYEAR". The graph displays revenue per worker and
employment relative to the first year when both series are available for the firm.


                                 Figure 7: Starbucks




Source: WRDS Compustat and BEA Table 1.1.9. Revenue per worker = "REVT / (GDP Deflator x
EMP)", Employment = "EMP" and Year = "FYEAR". The graph displays revenue per worker and
employment relative to the first year when both series are available for the firm.
                           INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                                  49




                         Table 22: Obsolescence by age groups


 Period              Age                    % of Emp         % of Plants      contrib OB

 1982­1995           0                          0.0              0.0               0.0
                     1­5                        2.1              5.8               -0.5
                     6­10                       0.7              1.7               -0.2
                     11+                        1.3              2.9               -0.3
 1996­2005           0                          0.0              0.0               0.0
                     1­5                        1.3              4.4               -0.1
                     6­10                       0.5              1.4               -0.0
                     11+                        1.1              2.8               -0.1
 2006­2013           0                          0.0              0.0               0.0
                     1­5                        1.5              4.6               -0.4
                     6­10                       0.6              1.5               -0.2
                     11+                        0.8              2.9               -0.2

Source: Census LBD. Firm age is the difference between the year of observation minus the birth
year of the firm's first plant. Units are percent of total employment or total number plants
50                                    KLENOW AND LI




                          Table 23: Obsolescence by size groups


 Period               Size                    % of Emp         % of Plants        contrib OB

 1982­1995            0                           0.0               0.0                0.0
                      1­19                        2.6               9.2               -0.7
                      20­249                      0.9               0.3               -0.2
                      250­999                     0.1               0.1               -0.0
                      1k­4999                     0.1               0.2               -0.0
                      5k­9999                     0.1               0.1               -0.0
                      10k+                        0.4               0.4               -0.1
 1996­2005            0                           0.0               0.0                0.0
                      1­19                        1.5               7.4               -0.2
                      20­249                      0.6               0.2               -0.1
                      250­999                     0.1               0.1               -0.0
                      1k­4999                     0.1               0.2               -0.0
                      5k­9999                     0.1               0.1               -0.0
                      10k+                        0.5               0.6               -0.0
 2006­2013            0                           0.0               0.0                0.0
                      1­19                        2.0               8.3               -0.6
                      20­249                      0.7               0.1               -0.2
                      250­999                     0.0               0.0                0.0
                      1k­4999                     0.0               0.1                0.0
                      5k­9999                     0.0               0.1                0.0
                      10k+                        0.2               0.5               -0.0

Source: Census LBD. Firm size is the sum of employment across all of its plants. Units are percent
of total employment or total number plants
                           INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                                    51




                  Table 24: Contribution by age-size groups, 1982­1995


 Size              Age                   CD          NV          OI         Total      % of Emp

 0                 0                     7.6        30.3         0.0         37.9          3.9
 1­19              1­5                   0.1         0.7        16.4         17.1          7.2
 1­19              6­10                  0.3         0.4         6.1         6.8           4.2
 1­19              11+                   0.4         0.0        10.4         10.8          7.7
 20­249            1­5                   0.0         1.1         2.2         3.4           5.6
 20­249            6­10                  0.0         0.8         1.3         2.1           4.6
 20­249            11+                   0.1         1.6         4.4         6.1          15.5
 250­999           1­5                   0.3         0.0         0.0         0.3           1.3
 250­999           6­10                  0.2         0.0         0.0         0.2           1.4
 250­999           11+                   0.1         0.0         2.5         2.6           9.3
 1k­4999           1­5                   0.2         0.0         0.0         0.2           0.9
 1k­4999           6­10                  0.4         0.0         0.2         0.6           1.1
 1k­4999           11+                   0.6         0.1         2.6         3.4          11.5
 5k­9999           1­5                   0.2         0.0         0.0         0.2           0.5
 5k­9999           6­10                  0.2         0.0         0.0         0.2           0.3
 5k­9999           11+                   0.4         0.0         0.7         1.2           5.1
 10k+              6­10                  1.4         0.0         0.0         1.4           0.4
 10k+              11+                   3.5         0.2         1.7         5.4          19.5
Source: Census LBD. CD = Creative Destruction, NV = New Varieties, and OI = Own Innovation (in-
cumbents improving on their own varieties). Firm size is the sum of employment across all of its
plants. Firm age is the difference between the year of observation minus the birth year of the firm's
first plant.
52                                    KLENOW AND LI




                  Table 25: Contribution by age-size groups, 1996­2005


 Size              Age                   CD          NV          OI         Total      % of Emp

 0                 0                     5.1        13.4         0.0         18.5          3.1
 1­19              1­5                   0.0         0.1        10.8         10.9          5.6
 1­19              6­10                  0.4         0.0         5.1         5.5           3.6
 1­19              11+                   1.3         0.0        10.0         11.3          8.5
 20­249            1­5                   0.1         0.0         4.1         4.2           4.6
 20­249            6­10                  0.0         0.6         2.9         3.5           4.2
 20­249            11+                   0.0         0.0        11.8         11.8         18.0
 250­999           1­5                   0.2         0.0         0.7         0.9           1.2
 250­999           6­10                  0.1         0.0         0.7         0.8           1.3
 250­999           11+                   0.3         0.0         6.4         6.6          10.7
 1k­4999           1­5                   0.3         0.0         0.3         0.6           0.8
 1k­4999           6­10                  0.2         0.0         0.6         0.8           1.1
 1k­4999           11+                   0.6         0.0         7.7         8.2          12.4
 5k­9999           1­5                   0.2         0.0         0.0         0.2           0.4
 5k­9999           6­10                  0.1         0.0         0.1         0.2           0.3
 5k­9999           11+                   0.1         0.3         2.9         3.3           5.0
 10k+              6­10                  0.2         0.0         0.2         0.4           0.5
 10k+              11+                   2.4         0.1         9.8         12.3         18.4

Source: Census LBD. CD = Creative Destruction, NV = New Varieties, and OI = Own Innovation (in-
cumbents improving on their own varieties). Firm size is the sum of employment across all of its
plants. Firm age is the difference between the year of observation minus the birth year of the firm's
first plant.
                           INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                                    53




                  Table 26: Contribution by age-size groups, 2006­2013


 Size              Age                   CD          NV          OI         Total      % of Emp

 0                 0                     8.9        21.2         0.0         30.1          2.5
 1­19              1­5                   0.0         0.2        12.6         12.8          4.8
 1­19              6­10                  0.2         0.0         5.2         5.4           3.2
 1­19              11+                   2.1         0.0        11.1         13.2          9.0
 20­249            1­5                   0.0         0.9         2.4         3.3           4.0
 20­249            6­10                  0.1         0.4         1.8         2.3           3.7
 20­249            11+                   0.0         2.5         6.6         9.1          18.6
 250­999           1­5                   0.0         0.0         0.3         0.3           1.0
 250­999           6­10                  0.1         0.0         0.5         0.6           1.2
 250­999           11+                   0.0         1.8         4.5         6.3          11.2
 1k­4999           1­5                   0.1         0.0         0.0         0.1           0.6
 1k­4999           6­10                  0.1         0.0         0.4         0.4           0.9
 1k­4999           11+                   0.2         0.0         5.9         6.2          13.6
 5k­9999           1­5                   0.0         0.0         0.0         0.0           0.3
 5k­9999           6­10                  0.1         0.0         0.0         0.1           0.2
 5k­9999           11+                   0.1         0.0         2.5         2.6           5.3
 10k+              6­10                  0.2         0.0         0.1         0.2           0.3
 10k+              11+                   0.5         0.1         6.3         6.9          19.6

Source: Census LBD. CD = Creative Destruction, NV = New Varieties, and OI = Own Innovation (in-
cumbents improving on their own varieties). Firm size is the sum of employment across all of its
plants. Firm age is the difference between the year of observation minus the birth year of the firm's
first plant.
54                                    KLENOW AND LI


References
Acemoglu, Daron, "Labor- and Capital-Augmenting Technical Change," Journal of the
  European Economic Association, 2003, 1 (1), 1­37.

  , Introduction to Modern Economic Growth, Princeton University Press, 2011.

Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, "A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction,"
  Econometrica, 1992, 60 (2), 323­351.

      and       , The Economics of Growth, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
  Press, 2009.

  , Antonin Bergeaud, Timo Boppart, Peter J. Klenow, and Huiyu Li, "Missing Growth
  from Creative Destruction," American Economic Review, 2019, 109 (8), 2795­2822.

  ,     ,   ,     , and   , "A Theory of Falling Growth and Rising Rents," NBER Working
  Paper 26448, 2020.

  , Nick Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith, and Peter Howitt, "Competition and
  Innovation: An Inverted-U Relationship," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2005, 120
  (2), 701­728.

  , Ufuk Akcigit, and Peter Howitt, "What Do We Learn from Schumpeterian Growth
  Theory?," Handbook of Economic Growth, 2014, 2, 515­563.

Akcigit, Ufuk and Sina T. Ates, "What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?," NBER
  Working Paper 25756, 2019.

     and William R. Kerr, "Growth through Heterogeneous Innovations," Journal of Polit-
  ical Economy, 2018, 126 (4), 1374­1443.

Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Burstein, "Aggregate Implications of Innovation Policy,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 2019, 127 (6), 2625­2683.

Baily, Martin Neil, Charles Hulten, and David Campbell, "Productivity Dynamics in
  Manufacturing Plants," Brookings Papers: Microeconomics, 1992, 4, 187­267.
                           INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                             55


Baqaee, David Rezza and Emmanuel Farhi, "Productivity and Misallocation in General
  Equilibrium," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2020, 135 (1), 105­163.


Bernard, Andrew B., Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott, "Multi-Product Firms and
  Product Switching," American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (1), 70­97.


Bloom, Nicholas, Charles I. Jones, John Van Reenen, and Michael Webb, "Are ideas get-
  ting harder to find?," NBER Working Paper 23782, 2017.


Broda, Christian and David E Weinstein, "Globalization and the Gains from Variety,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, 121 (2), 541­585.


Decker, Ryan A., John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, "Declining Dy-
  namism, Allocative Efficiency, and the Productivity Slowdown," American Economic
  Review, 2017, 107 (5), 322­26.


Decker, Ryan, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, "The Role of En-
  trepreneurship in U.S. Job Creation and Economic Dynamism," Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 2014, 28 (3), 3­24.


Engbom, Niklas, "Firm and Worker Dynamics in an Aging Labor Market," unpublished
  paper, 2017.


Eslava, Marcela and John Haltiwanger, "The Life-Cycle Growth of Plants: The Role of
  Productivity, Demand and Distortions," unpublished paper, 2019.


Feenstra, Robert C., "New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International
  Prices," American Economic Review, 1994, 84 (1), 157­177.


Fernald, John G, "Productivity and Potential Output Before, During, and After the Great
  Recession," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2015, 29, 1­51.


Foster, Lucia, John C. Haltiwanger, and C.J. Krizan, "Aggregate Productivity Growth:
  Lessons from Microeconomic Evidence," New Developments in Productivity Analy-
  sis, 2001, 8, 303­372.
56                                   KLENOW AND LI


  , John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson, "Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and Efficiency:
  Selection on Productivity or Profitability?," American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (1),
  394­425.

Garcia-Macia, Daniel, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Peter J. Klenow, "How Destructive is Inno-
  vation?," Econometrica, 2019, 87 (5), 1507­1541.

Griliches, Zvi and Haim Regev, "Firm Productivity in Israeli Industry 1979­1988," Jour-
  nal of Econometrics, 1995, 65 (1), 175­203.

Guti´          an and Thomas Philippon, "Fading Stars," AEA Papers and Proceedings,
    errez, Germ´
  2019, 109, 312­316.

Haltiwanger, John, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, "Who Creates Jobs? Small versus
  Large versus Young," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2013, 95 (2), 347­361.

Hopenhayn, Hugo A., "Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium,"
  Econometrica, 1992, 60 (5), 1127­1150.

Hopenhayn, Hugo, Julian Neira, and Rish Singhania, "From Population Growth to Firm
  Demographics: Implications for Concentration, Entrepreneurship and the Labor
  Share," NBER Working Paper 25382, 2018.

Hottman, Colin J., Stephen J. Redding, and David E. Weinstein, "Quantifying the
  Sources of Firm Heterogeneity," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (3), 1291­
  1364.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow, "Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China
  and India," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (4), 1403­1448.

      and   , "The Life Cycle of Plants in India and Mexico," Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 2014, 129 (3), 1035­1084.

     and    , "The Reallocation Myth," Fostering a Dynamic Global Economy, 2017.

  ,     , and Ishan B. Nath, "A Global View of Creative Destruction," NBER Working Paper
  26461, 2019.
                         INNOVATIVE GROWTH ACCOUNTING                             57


Jones, Charles I., "R&D-Based Models of Economic Growth," Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, 1995, 103 (4), 759­784.

  , "Life and Growth," Journal of Political Economy, 2016, 124 (2), 539­578.

Klette, Tor Jakob and Samuel Kortum, "Innovating Firms and Aggregate Innovation,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (5), 986­1018.

Krusell, Per, "How is R&D Distributed Across Firms? A Theoretical Analysis," unpub-
  lished paper, 1998.

Lentz, Rasmus and Dale T. Mortensen, "An Empirical Model of Growth through Product
  Innovation," Econometrica, 2008, 76 (6), 1317­1373.

Liu, Ernest, Atif Mian, and Amir Sufi, "Low Interest Rates, Market Power, and Produc-
  tivity Growth," NBER Working Paper 25505, 2019.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr. and Benjamin Moll, "Knowledge Growth and the Allocation of
  Time," Journal of Political Economy, 2014, 122 (1), 1­51.

Luttmer, Erzo G.J., "On the Mechanics of Firm Growth," Review of Economic Studies,
  2011, 78 (3), 1042­1068.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David N. Weil, "A Contribution to the Empirics
  of Economic Growth," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1992, 107 (2), 407­437.

Melitz, Marc J. and Saso Polanec, "Dynamic Olley-Pakes Productivity Decomposition
  with Entry and Exit," The RAND Journal of Economics, 2015, 46 (2), 362­375.

Olley, G. Steven and Ariel Pakes, "The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommuni-
  cations Equipment Industry," Econometrica, 1996, 64 (6), 1263­1297.

Peters, Michael, "Heterogeneous Mark-Ups, Growth and Endogenous Misallocation,"
  forthcoming in Econometrica, 2019.

  and Conor Walsh, "Declining Dynamism, Increasing Markups and Missing Growth:
  The Role of the Labor Force," unpublished paper, 2019.
58                                  KLENOW AND LI


Rivera-Batiz, Luis A. and Paul M. Romer, "Economic Integration and Endogenous
  Growth," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1991, 106 (2), 531­555.

Romer, Paul M., "Endogenous Technological Change," Journal of Political Economy,
  1990, 98 (5, Part 2), S71­S102.

Solow, Robert M., "A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth," Quarterly Jour-
  nal of Economics, 1956, 70 (1), 65­94.
