                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   ADVANCES IN STRUCTURAL VECTOR AUTOREGRESSIONS WITH IMPERFECT
                      IDENTIFYING INFORMATION

                                      Christiane Baumeister
                                       James D. Hamilton

                                       Working Paper 27014
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27014


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




We thank Diego Kaenzig and Lam Nguyen for helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Christiane Baumeister and James D. Hamilton. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Advances in Structural Vector Autoregressions with Imperfect Identifying Information
Christiane Baumeister and James D. Hamilton
NBER Working Paper No. 27014
April 2020
JEL No. C11,C32,Q43

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper examines methods for structural interpretation of vector autoregressions when the
identifying information is regarded as imperfect or incomplete. We suggest that a Bayesian
approach offers a unifying theme for guiding inference in such settings. Among other advantages,
the unified approach solves a problem with calculating elasticities that appears not to have been
recognized by earlier researchers. We also call attention to some computational concerns of
which researchers who approach this problem using other methods should be aware.


Christiane Baumeister
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
3028 Jenkins Nanovic Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
cbaumeis@nd.edu

James D. Hamilton
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
jhamilton@ucsd.edu
1         Introduction.
The problem of identification -- drawing causal or structural conclusions from the correlations
we observe in the data -- is often the core challenge of empirical economic research. The tradi-
tional approach to identification is to bring in additional information in the form of identifying
assumptions, such as restrictions that certain magnitudes have to be zero. Although this ap-
proach is very common in empirical economic studies, it would be hard to find an economic
researcher who does not entertain some doubts about whether the identifying restrictions are
really valid.
    These doubts have led to substantial interest among empirical macroeconomists in methods
that make use of incomplete identifying assumptions, such as restrictions on the signs rather
than the magnitudes of certain parameters of interest. These methods have been applied to
interpreting vector autoregressions in hundreds of published studies.1 Surveys of the literature
have been provided by Kilian and Lütkepohl (2017), Uhlig (2017), and Kilian and Zhou (2020).
    In this paper we propose a unifying principle for approaching these questions that much
of the literature has overlooked. We suggest that what are usually thought of as identifying
assumptions should more generally be described as information that the analyst had about
the economic structure before seeing the data. We maintain that such information is most
naturally represented as a Bayesian prior distribution over certain features of the economic
structure. Traditional point identification can be viewed as a special case of a dogmatic
Bayesian prior -- values that we knew for certain before we saw the data. The natural way to
acknowledge that our prior information about the structure is less than perfect is to reduce the
confidence reflected in those prior distributions. Application of Bayes' Law will then result
in those doubts about the true structure being incorporated in the conclusions we draw after
having seen the data.
    In Section 2 we illustrate this theme using a number of earlier studies and correct some
misunderstandings that have appeared in the recent literature. Section 3 demonstrates that a
common approach to estimating elasticities in sign-restricted vector autoregressions, used for
example by Kilian and Murphy (2012, 2014), Güntner (2014), Riggi and Venditti (2015), Kil-
ian and Lütkepohl (2017), Ludvigson, Ma, and Ng (2017), Antolín-Díaz and Rubio-Ramírez
(2018), Basher et al. (2018), Herrera and Rangaraju (2020), and Zhou (2020), is incorrect.
We show how a unified Bayesian approach fixes this problem. Section 4 comments on some
computational issues of which users of sign-restricted vector autoregressions should be aware.
Here we again note an advantage of a unified Bayesian approach in avoiding these problems.
Section 5 discusses auxiliary identifying information in the form of instruments or proxy vari-
ables. Section 6 briefly concludes.
    Our core recommendation is that instead of regarding identifying assumptions as something
    1
        See Baumeister and Hamilton (2020a) for a partial list of these.



                                                         2
one simply has to make, researchers should reflect carefully on what we know on the basis of
other data sets or economic theory and how confident we are in this knowledge. Both the
prior information and our doubts about the quality of the information should be incorporated
in any conclusions we draw from the data.


2         Alternative approaches to structural identification.
A wide class of dynamic structural models takes the form

                                           Ayt = Bxt-1 + ut .                                           (1)

Here yt is an (n × 1) vector of observed variables and xt-1 is a (k × 1) vector containing m lags
                                       
of y and a constant term, xt-1 = (yt-1 , yt                     
                                             -2 , ..., yt-m , 1) , so k = mn + 1. This is a system
of n structural equations in which A is an (n × n) matrix of contemporaneous coefficients
and B captures structural dynamics. The structural shocks ut are assumed to be mutually
uncorrelated white noise with E (ut ut ) given by the diagonal matrix D.2
        Associated with this system is a reduced-form vector autoregression:

                                            yt = xt-1 + t                                               (2)

                                                = A-1 B.                                                (3)

The relation between reduced-form residuals and the structural shocks is

                                               t = A-1 ut                                               (4)

                                     E (t t ) =  = A-1 D(A-1 ) .                                        (5)

The reduced-form parameters  and  are readily estimated by OLS. However, knowledge of
the reduced-form parameters is not enough information to uncover the structural parameters
A, B, and D of interest. Drawing an inference about the structural parameters requires
bringing in additional information about the structure from other sources.


2.1        The traditional approach to identification.
The traditional approach to structural estimation is based on imposing enough restrictions on
the structural parameters to achieve point identification, that is, a unique mapping from the
reduced-form parameters  and  into the structural parameters A, B, and D. Often these
    2
    Specifying D to be diagonal is motivated by the idea that the structural shocks are primitive and do not
have common causes. The idea behind the structural model is to characterize contemporaneous relations
between the variables in terms of off-diagonal elements of A; see Bernanke (1986).


                                                     3
come in the form of restrictions that certain elements of A have to be zero. One of literally
thousands of studies that we could use to illustrate this approach is the Cholesky identification
scheme used by Kilian (2009). In his application, yt is a (3 × 1) vector consisting of monthly
measures of the quantity of oil produced globally, world real economic activity, and the real
price of oil: yt = (qt , yt , pt ) . The number of lags m was taken to be 24, and the system of
structural equations can be written3

                                   qt = qy yt + qp pt + b1 xt-1 + u1t                                    (6)

                                   yt = yq qt + yp pt + b2 xt-1 + u2t                                    (7)

                                  pt = pq qt + py yt + b3 xt-1 + u3t .                                   (8)

Equation (6) models the behavior of oil producers with qp the short-run price elasticity of
supply. Equation (7) describes the determinants of global economic activity and (8) describes
the behavior of oil consumers, with pq the reciprocal of the short-run price elasticity of
demand.
    Kilian (2009) achieved identification by imposing qy = qp = 0, which implies that
producers do not respond immediately to changes in economic activity or the price, and
yp = 0, meaning that the price of oil has no contemporaneous effect on economic activity.
Column 1 of Figure 1 plots the responses of the three variables to a negative shock to the supply
of oil under this traditional Cholesky identification scheme.4 An oil production shortfall is
followed a few months later by a modest increase in price and decrease in economic activity.


2.2     A generalization of the traditional approach.
Unfortunately, convincing zero restrictions are a rare commodity in economics. They are hard
to come up with and are often difficult to defend. Bayesian methods allow us to incorporate
prior information in a much less restrictive way. The Bayesian idea is to represent prior infor-
mation in the form of a probability distribution over the structural parameters. The value of
the prior density p(A, B, D) is higher for values of parameters that we think are more plausible
a priori and lower for those that we think are less plausible. The value could be zero for para-
meter configurations that we are absolutely certain can be ruled out. Algorithms for imple-
menting this approach are available at https://sites.google.com/site/cjsbaumeister/research.
    Baumeister and Hamilton (2019) showed how the above Cholesky example can be viewed
as a special case of the more general Bayesian approach. We used degenerate priors for qy ,
   3
      The empirical illustrations below are taken from Baumeister and Hamilton (2019), where a detailed de-
scription of the data can be found.
    4
      Kilian (2009) measured the monthly growth in oil production at an annual rate, whereas we are measuring
it at a monthly rate. This is why the units in the (1,1) panel of our Figure 1 are 1/12 the units reported in
the (1,1) panel of Kilian's Figure 3.



                                                     4
qp , and yp centered at zero and with zero variance to represent the inference of an analyst
who was absolutely certain that these three parameters had to be zero. We used priors
with fat tails and a huge variance for yq , pq , py , thus treating essentially any value for
these parameters as reasonable. The impulse-response functions that result from Bayesian
inference using this prior distribution are plotted in the second column of Figure 1. Not
surprisingly, this is identical to the first column. The Cholesky approach to identification
can be given a Bayesian interpretation, where the prior information is that we claim to know
with certainty that the elements in the upper-triangular block of A were all zero but have no
useful information at all about elements in the lower-triangular block of A.
    Expressing the prior information that is implicit in the traditional approach in this way
invites us to consider a natural generalization. We may have good information that the short-
run supply elasticity qp is small. But it is hard to claim that we know with absolute certainty
that qp has to be zero. On the other hand, we may also have some useful information that the
short-run demand elasticity is not large in absolute value. The identifying information that
we lose by becoming less dogmatic about the supply elasticity can be compensated in part by
incorporating imperfect prior information about other structural parameters like the demand
elasticity. Baumeister and Hamilton (2019) illustrated how this idea could be implemented
in practice.


2.3     Sign-restricted vector autoregressions.
Another popular approach to structural identification imposes constraints not that parameters
like qp have to be zero but instead that they cannot be negative. Methods for inference based
on inequality constraints were developed by Faust (1998), Canova and De Nicoló (2002), Uhlig
(2005) and Rubio-Ramírez, Waggoner and Zha (2010) (hereafter RWZ). The RWZ algorithm
generates a draw for the reduced-form parameters  and  from a Normal-inverted-Wishart
distribution and then transforms each  into a draw for the contemporaneous impacts of one-
standard-deviation structural shocks (H = A-1 D1/2 ) using a QR decomposition of a matrix
of standard Normals that comes from the researcher's random-number generator.5 Draws
are only retained if they satisfy the sign and other restrictions that the researcher imposes.
The set of retained draws is then typically summarized in terms of 68% intervals around the
median.
    This approach can also be described as Bayesian inference. Implicit in the draws gener-
ated by the RWZ algorithm is a prior probability distribution p(A, B, D) over the structural
parameters. For example, Baumeister and Hamilton (2015) showed that conditional on  the
RWZ algorithm implies a Cauchy distribution over parameters like qp . The common prac-
   5
     Specifically, the researcher generates an (n × n) matrix G consisting of independent standard Normals,
factors this as G = QR where Q is an orthonormal matrix and R is upper triangular, and then generates H
from H = PQ for P the Cholesky factor of .


                                                    5
tice of reporting medians and 68% probability regions of the retained draws would be fine if
the researcher viewed the implicit prior p(A, B, D) as accurately incorporating information
that the researcher had about the structural model before seeing the data. However, the
typical empirical application makes no defense or even acknowledgement of the implicit prior
distribution. If one uses literally no prior information other than the sign restrictions, as
many applied studies seem to claim, there is no statistical basis for reporting only 68% of the
retained draws. The boundaries of the 68% region are simply an artifact of the researcher's
random number generator, not a summary of some feature in the data. If researchers claim
not to have used any identifying information other than the sign restrictions, then what they
should be reporting is the identified set, namely, all the retained values. For more discussion
see Watson (2019) and Baumeister and Hamilton (2020a).


2.4     Identification using sign and other restrictions.
Unfortunately, if the identification is based on sign restrictions alone, the identified set is
typically too large to be useful. The conclusion that "anything is possible" is not very
informative. For this reason, many applied researchers impose additional restrictions along
with the sign conditions to throw out more of the draws proposed by the RWZ algorithm;
examples include Kilian and Murphy (2012, 2014), Riggi and Venditti (2015), Carter et al.
(2017), De Santis and Zimic (2018), and Foroni and Stracca (2019). For illustration we
examine the application in Kilian and Murphy (2012). They analyzed the 3-variable system
(6)-(8) over almost the same sample as Kilian (2009). They discarded draws that did not
satisfy the sign restrictions                             
                                               + + +
                                                          
                                  sign(H ) =  + + -  .                                      (9)
                                                       - + +
They further discarded any draw that implied a value for the short-run supply elasticity qp
that was greater than 0.0258.6 The impulse-response functions that they arrived at are plotted
in the third column of Figure 1.7 Although motivated by a seemingly different identification
strategy, the graphs in column 3 are remarkably similar to those in column 1. Restricting
the short-run supply elasticity to fall in (0, 0.0258) turns out in practice to be very similar to
forcing it to exactly equal zero.
    Again if we viewed this algorithm as resulting from a Bayesian prior distribution (which
Kilian and Murphy did not), the claim would be that we know on the basis of information
before seeing the data that an elasticity of 0.0257 is plausible but a value of 0.0259 is completely
  6
     Many other studies using a number of different variables have also imposed a 0.0258 bound on the oil
supply elasticity. Examples include Kilian and Murphy (2014), Güntner (2014), Basher et al. (2018), and
Geiger and Scharler (2019).
   7
     These correspond to the solid lines in row 1 of Figure 5 in Kilian and Murphy (2012).


                                                   6
impossible. A more natural representation of prior information might take the form that while
we think a value of 0.0259 is less likely than a value of 0.0257, we cannot say that a value of
0.0259 is completely impossible.
    Other researchers have tried to arrive at sharper inference by imposing dynamic sign re-
strictions. For example, the prior implicit in Kilian and Murphy (2014) maintains that the re-
searcher knows before seeing the data not just the signs of the effect of an oil supply disruption
u1t on production, economic activity, and price upon impact (qt+s /u1t , yt+s /u1t , pt+s /u1t
for s = 0) but also knows with certainty the signs of the effects s = 1, 2, ..., 12 months after
the shock as well. From the Bayesian perspective, this amounts to a joint prior distribution
p(A, B) over the contemporaneous and lagged structural coefficients. Baumeister and Hamil-
ton (2015) showed how to perform Bayesian analysis when prior information takes this form.
However, Canova and Paustian (2011) cautioned that researchers' confidence about the signs
of general equilibrium effects at higher horizons is often misplaced. Baumeister and Hamilton
(2015, Section 4) argued that we might typically expect effects at horizon s to be similar to
those at horizon s - 1, with decreasing confidence in that prior information the larger is s.
See Baumeister and Hamilton (2018, Table 2) and (2019, page 1896) for illustrations of how
this works in practice.


2.5    Relaxing the influence of prior information.
By representing prior information in the form of a density p(A, B, D), the analyst is formally
summarizing how much we trust the prior information. If we are very certain, the prior should
have a small variance, and will end up having a big influence on the posterior distribution. If
we are very uncertain, we would use a large variance, and the prior will have little influence
on the posterior distribution.
    To illustrate alternative uses of prior information, we examine in further detail the implicit
prior in Kilian and Murphy (2012, 2014), which maintained that a value for the short-run
oil supply elasticity of 0.0257 was plausible but a value of 0.0259 was completely impossible.
Where did such precise information come from? Kilian and Murphy (2012) obtained the cutoff
0.0258 from observations in August 1990 after Iraq invaded Kuwait. They divided the increase
in oil production in countries other than Iraq and Kuwait in August of 1990 (1.17%) by the
increase in oil price in August of 1990 (45.3%), finding 1.17/45.3 = 0.0258. However, Caldara,
Cavallo and Iacoviello (2019) noted that the reason that world production only increased by
1.17% was because of a 19.5% cut from United Arab Emirates, who feared they too would
be invaded if they did not cut production. In August 1990, the increase in production from
countries other than Iraq, Kuwait and U.A.E. was 1.95%. If one used that figure instead of
Kilian and Murphy's 1.17%, the implied elasticity would have been 1.95/45.3 = 0.043.
    Zhou (2020) accordingly used 0.04 as the upper bound on the oil supply elasticity. Again


                                                7
this took the form of an implicit prior belief that a value of 0.039 is plausible while 0.041 is
completely impossible. But Caldara, Cavallo and Iacoviello identified dozens of other episodes
like August 1990 in which a few countries' production was affected by specific disruptions.
Examples include strikes by Norwegian oil workers, Libyan civil conflict, and hurricanes in
the Gulf of Mexico. In each of these episodes we can measure the price change and increase
of production outside of the impacted countries. The authors used all episodes like this
together as instrumental variables to estimate the short-run world oil supply elasticity. They
arrived at an estimate of 0.081 with a standard error of 0.037. In a different analysis of
individual wells in North Dakota, Bjørnland, Nordvik and Rohrer (2019) concluded, "while
output from conventional wells appear non-responsive to price fluctuations in the short-term,
we find supply elasticity to be positive and in the range of 0.3-0.9 for shale oil wells, depending
on wells and firms characteristics."
   Given this prior evidence, we suggest that researchers would not want to impose a strict
upper bound, but instead should use a continuous distribution that attaches less and less
probability to larger and larger values to summarize existing knowledge. One option is the
distribution in Baumeister and Hamilton (2019), which used a Student t with location pa-
rameter 0.1, scale parameter 0.2, 3 degrees of freedom, and truncated to be positive.8 This
distribution has a standard deviation of 0.25, reflecting confidence that the parameter is likely
well below unity, but not restricting it much beyond that. Our overall results were broadly
consistent with those in Kilian and Murphy (2012, 2014), though we concluded that supply
shocks had somewhat larger effects than they did.
    By contrast, the uniform (0, 0.0258) prior that is implicit in Kilian and Murphy (2012,
2014) has a standard deviation of only 0.0074. This very small variance and dogmatic upper
bound of the prior causes it to have a big influence on the results, and explains the remarkable
correspondence between columns 1 and 3 of Figure 1.9
    As a robustness check, Baumeister and Hamilton (2019) also used a prior that assigns
an 80% probability that the supply elasticity is uniform over the Kilian-Murphy range of
(0, 0.0258) and only a 20% weight on the truncated Student t(0.1,0.2,3). This mixture prior
resulted in the identical conclusions as our baseline analysis.10
   8
      Contrary to the assertions in Kilian and Zhou (2019, 2020), Baumeister and Hamilton's algorithm for
Bayesian inference can use any bounded density for p(A). There are no computational or other considerations
forcing us to use a truncated Student t distribution. We often choose Student t because it includes the Cauchy
distribution implicit in the RWZ algorithm as a special case (a Cauchy variable is a Student t with one degree
of freedom) as well as including the Normal distribution as a special case (a Normal variable is a Student t
with infinite degrees of freedom). Using 3 degrees of freedom gives the prior much fatter tails than the Normal
but still ensures that the prior has a finite variance, which can be an advantage for certain objectives such as
calculating a posterior mean.
    9
      Kilian and Zhou (2020, p. 22) criticized the Bayesian approach, arguing, "the problem is that, in practice,
the existing literature provides little guidance about the nature of this prior." This criticism is misdirected.
The analyses in Kilian and Murphy (2012, 2014) and Zhou (2020) make much stronger use of prior information
than anything in Baumeister and Hamilton (2019).
  10
      Compare column 1 with column 3 of Table 3 and row 1 with row 4 in Table 4 in Baumeister and Hamilton


                                                       8
    To summarize, the Bayesian approach allows the researcher to put as much or as little
reliance on prior information as is warranted, including both the extremes that one knows some
features with certainty (p(A, B, D) = 0 for some values) or that one knows essentially nothing
about other features (a prior that is flat or nearly flat over broad ranges). Many researchers
have missed this fundamental insight that Bayesian inference is a strict generalization of
conventional approaches, somehow thinking that prior information is something that is only
being used in applications like Baumeister and Hamilton (2019) but not in the thousands
of studies that attempt to do structural inference in vector autoregressions without openly
acknowledging the Bayesian interpretation of what they are doing.11


3     Objects of interest in structural inference.
One difference between the parameterization used by Baumeister and Hamilton (2015, 2019)
and that used in most sign-restricted VARs is that Baumeister and Hamilton represent the
structural model in terms of the parameters (A, B, D) whereas most sign-restricted VARs
have focused on the matrix of contemporaneous impacts of one-standard-deviation structural
shocks, H = A-1 D1/2 . Uhlig (2017) has argued that the H parameterization is to be
preferred since from the perspective of policy, what we often care about are the equilibrium
effects of possible interventions. However, if the goal is to use prior information as a tool
to allow us to draw structural conclusions from the observed correlations -- and we have
argued this in fact is the core challenge for structural VARs -- this information typically comes
in the form of information about A rather than H . Most microfounded models take the
form of a system like (1), in which individual equations represent the actions of different
agents such as consumers, firms, or government, rather than in the form of postulated general
equilibrium impacts of the actions of individual agents. Formulating a prior p(A, B, D)
typically involves looking at previous findings about elasticities (Baumeister and Hamilton,
2019; Aastveit, Bjørnland, and Cross, 2020), policy rules (Baumeister and Hamilton, 2018;
Belongia and Ireland, forthcoming), and responses of agents to permanent changes (Baumeister
and Hamilton, 2015). All of these are most naturally represented as information about A,
(2019). We also obtained very similar results for a prior that puts a weight of 95% on the Kilian and Murphy
prior.
   11
      For example, Kilian and Lütkepohl (2017, p. 455) questioned "why a prior that merely reflects the personal
views of the user should be of wider interest to other economists." This misses the key point: the conclusions
of every structural VAR reflect the analysts' prior information. Indeed, we view the quoted statement as
a very strong argument in support of our recommendation to communicate carefully the basis for the prior
information and to place less weight on those findings that are more in doubt. On page 457 they argued that
examining previous studies cannot tell us "what the functional form of the prior density should be. Nor does
it tell us what the dispersion of the prior density should be." The dispersion and fatness of the tails of the
prior density summarize not the conclusions of previous research but rather the credibility of those conclusions
and how broadly they are accepted. Less reliable information is captured by using a prior density with more
dispersion, which gives the prior less influence on the posterior inference.



                                                       9
not A-1 .
    Moreover, many applications of sign-restricted VARs that use the H parameterization
have also tried to draw conclusions about behavioral elasticities. Examples include Kilian
and Murphy (2012, 2014), Güntner (2014), Riggi and Venditti (2015), Kilian and Lütkepohl
(2017), Ludvigson, Ma, and Ng (2017), Antolín-Díaz and Rubio-Ramírez (2018), Basher et
al. (2018), Herrera and Rangaraju (2020), and Zhou (2020). These researchers based their
estimates of elasticities on the ratios of certain elements of H . However, such calculations
do not in fact calculate behavioral elasticities, as we now explain.
    The issue can be illustrated using a 3-equation system similar to that studied in Section
2.1 with the lagged terms dropped and the demand equation reparameterized. The observed
variables are the log of quantity (qt ), the log of income (yt ), and the log of price (pt ),

                                     qt = yt + pt + us
                                                     t                                    (10)

                                     yt = qt + pt + uy
                                                     t                                    (11)

                                     qt = yt + pt + ud
                                                     t.                                   (12)

These correspond to the supply equation, the income equation, and the demand equation,
respectively. The parameter  (the demand price elasticity) is the answer to the question: if
the price were to increase by 1% with income held constant, by how much would the quantity
demanded by consumers change?
   How can we estimate this magnitude? Suppose for example that we knew the values of
, , ,  and that the structural shocks were mutually uncorrelated. Then the supply shock
                                         y
us
 t = qt - yt - pt and income shock ut = yt - qt - pt would be valid instruments for
purposes of estimating the parameters of the demand equation, because they are correlated
with yt and pt but uncorrelated with ud
                                      t:

                                                             -1
                      ^IV
                                    T    s       T    s           T    s
                                    t=1 ut yt    t=1 ut pt        t=1 ut qt
                             =                                                .           (13)
                      ^IV
                                    T    y       T    y           T    y
                                    t=1 ut yt    t=1 ut pt        t=1 ut qt


Alternatively, we could estimate  and  by maximizing the likelihood function conditional on
         y
us
 t and ut . For this example, the conditional MLE is numerically identical to the IV estimates;
see the appendix for mathematical details.
    More generally, using the likelihood function of the observed vector of data yt along with
any additional information about structural parameters is the optimal way to form inference
about the structural parameters. As noted by Rothenberg (1973), from a frequentist per-
spective, when the additional information takes the form of complete identifying assumptions,
maximum likelihood estimation is optimal in the sense that it achieves the smallest asymptotic
variance. From a Bayesian perspective, when the additional information takes the form of


                                                10
Bayesian prior distributions, Bayesian inference is optimal in the sense of minimizing posterior
expected loss. Thus the unified approach to incorporating prior information that we are ad-
vocating is the optimal way to form an inference about parameters like , the price elasticity
of demand.
    Now consider the relation between the parameter  and the observed impacts of structural
shocks. The above structural model can be written Ayt = ut , with the impacts of the
structural shocks on the observed variables captured by the matrix

                                         yt
                                  H=        = A-1                                                       (14)
                                         ut
                                                             
                                               - -   -   + 
                                                             
                                      = |A|-1  - -   -   +   .
                                                 - 1 -  1 - 

What would we get if we tried to estimate the demand elasticity on the basis of the ratio of
the change in qt to the change in pt in response to a shock to supply us
                                                                       t ? For this system that
                 12
ratio is given by
                                        h11   - - 
                                            =           .                                  (15)
                                        h31      - 1
In general, expression (15) is not the demand elasticity . The reason is that if there is a
shock to ust , not only will it change the price pt , but it will also change income. The size of
the change in price is |A|-1 ( - 1) and the size of the change in income is |A|-1 (- -  ).
From the demand curve, the change in price will lead to a change in quantity demanded of
 times the change in price, namely  |A|-1 ( - 1). Likewise the change in income will lead
to a change in quantity demanded of  times the change in income, namely  |A|-1 (- -  ).
The observed change in quantity demanded in response to the shock in supply is the sum of
these two terms,

                             |A|-1 ( - 1) +                          |A|-1 (- -  ) = |A|-1 (- -  ) .
         response to price    change in price   response to income    change in income   total change


Dividing this by the magnitude of the change in price that results from the supply shock,
|A|-1 ( - 1), produces the result (15).
    In the special case when demand does not respond to income ( = 0), expression (15)
would simplify to the correct answer . But in general, expression (15) reflects a combination
of the sensitivity of demand to price and the sensitivity of demand to income.
    For example, when Kilian and Murphy (2014) calculated the demand elasticity in their 4-
variable model they used an incorrect expression like (15). To calculate the supply elasticity
they used two different expressions, both of which are incorrect. They first calculated h12 /h32 ,
 12                                                     1/2
      This is identical to the ratio h             
                                      11 /h31 for H = HD    .


                                                            11
the ratio of the first to the third elements of the second column of A-1 . This is the ratio
of the change in quantity to the change in price in response to what they call a flow demand
shock. They next calculated h13 /h33 , the ratio of the first and third elements of the third
column of A-1 . This is the ratio of the change in quantity to the change in price in response
to what they call a speculative demand shock. Kilian and Murphy supposed that either of
these magnitudes could be regarded as estimates of the supply elasticity. In practice they will
be two different numbers. The way their code works is to reject a draw unless both of these
proposed measures of the supply elasticity are below 0.0258.
    In the correct structural interpretation, there is a single unique magnitude that should be
called the supply elasticity. This is the (1,3) element of A = H-1 , and this is the object for
which optimal inference is obtained by following the unified Bayesian approach.13
    Notwithstanding, the researcher may also have some useful information about the equilib-
rium impacts of structural shocks. For example, extremely large impacts of policy changes on
broad macroeconomic variables may be regarded as unlikely, or we may claim to know a priori
the signs of certain elements of H. There is no problem incorporating information about H
as a supplement to information about A. Suppose that for the system given by (10)-(12)
(and the necessary implication of those three equations in the form of expression (14)) we
had prior information about both the price elasticity of supply p1 () and the contemporary
effect of a supply shock on income p2 (|A|-1 (- -  )). Then we could use the product
p(A)  p1 ()p2 (|A|-1 (- -  )) as a composite prior for A. As discussed by Baumeister and
Hamilton (2018), there is no problem with including multiple sources of information about
the same parameter, just as there is no problem with using multiple earlier samples that all
contain information about a common parameter to form a Bayesian prior in standard settings.
The applications in Baumeister and Hamilton (2018, 2019) and Grisse (2020) all incorporate
prior information about both A and A-1 .14
  13
      Kilian and Zhou (2020) have separately argued that one cannot talk about the elasticity of oil demand at
all in a 3-variable system like (6)-(8) because some purchased oil is not consumed as fuel but is instead stored
as inventory by refiners. This argument is fallacious. The demand price elasticity in the 3-variable system
summarizes the price sensitivity of the joint response of consumers and refiners which is a perfectly well defined
and economically relevant concept. Baumeister and Hamilton (2019) in fact analyzed a 4-variable system that
includes inventories, and Baumeister and Hamilton (2020b) demonstrated that those are correctly measuring
the concept in which Kilian and Zhou (2020) claim we should be interested, whereas the calculations based on
H in Kilian and Murphy (2014) do not.
   14
      Kilian and Zhou (2020) asserted that "Baumeister and Hamilton's approach is not designed to handle
the restrictions on [A-1 ] typical of conventional oil market models, except in the special case of a recursively
identified model." Their statement is false. The method described by Baumeister and Hamilton (2018, 2019)
for incorporating information about both A and A-1 is completely general.




                                                       12
4     Computational considerations.
Discarding draws from the RWZ algorithm that do not satisfy specified conditions is vulnerable
to the concern of arbitrariness that we highlighted above. We think it is unreasonable to treat
a value qp = 0.0257 as perfectly plausible but rule out qp = 0.0259 as completely impossible.
An additional consideration is that as the criteria for rejecting draws becomes more strict, the
number of accepted draws shrinks. For example, the code for Kilian and Murphy (2014) that
is posted at the Journal of Applied Econometrics data archive generates 5 million draws for
the vector of possible parameters of which only 16 satisfy all the authors' criteria.
    Uhlig (2017) argued that when so many draws are rejected, the identification is sharp and
that this is a good thing. We have several concerns about this. The first is the question
we have been discussing up to this point, which is whether the identifying assumptions being
applied (in this case, that qp < 0.0258) are really credible. Second is the practical issue of
what to conclude from the 16 retained draws. If the goal is to rely on no prior information
beyond the sign and other restrictions explicitly imposed, we argued above that researchers
should be reporting the identified set, that is, the set of all values consistent with the observed
data and the imposed restrictions. Sixteen observations is not enough to estimate the full
extent of this set. The fact that we end up with only a couple of usable realizations from
every million draws suggests at a minimum that the RWZ algorithm for models like this is
so inefficient that we don't reliably find the answer we're looking for using the method as
typically implemented.
    Moreover, researchers typically report not the entire set of retained draws but instead just
highlight a summary statistic such as the median retained draw. For example, Kilian and
Murphy (2014, p. 464) reported results based on the "model with an impact price elasticity
of oil demand in use closest to the posterior median of that elasticity among the admissible
structural models." Results from running their code as publicly posted, which incorporates
this criterion for selecting a "representative" draw, are plotted as the dotted red lines in our
Figure 2. These show the effects of what Kilian and Murphy (2014) called a speculative
demand shock on their measure of real economic activity and on the real price of oil, and
reproduce two of the panels shown in Figure 1 of their article. A researcher who ran this
code and looked at this output might describe the findings as Kilian and Murphy did on pages
464-465:

      a positive speculative demand shock is associated with an immediate jump in the
      real price of oil. The real price response overshoots, before declining gradually.
      The effects on global real activity and global oil production are largely negative,
      but small.

We reran their posted code making only one change. In the original code, the seed used in the
random number generator is 316. We reran the same code using instead a seed for the random

                                                13
number generator of 613. The blue solid lines in Figure 2 show what these imputed effects
look like when this different seed for the random number generator is used. A researcher who
ran their code using a random number seed of 613 instead of 316 might describe the findings
as follows:

     a positive speculative demand shock is associated with an immediate large drop in
     economic activity and a small positive effect on price.

Using a random number seed of 613 thus leads to completely different policy implications
compared to a seed of 316.
    By contrast, the results in Baumeister and Hamilton (2018, 2019) are all based on 1 million
retained draws. This enables us to characterize the Bayesian posterior distribution for any
objects of interest quite accurately in a way that will be identical when one makes a change as
trivial as changing the random number seed. Moreover, Bayesian statistical decision theory
spells out exactly how we should use the posterior distribution to summarize the findings.
For detailed discussion of loss functions and optimal statistical inference see Baumeister and
Hamilton (2018).


5    Estimating structural vector autoregressions using in-
     strumental variables or proxy variables.
Another promising approach to identification in structural VARs has been proposed by Stock
and Watson (2012, 2018) and Mertens and Ravn (2014). The idea is to find a proxy or
instrumental variable that is correlated with one of the structural shocks of interest. For
example, Känzig (2019) proposed to use the market response in a narrow window around
OPEC announcements as an instrument for the supply shock. If this variable is uncorrelated
with the other structural shocks, then it is a valid instrument and provides an alternative way
to achieve identification. Noh (2019) and Paul (forthcoming) showed that such IV estimates
can be easily obtained using restricted OLS regressions.
    Stock and Watson (2018) noted that the validity of the instrument in conjunction with the
auxiliary assumptions that are typically implicit in these applications is empirically testable.
Noh (2019) and Paul (forthcoming) developed a particularly simple way to conduct this test.
Unfortunately, often this test rejects the hypothesis that instruments are valid. Even if it
does not reject, many researchers might still have some doubts about the instruments.
    Nguyen (2019) suggested that we could treat potential instruments or proxies in a similar
way to other identifying information. The identifying assumption that zt is a valid instrument
for structural shock uit is a claim that the population correlation between zt and ujt for j = i
is exactly zero. A strict generalization of this would be a prior belief that the correlation


                                              14
is close to zero, though we are not 100% certain of this. Nguyen showed how the Bayesian
approach can be used to combine imperfect confidence in the instruments with uncertain
prior information about other aspects of the structure. This allows us to perform inference
in a system in which we openly acknowledge doubts about both the validity of instruments
and about our other identifying information and to incorporate these doubts into statistical
summaries of what we can conclude from the observed data.


6    Conclusions.
Many researchers treat identifying assumptions as a necessary evil, seeing the task to be to
make enough of them to get sharp answers to questions of interest. We suggest that researchers
instead begin by thinking carefully about the meaning of the structural parameters, looking
for information that we can obtain about these from other datasets, model calibrations, or
economic theory. The next step is to summarize that knowledge in the form of a prior
density p(A) that accurately reflects both the information and our doubts, for example, using
large variances for features we honestly know little about. Once prior information has been
represented in this way, it's simply a matter of plugging their subroutine to calculate p(A)
into the code posted at https://sites.google.com/site/cjsbaumeister/research.
    Identification is not an either-or decision of whether the researcher should use hard re-
strictions, sign restrictions, or proxy variables. They can all be used together, even if we
have doubts about each one of them. A Bayesian perspective that unifies all the different
approaches into a common framework makes it possible to take advantage of the strengths of
each method while incorporating honest doubts about each into the final statistical summary.




                                             15
                                       References
    Aastveit, Knut Are, Hilde C. Bjørnland, and Jamie L. Cross (2020). "Inflation Expecta-
tions and the Pass-through of Oil Prices," working paper, Norwegian Business School.
    Antolín-Díaz, Juan, and Juan F. Rubio-Ramírez (2018). "Narrative Sign Restrictions for
SVARs," American Economic Review 108: 2802-2829.
    Basher, Syed Abul, Alfred A. Haug, and Perry Sadorsky (2018). "The Impact of Oil-
market Shocks on Stock Returns in Major Oil-exporting Countries," Journal of International
Money and Finance 86: 264--280.
    Baumeister, Christiane, and James D. Hamilton (2015). "Sign Restrictions, Structural
Vector Autoregressions, and Useful Prior Information," Econometrica 83: 1963-1999.
    Baumeister, Christiane, and James D. Hamilton (2018). "Inference in Structural Vector
Autoregressions when the Identifying Assumptions Are Not Fully Believed: Re-evaluating the
Role of Monetary Policy in Economic Fluctuations," Journal of Monetary Economics 100:
48-65.
   Baumeister, Christiane, and James D. Hamilton (2019). "Structural Interpretation of
Vector Autoregressions with Incomplete Information: Revisiting the Role of Oil Supply and
Demand Shocks," American Economic Review 109: 1873-1910.
   Baumeister, Christiane, and James D. Hamilton (2020a). "Drawing Conclusions from
Structural Vector Autoregressions Identified on the Basis of Sign Restrictions," NBER working
paper 26606.
   Baumeister, Christiane, and James D. Hamilton (2020b). "Structural Interpretation of
Vector Autoregressions with Incomplete Identification: Setting the Record Straight," working
paper, UCSD.
   Belongia, Michael T., and Peter N. Ireland (forthcoming). "A Classical View of the Busi-
ness Cycle," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking.
   Bernanke, Ben S. (1986). "Alternative Explanations of the Money-Income Correlation,"
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 25: 49-99.
   Bjørnland, Hilde C., Frode Martin Nordvik, and Maximilian Rohrer (2019). "Supply
Flexibility in the Shale Patch: Evidence from North Dakota," working paper, Norwegian
Business School.
   Caldara, Dario, Michele Cavallo, and Matteo Iacoviello (2019). "Oil Price Elasticities and
Oil Price Fluctuations," Journal of Monetary Economics 103: 1-20.
   Canova, Fabio, and Gianni De Nicoló (2002). "Monetary Disturbances Matter for Business
Fluctuations in the G-7," Journal of Monetary Economics 49: 1131-1159.
   Canova, Fabio and Matthias Paustian (2011). "Business Cycle Measurement with Some
Theory," Journal of Monetary Economics 58: 345-361.
   Carter, Colin A., Gordon C. Rausser, and Aaron Smith (2017). "Commodity Storage and
the Market Effects of Biofuel Policies," American Journal of Agricultural Economics 99(4):

                                             16
1027-1055.
   De Santis, Roberto A., and Srecko Zimic (2018). "Spillovers Among Sovereign Debt Mar-
kets: Identification Through Absolute Magnitude Restrictions," Journal of Applied Econo-
metrics 33: 727--747.
   Faust, Jon (1998). "The Robustness of Identified VAR Conclusions about Money," Carnegie-
Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 49: 207-244.
   Foroni, Claudia, and Livio Stracca (2019). "Much Ado About Nothing? The Shale Oil
Revolution and the Global Supply Curve," ECB working paper 2309.
   Geiger, Martin, and Johann Scharler (2019). "How Do Consumers Assess the Macro-
economic Effects of Oil Price Fluctuations? Evidence from U.S. Survey Data," Journal of
Macroeconomics 62: 1-19.
   Grisse, Christian (2020). "The Effect of Monetary Policy on the Swiss Franc: An SVAR
Approach," Swiss National Bank working paper 2020-02.
   Güntner, Jochen H.F. (2014), "How Do Oil Producers Respond to Demand Shocks?"
Energy Economics 44: 1-13.
   Herrera, Ana Maria, and Sandeep Rangaraju (2020). "The Effect of Oil Supply Shocks
on US Economic Activity: What Have We Learned?" Journal of Applied Econometrics 35:
141-159.
   Känzig, Diego R. (2019). "The Macroeconomic Effects of Oil Supply News: Evidence from
OPEC Announcements," working paper, London Business School.
   Kilian, Lutz (2009). "Not All Oil Price Shocks Are Alike: Disentangling Demand and
Supply Shocks in the Crude Oil Market," American Economic Review 99: 1053-1069.
   Kilian, Lutz, and Helmut Lütkepohl (2017). Structural Vector Autoregressive Analysis,
Cambridge University Press.
   Kilian, Lutz, and Daniel P. Murphy (2012). "Why Agnostic Sign Restrictions Are Not
Enough: Understanding the Dynamics of Oil Market VAR Models," Journal of the European
Economic Association 10(5): 1166-1188.
   Kilian, Lutz, and Daniel P. Murphy (2014). "The Role of Inventories and Speculative
Trading in the Global Market for Crude Oil," Journal of Applied Econometrics 29: 454-478.
   Kilian, Lutz, and Xiaoqing Zhou (2019). "Oil Supply Shock Redux?" Working paper.
   Kilian, Lutz, and Xiaoqing Zhou (2020). "The Econometrics of Oil Market VAR Models,"
CEPR working paper 14460.
   Ludvigson, Sydney C., Sai Ma, and Serena Ng (2017). "Shock Restricted Structural Vector-
Autoregressions," NBER Working Paper 23225.
   Mertens, Karel, and Morten O. Ravn (2014). "A Reconciliation of SVAR and Narrative
Estimates of Tax Multipliers," Journal of Monetary Economics 68: S1-S19.
   Nguyen, Lam (2019). "Bayesian Inference in Structural Vector Autoregression with Sign
Restrictions and External Instruments," working paper, UCSD.


                                            17
   Noh, Eul (2019). "Impulse-response Analysis with Proxy Variables," working paper, SSRN.
   Paul, Pascal (forthcoming). "The Time-Varying Effect of Monetary Policy on Asset
Prices," Review of Economics and Statistics.
   Riggi, Marianna, and Fabrizio Venditti (2015). "The Time Varying Effect of Oil Price
Shocks on Euro-area Exports," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 59: 75-94.
   Rothenberg, Thomas J. (1973). Efficient Estimation with A Priori Information, Yale
University Press.
   Rubio-Ramírez, Juan, Daniel F. Waggoner, and Tao Zha (2010). "Structural Vector Au-
toregressions: Theory of Identification and Algorithms for Inference," Review of Economic
Studies 77(2): 665-696.
   Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (2012). "Disentangling the Channels of the 2007-09
Recession," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 43(1): 81--156.
   Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (2018). "Identification and Estimation of Dynamic
Causal Effects in Macroeconomics Using External Instruments," Economic Journal 128: 917-
948.
   Uhlig, Harald (2005). "What are the Effects of Monetary Policy on Output? Results from
an Agnostic Identification Procedure," Journal of Monetary Economics 52: 381--419.
   Uhlig, Harald (2017). "Shocks, Sign Restrictions, and Identification," in Advances in
Economics and Econometrics Volume 2, pp. 95-127, edited by Bo Honoré, Ariel Pakes, Monika
Piazzesi, and Larry Samuelson, Cambridge University Press.
   Watson, Mark (2019). "Comment on `On the Empirical (Ir)Relevance of the Zero Lower
Bound' by D. Debortoli, J. Gali, and L. Gambetti," NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
   Zhou, Xiaoqing (2020). "Refining the Workhorse Oil Market Model," Journal of Applied
Econometrics 35: 130-140.




                                           18
  Appendix: The relation between IV and MLE in a simple 3-
variable example.
    Equation (13) characterized the instrumental-variables estimates of elasticities in a simple
3-variable example, which we used to explain how economists typically approach estimation
of elasticities in simultaneous-equation systems. IV is closely related to (and in general,
is less efficient than) full-information maximum likelihood, which is the frequentist analog to
Bayesian inference about structural parameters using the likelihood function. In this appendix
we show that, for this simple 3-variable example, IV turns out to be identical to maximum
likelihood. Our purpose in doing so is to help explain why analysis based on the likelihood
function implied by the structural model (whether frequentist or Bayesian) is the correct and
indeed the optimal way to estimate elasticities.
    Characterization of IV estimate.
   Expression (13) can be rewritten

                          T    s            T    s              ^IV                    T    s
                          t=1 ut yt         t=1 ut pt                                  t=1 ut qt
                                                                           =
                          T    y            T    y              ^IV                    T    y
                          t=1 ut yt         t=1 ut pt                                  t=1 ut qt



                                                        T                  T
                                                                                       
                                                        t=1 qt yt          t=1 qt pt        ^IV
                         1 - -                          T                  T                
                                                        t=1 yt yt          t=1 yt pt        ^IV
                         - 1 -                          T                  T                
                                                        t=1 pt yt          t=1 pt pt
                                                            T
                                                                        
                                                            t=1 qt qt
                          1 - -                             T           
                     =                                      t=1 yt qt   
                          - 1 -                             T
                                                            t=1 pt qt

                                      T                 T               T
                                                                                              
                                      t=1 qt qt         t=1 qt yt       t=1 qt pt         1
           1 - -                      T                 T               T               ^          0
                                      t=1 yt qt         t=1 yt yt       t=1 yt pt        -IV  =        .   (16)
           - 1 -                      T                 T               T                 ^IV      0
                                      t=1 pt qt         t=1 pt yt       t=1 pt pt        -
   We can partition A as                                                
                                                                
                                                               (2×3)    
                                                  A =                   
                                             (3×3)              
                                                               (1×3)


                                                     1 - -
                                         =
                                                     - 1 -

                                           =         1 - -                   .




                                                          19
This allows (16) to be written compactly as

                                               ^
                                                ^IV = 0                                          (17)

for ^ the sample variance-covariance matrix of the observed data:
                                   T                       T                     T
                                                                                             
                           T -1    t=1 qt qt    T -1       t=1 qt yt   T -1      t=1 qt pt
                          
                      ^ =  T -1    T                       T                     T           
                                   t=1 yt qt    T -1       t=1 yt yt   T -1      t=1 yt pt   .
                                   T                       T                     T
                           T -1    t=1 pt qt    T -1       t=1 pt yt   T -1      t=1 pt pt


      Characterization of MLE.
      Next consider maximum likelihood estimation. Conditional on the (2 × 1) vector zt = yt ,
the remaining randomness in yt can be summarized in terms of the observed scalar wt =   yt
where   is the (3 × 1) vector that is orthogonal to the rows of  and whose third element
is normalized to be unity.15 If ut  N (0, D), then yt is multivariate Normal and wt |zt 
N ( (,  ) zt , v ) where given , the (2 × 1) vector  is a known function of (,  ). To calculate
this function, notice that yt = A-1 ut so wt =   yt =   A-1 ut . Since the elements of ut are
                                                                                    y
mutually independent, the coefficients in the population projection of wt on (us
                                                                               t , ut ) are given
by the first two terms of the vector   A-1 :
                                                              
                                                  1 0
                                                      
                                   (,  ) =   A-1  0 1  .                                         (18)
                                                  0 0

Given , this is a known function of (,  ).
   The conditional MLE of (,  ) is the value that maximizes

                                                                  T
                                                                  t=1 [wt     -  (,  ) zt ]2
                     -(T /2) log(2 ) - (T /2) log v -
                                                                               2v

or equivalently the value that minimizes T                    2
                                         t=1 [wt -  (,  ) zt ] . Note that in general the value
of  that minimizes this sum of squared residuals is the OLS estimate
                                                                               -1
                                               T                  T
                              ^ OLS =
                                                       
                                               t=1 wt zt
                                                                          
                                                                  t=1 zt zt         .            (19)
 15
      That is,                                                      
                                     1 - -                       0
                                    - 1 -                    =  0 
                                     0  0   1                    1
                                                              -1  
                                       1 -                 -      0
                                    =  - 1                 -   0  .
                                       0  0                 1     1
Note that   is known from  and does not depend on (,  ).


                                                     20
We claim that if we choose (^MLE , ^MLE ) such that

                                                                        -1
                                        T                   T
                              ^MLE
                                                
                                        t=1 yt zt
                                                                    
                                                            t=1 zt zt        = 0 ,               (20)

then (18) will satisfied:
                                                 -1      
                                   1  -     -        1 0
                                                         
                      ^ OLS
                              =    -   1    -   0 1  .                                           (21)
                                   1 -^MLE -^MLE     0 0

To verify (21), first define the (3 × 2) matrix
                                                                      -1
                              ^=      T                   T       
                                      t=1 yt zt           t=1 zt zt
                                                                               -1
                                       T                      T        
                               =       t=1 yt yt              t=1 yt yt                          (22)

so that for example
                                           ^ OLS =   
                                                     ^.                                          (23)
                    ^ MLE :
Premultiply (22) by A
                                                                                     -1      
                                                  T                     T        
                                                  t=1 yt yt             t=1 yt yt 
                              ^ =
                                                                                        -1
                                                                                             .   (24)
                    ^MLE
                                      ^MLE          T                      T        
                                                    t=1 yt yt              t=1 yt yt 


The first two rows of (24) will be recognized as the (2 × 2) identity matrix, and the third row
is zero by the proposed choice for  ^MLE . Thus
                                                      
                                                1 0
                                      ^ MLE 
                                      A     ^ =     
                                                0 1 .
                                                0 0

                    ^ -1 gives
Premultiplying by   A MLE

                                                              
                                                  1 0
                                           ^ -1 
                                     ^ =   A          
                                             MLE  0 1 
                                                  0 0

or using (23),
                                                             
                                                      1 0
                                   ^ OLS       ^ -1 
                                           =   A
                                                          
                                                 MLE  0 1 
                                                      0 0


                                                     21
as claimed in (21).
    Demonstration of equivalence.
                    T       
    Note that since t=1 zt zt has full rank, condition (20) can equivalently be written


                                                 T
                                0 = ^MLE                 
                                                 t=1 yt zt

                                                 T
                                   =^MLE                 
                                                 t=1 yt yt    .

This is simply the transpose of (17), confirming that for this example MLE is numerically
identical to IV.




                                            22
Figure 1. Impulse-response functions for the effects of an oil supply shock under three characterizations
of the identifying assumptions.



                    Oil production                 Oil production                 Oil production
            2                              2                             2

            1                              1                             1

            0                              0                             0

           -1                             -1                             -1

           -2                             -2                             -2
                0    5      10       15        0    5        10     15        0    5      10       15

                    Real activity                  Real activity                  Real activity
            2                              2                             2

            1                              1                             1

            0                              0                             0

           -1                             -1                             -1

           -2                             -2                             -2
                0    5      10       15        0    5        10     15        0    5      10       15

                    Real oil price                 Real oil price                 Real oil price
            2                              2                             2

            1                              1                             1

            0                              0                             0

           -1                             -1                             -1

           -2                             -2                             -2
                0    5      10       15        0    5        10     15        0    5      10       15
                         Months                         Months                         Months



Notes to Figure 1. Effects of a one-standard-deviation decrease in       on      using the Choleski
identification as in Kilian (2009) (column 1), using the Bayesian prior described in the text (column 2),
and using the identification scheme in Kilian and Murphy (2012) (column 3).




                                                        23
Figure 2. Effects of speculative oil demand shock for the Kilian and Murphy (2014) specification and
data set using two different seeds for the random number generator.




Notes to Figure 2. Left panel: effect on real activity. Right panel: effect on real price of oil. Red dotted
lines: seed = 316, which was the original seed used by Kilian and Murphy (2014) and which reproduces
panels (3,2) and (3,3) In Kilian and Murphy's Figure 1. Blue solid lines: seed = 613.




                                                     24
