                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               DISPUTES IN INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT AND TRADE

                                          Ralph Ossa
                                        Robert W. Staiger
                                         Alan O. Sykes

                                       Working Paper 27012
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27012


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




Ralph Ossa gratefully acknowledges funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under
the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (grant agreement No
819394). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27012.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Ralph Ossa, Robert W. Staiger, and Alan O. Sykes. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Disputes in International Investment and Trade
Ralph Ossa, Robert W. Staiger, and Alan O. Sykes
NBER Working Paper No. 27012
April 2020
JEL No. F02,F1,F23

                                          ABSTRACT

International investment agreements employ dispute settlement procedures that differ markedly
from their counterparts in trade agreements along three key dimensions: standing (i.e., the right to
file grievances), the nature of the remedy, and the remedial period. In the state-to-state dispute
settlement procedures of a typical trade agreement, only governments have standing, while
private investors also have standing in the investor-state dispute settlement procedures employed
by investment agreements. Trade agreements typically employ tariff retaliation as the remedy for
violation of the agreement, while the award of cash damages is the norm in investment disputes.
And trade agreements typically provide for only prospective remedies covering harm done
subsequent to a ruling, while the damages awarded in investment disputes routinely cover past as
well as future harms. We develop parallel models of trade agreements and investment agreements
and employ them to study these differences. We argue that the differences can be understood as
arising from the fundamentally different problems that trade and investment agreements are
designed to solve.

Ralph Ossa                                       Alan O. Sykes
University of Zurich                             Law School
Department of Economics                          Stanford University
Schoenberggasse 1                                Stanford, CA 94305
8001 Zuerich                                     asykes@stanford.edu
Switzerland
ralph.ossa@econ.uzh.ch

Robert W. Staiger
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
319 Silsby
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
rstaiger@dartmouth.edu
1. Introduction

Firms that supply goods and services to customers in foreign countries are typically protected
by two types of international agreements. If they engage in exporting, they are protected by
trade agreements such as those of the World Trade Organization (WTO), which secure their
access to foreign markets. If they engage in foreign direct investment, they are protected by
investment agreements such as those negotiated pursuant to the U.S. bilateral investment treaty
(BIT) program and similar programs in the EU and elsewhere, which protect their foreign assets
from expropriation and related practices. Increasingly, such trade and investment agreements
are combined with other provisions into more comprehensive international economic arrange-
ments. For example, the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA) between
Canada and the EU, the U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA), and the Comprehensive
and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Paci...c Partnership (CPTPP), all o¤er trade and invest-
ment protections.1
       Dispute settlement pursuant to these agreements has become a subject of much political
controversy. The predominant remedy for breach of investment treaty commitments ­investor-
state dispute settlement (ISDS) with a private right of action for money damages ­has come
under attack from both the left and the right. In a recent editorial, Senator Elizabeth Warren
wrote: "Conservatives who believe in U.S. sovereignty should be outraged that ISDS would shift
power from American courts, whose authority is derived from our Constitution, to unaccount-
able international tribunals. Libertarians should be o¤ended that ISDS e¤ectively would o¤er
a free taxpayer subsidy to countries with weak legal systems. And progressives should oppose
                                                                                        2
ISDS because it would allow big multinationals to weaken labor and environmental rules."  An
October, 2017 letter to President Trump signed by 230 law and economics professors urged the
President to eliminate ISDS from the USMCA, insisting that ISDS "undermines the important
roles of our domestic and democratic institutions, threatens domestic sovereignty, and weakens
                 3
the rule of law."  The Trump administration has responded by negotiating the phase-out of
ISDS for disputes between Canada and the United States in the USMCA, although it preserves
   1
     In addition to the agreement establishing the WTO, there are nearly 300 "regional trade agreements" in
force. International investment agreements are even more numerous, with over 2000 bilateral investment treaties
in force, and roughly 300 additional investment agreements that are part of larger economic arrangements
(usually free trade agreements).
   2
     Washington Post, February 25, 2015.
   3
     Available at https://www.citizen.org/system/...les/case_documents/isds-law-economics-professors-letter-
oct-2017_2.pdf.


                                                      1
the existing ISDS mechanism for claims involving Mexico only in a few sectors such as telecom-
munications and oil and gas.4 Interestingly, much of the resistance to eliminating the ISDS
mechanism came from the Mexican government itself, which secured its partial retention over
the initial objections of the United States.5
       The remedy for breach of trade treaty commitments ­ state-to-state dispute settlement
(SSDS) ­has also come under attack. On the academic front, critics of the WTO lament the
fact that nations can violate treaty obligations yet su¤er no formal sanction until the violation
is detected, a case is brought and litigated to conclusion, and the violator has had a "reasonable
time"to desist from its illegal behavior. This system is said to give violators a "three-year free
      6
pass."  More recently, United States Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer stated at the 2017
ministerial meeting of the WTO: "The WTO is losing its essential focus on negotiation and
becoming a litigation-centered organization. Too often members seem to believe they can gain
                                                                                 7
concessions through lawsuits that they could never get at the negotiating table."  And in July,
2018, Lighthizer referred to a recent WTO dispute panel ruling on U.S. countervailing duty
                                                                                             8
laws as "the latest example of judicial activism at the WTO seeking to undermine those laws."
Dissatisfaction with WTO dispute rulings has led the United States to block the appointment
of judges to ...ll vacancies on the WTO Appellate Body for the past several years, creating a
situation in which there are now too few con...rmed judges to sta¤ the required three-person
appellate panels.
       All of these controversies arise against a backdrop of intriguing puzzles that the formal
economic literature has done little to address. Why do international investment agreements
overwhelmingly provide for private rights of action in the form of ISDS rather than simply
SSDS? Why do trade agreements uniformly provide for SSDS and not private rights of action
in the form of exporter-state dispute settlement (ESDS)?9 Are the critics of ISDS right that
   4
     Other investors can pursue claims against Mexico on a more limited legal basis and only after litigating in
Mexican court for up to 30 months.
   5
     On Mexico' s position in these negotiations, see https://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?g=c42ad0d6-
3240-4e24-ac21-5caca954962c. The opposition to ISDS is not limited to the United States. In Europe, the
Belgian province of Wallonia temporarily blocked the entire CETA agreement over concerns about its investment
provisions. Opposition to these investment provisions was also at the heart of the massive protests in Europe
against the CETA and TTIP agreements, which brought hundreds of thousands of Europeans to the streets.
   6
     See Davey (2010).
   7
     https://www.tralac.org/discussions/article/12560-the-appellate-body-crisis.html.
   8
     https://ustr.gov/about-us/policy-o¢ ces/press-o¢ ce/press-releases/2018/july/ustr-robert-lighthizer-
statement-wto.
   9
     As we noted, some agreements have both trade and investment provisions. In the USMCA, for example, the
investor-rights provisions allow for both SSDS and private rights of action in the form of ISDS. But the "trade"


                                                       2
it unwisely burdens national sovereignty and undermines sound regulatory policies? Why did
Mexico push to retain the ISDS in the USMCA? Might private rights of action in the form of
ESDS make sense in the international trade arena in light of recent attacks on SSDS?
   To answer these and related questions, we develop parallel models of trade and investment
agreements and employ them to study the relative merits in each setting of the features of
dispute settlement that are at the heart of these controversies. Our baseline model of trade
agreements mirrors closely that of Maggi and Staiger (2011), where the governments of an
importing and an exporting country can make use of a vaguely worded contract written ex
ante in the presence of uncertainty about the future state of the world, and where the dispute
settlement procedure of the trade agreement involves a court whose mandate is to interpret
the contract when invoked ex post in a dispute over whether the trade policy commitments
described in the contract have been honored. Our model of investment agreements extends this
setting to reect investment policies and to include an ex-ante investment stage, with foreign
investors who at the time of their investment decisions form expectations about the ex-post
treatment they will receive from the host-country government under the dispute settlement
procedures in place.
   Our analysis focuses on three distinct features of dispute settlement that form the basis
of the controversies described above and that are often conated: standing, the nature of the
remedy, and the remedial period. Standing concerns who has the right to bring cases to a
dispute panel. Generally speaking, only member governments have the right to ...le cases under
trade agreements (SSDS). In the vast majority of investment agreements, by contrast, private
investors also have standing (ISDS).
   The nature of the remedy concerns the remedial consequences of an adjudicated violation. In
trade agreements, adjudicators usually recommend to a violator that it cease and desist from the
violation. Sometimes (as in the WTO) the dispute settlement process may also authorize trade
sanctions (formally, a "suspension of reciprocal concessions") against violators that refuse to
comply with such recommendations. Money awards to complainants are not used as a practical
matter (although a violator might pay money to a complaining nation to settle a case). Under
investment agreements, by contrast, money awards are routinely available to successful private
investors when the agreements grant them standing.
provisions of the USMCA, involving commitments on trade in goods and services and intellectual property
rights, rely exclusively on SSDS, as does the WTO.



                                                  3
   The remedial period refers to the period of time that is "covered"by the remedial measure
and, in particular, to the question whether any remedy exists for harm done to the complainant
prior to the adjudication of a violation. In trade agreements where adjudicators simply recom-
mend that violators cease and desist, the complainant plainly receives no remedy for the harm
done between the commencement of the violation and the point in time at which the violator
cures the violation. And where trade retaliation is employed against recalcitrant violators as
in the WTO, it tends to be based on the prospective harm from the continued violation, and
does not seek to o¤er any "redress" for retrospective harm. Under investment agreements, by
contrast, private investors routinely receive money damages for the entirety of the harm su¤ered
as a consequence of the violation, compensating them for past losses as well as the value of
future harms. We refer to the choice of remedial period as the choice between a¤ording only
"prospective damages,"or in addition providing "retrospective damages."
   The ...rst stage of our analysis concerns standing. We ...nd that for trade agreements, it is
never optimal to provide standing to exporters, and consequently that SSDS dominates ESDS.
By contrast, for investment agreements we ...nd that standing for foreign investors in the form of
ISDS may well be desirable. Factors that bear on the desirability of granting investors standing
in investment agreements include the accuracy of the adjudicative process, the political costs
faced by the foreign government when initiating a dispute, the probability that a host country
will take an action that can be alleged to violate treaty commitments as well as the degree of
ex-post e¢ ciency associated with that action, and the litigation cost borne by the host country
in the event of a formal dispute. Hence, our analysis provides no support for the inclusion of
private standing in trade agreements while it o¤ers quali...ed ­though by no means universal ­
support for the inclusion of private standing in investment agreements.
   Two key observations underlie these results. First, we view trade agreements as concerned
primarily with correcting the ine¢ ciencies in market access levels implied by unilateral gov-
ernment policy choices, which means that these are fundamentally government-to-government
agreements; and we view investment agreements as concerned primarily with solving host gov-
ernment commitment problems with respect to foreign investors, which means that these are
fundamentally agreements between the host government and foreign investors. Second, we
argue that private litigants ­ exporters and private investors ­ are imperfect agents for gov-
ernments and vice versa, and in particular that private litigants would invoke the court more



                                                4
aggressively than would governments on their behalf.10
       With these observations in place, our ...ndings on standing can then be understood in two
steps. The ...rst step is to observe that as the foreign export industry is an imperfect agent
of the foreign government, it does not make sense to give foreign exporters standing in trade
disputes when what is at stake is an agreement between the two governments; and as the foreign
government is an imperfect agent of foreign investors, it does not make sense to give the foreign
government standing in investment disputes when what is at stake is an agreement between the
host government and foreign investors. This ...rst step therefore suggests that trade agreements
should adopt SSDS while investment agreements should adopt ISDS. The second step is then
to observe that foreign complainants never internalize the costs that ...ling a dispute imposes on
the home/host government, and this negative externality leads to a general tendency to over...le
relative to e¢ cient litigation levels. Hence, beginning from the position that trade agreements
should adopt SSDS, it would never make sense to introduce the possibility of an even more
aggressive ...ler in the form of ESDS; whereas beginning from the position that investment
agreements should adopt ISDS, it might make sense to restrict standing to a less aggressive
...ler in the form of SSDS.
       The second stage of our analysis concerns the nature of the remedy ­ the choice between
retaliatory sanctions and money damages. Building on our analysis of standing, we now take as
given the fact that trade agreements limit standing to governments while investment agreements
a¤ord standing to investors. The key trade-o¤ that we exploit in this stage of our analysis is
that retaliation is less e¢ cient but that cash damages can be di¢ cult to assess. The optimal
remedy in a given setting then depends on which of these forces is stronger in that setting.
We demonstrate that it makes sense that investment treaties provide for cash payments while
trade agreements do not, provided that the cash value of the pro...ts lost by a foreign investor
facing adverse host-country investment policies is su¢ ciently easy to quantify relative to the
cash value of the harm su¤ered by a foreign government whose exporters face trade protection.
And we argue that at a broad level this condition is plausibly met in light of the di¢ culty
of placing a monetary value on the lost jobs and distributional considerations that typically
dominate the trade concerns of real-world governments.
  10
    This argument assumes that free-rider issues facing exporters and private investors are not too severe. But
as we explain below, even severe free-rider issues do not overturn our results on standing, because the relevant
thought experiment for standing is whether exporters or private investors should be given standing in addition
to governments.



                                                       5
   The third stage of our analysis adds consideration of the remedial period in the dispute
process, that is, the choice between prospective damages only on the one hand, and the addition
of retrospective damages on the other. We ...nd that retrospective remedies are preferable if the
retrospective portion of the harm su¤ered as a consequence of treaty violations is high enough
and any ine¢ ciencies associated with the remedy are small enough ­ as we argue is likely to
be the case for investment disputes, where the pre-ruling harm is usually attributable to policy
actions that diminish or destroy the returns to a sunk investment with a ...nite lifespan and where
the remedy takes the form of monetary transfers. In contrast, we ...nd that prospective remedies
alone are preferable when the retrospective portion of the harm su¤ered as a consequence of
treaty violations is low enough and/or the e¢ ciency costs of the remedy are high enough ­as
we argue is likely to be the case for trade disputes, where the pre-ruling harm is attributable
mostly to the costs of the delay in securing market access and where the remedy takes the form
of retaliatory trade sanctions.
   Our analysis of the remedial period in the dispute process thus provides support for the
retrospective damages found in investment treaties. But perhaps surprisingly, our analysis also
provides some support for the prospective damages approach taken by the WTO and trade
agreements more broadly, in that, while not perfect, allowing violators to take a "three-year
free pass" may be the better option if the alternative involves retrospective damages paid out
in the form of highly ine¢ cient retaliatory trade sanctions.
   Our paper is related to several literatures. A ...rst literature focuses on dispute settlement
procedures in trade agreements (see Park, 2016, for a recent survey); within this literature,
our paper is most closely related methodologically to Maggi and Staiger (2011), who provide
the basic model of dispute settlement in trade agreements on which we build. A second and
more recent literature focuses on dispute settlement procedures in investment treaties (see,
for example Konrad, 2017, Horn, 2018, Stahler, 2018, Horn and Tangeras, 2019, Janeba, 2019,
Kohler and Stahler, 2019 and Sykes, 2019). Our use of the Maggi and Staiger (2011) framework
makes us methodologically distinct from these papers. Relative to all of this literature, our
paper ventures into largely uncharted territory: to the best of our knowledge, we are the ...rst
to formally explore the choice of standing, the nature of the remedy, and the remedial period
together in either trade or investment agreements and, by considering these features in both
trade and investment agreements, the ...rst to o¤er a formal comparative analysis of the core



                                                6
design features of dispute settlement procedures across these two setting.11
   The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides additional institutional
detail on trade and investment agreements and their dispute settlement systems. Section 3
contains our analysis of the standing issue, while section 4 considers the nature of the remedy
and section 5 focuses on the remedial period. Section 6 concludes.


2. Trade and Investment Disputes in Practice

Important heterogeneities exist within and among trade and investment agreements and their
approaches to dispute settlement, and it is not our intent here to provide a comprehensive
survey of these heterogeneities. Instead, we focus on "typical" characteristics of trade and
investment agreements with reference to a few illustrative examples.

2.1. Trade Agreements

Modern international trade agreements date back to the beginning of Reciprocal Trade Agree-
ments program in the 1930s, which eventually led to the creation of the General Agreement on
Tari¤s and Trade (GATT) in 1947. The key substantive obligations under trade agreements
such as GATT are tari¤ commitments, along with restrictions on other border measures (such as
quotas) that can impede market access, and constraints on various domestic policies (e.g., dis-
criminatory taxes and regulations, subsidies) that can undermine market access commitments
associated with tari¤ reduction.
   Under GATT, formal sanctions for violations did not arise in practice, but disputants could
agree to allow arbitral panels to adjudicate the merits of a case and issue a report as to whether
a violation had occurred. Over time, the membership became dissatis...ed with this system and,
with the creation of the WTO (which subsumed GATT), established a new system whereby
complaining nations can obtain an arbitral panel and secure a ...nal ruling (including a right of
appeal), accompanied by a formal recommendation to a violator to cease the violation within a
"reasonable time."If a violator fails to do so, the complaining nation may reach an agreement
with the violator for alternative compensation. Failing such agreement, the complainant may
impose retaliatory trade measures (a "suspension of concessions") in an amount "equivalent"
  11
     Horn (2018) considers the implications of switching from ISDS to SSDS in the context of BITs in a model
similar to Horn and Tangeras (2019), but he does not optimize other features of the agreement and does not
consider trade agreements.


                                                     7
to the level of harm done by the violation, an issue subject to arbitration if requested by the
violator. In practice, arbitrators judge "equivalence" in relation to the prospective harm from
the ongoing violation. (Davey 2010). Scholars have debated whether this system should be
viewed as a "property rule"or liability rule"(Schwartz & Sykes 2002), and we take no position
on the issue. But three observations are beyond dispute ­only member state governments have
standing to ...le cases (SSDS, but not ESDS), the system relies on negotiated compensation and
retaliatory trade measures rather than monetary damage awards as its sole formal "remedy,"
and at no time in the history of WTO/GATT has there been any formal remedy for harm done
prior to the adjudication of a violation.
   The dispute settlement systems under the hundreds of free trade agreements now in force
vary somewhat, but many share core features with the WTO system. Under USMCA Chap-
ter 31, for example, only member governments can bring complaints in relation to the trade
provisions. A complaining party can seek an arbitral panel, which will rule on the existence of
a violation. If one is found, the remedy "if possible" is removal of the o¤ending measure, or
negotiated trade compensation. Failing successful negotiation in that regard, the complaining
party again has the option to suspend "bene...ts of equivalent e¤ect" to the violation. There
is no monetary remedy, and the concept of "equivalence" is forward looking in relation to the
harm done by the ongoing violation until such time as it is eliminated or the case is settled.
Broadly similar provisions are to be found in other U.S. free trade agreements.

2.2. Investment Agreements

Investment agreements address two broad classes of issues. Foremost, they protect existing
investors against certain measures by host countries that impair the value of their established
investments. These include expropriation and equivalent actions without adequate compensa-
tion, discrimination in favor of host country or third-country investors, and in many agreements
a guarantee of "fair and equitable treatment"that addresses behavior by host governments in-
volving fraud, deception and denial of due process. In a considerably smaller number of invest-
ment treaties (only about six percent of all such treaties surveyed by UNCTAD [2018]), invest-
ment agreements also secure non-discriminatory "market access"for foreign investors. The core
obligation here is "national treatment" (non-discrimination relative to domestic investors) in
the "establishment" of investments. Investment agreements that contain this provision enable
foreign investors to compete on equal terms with domestic investors for new investment oppor-


                                               8
tunities (with some exceptions, such as national security concerns). All of the existing United
States BITs and free trade agreements with investment provisions include national treatment
for establishment of investments.
   SSDS in some form can be found in virtually all international investment agreements. But
in addition, ISDS is included in 95% of investment treaties currently in force according to
UNCTAD (2018), and in all international investment agreements involving the United States
except for its limited role in the new USMCA as noted earlier. The details vary as to the
exact preconditions for invoking ISDS, but the basic structure allows investors who believe that
a treaty commitment has been violated, and who have not secured adequate redress through
consultations or litigation in the host country, to bring a case to international arbitration
before neutral arbitrators. The most common arbitrations occur at the International Center
for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) at the World Bank, or in ad hoc arbitration
pursuant to the UNCITRAL arbitration rules. The arbitrators determine whether the dispute
falls within their jurisdiction under the terms of the treaty that is invoked, and if so adjudicate
the merits of claims regarding treaty violations. When a violation is found, the arbitrators
proceed to assess damages (the "quantum"), and issue an award directing the host country to
compensate the complaining investor for the violation. In cases of expropriation of property,
they may o¤er the host country an opportunity to reduce damages by making restitution of the
property. The general principle governing damages is that the investor should be compensated
for all past and future injury due to the violation. Most awards are paid voluntarily by the
host country, and their enforcement is facilitated by the "New York Convention"which requires
signatories to treat the awards as the equivalent of awards by their own domestic courts.


3. Standing

In this section we focus exclusively on issues of standing, and thus the question of whether to
include SSDS or ESDS/ISDS in an optimally designed trade/investment agreement. We ...rst
consider the standing issue when the underlying ine¢ ciency to be addressed by the agreement
relates to market access/terms of trade issues. Consistent with our discussion in section 2,
our formal results are derived in the setting of a trade agreement, reecting the position that
these are the central issues of concern in trade agreements, but we also comment on how our
results extend to market access issues that are handled in international investment agreements.
We then address the standing issue when the underlying ine¢ ciency to be addressed by the

                                                9
agreement relates to a government'
                                 s imperfect ability to make commitments to foreign ...rms
that must make sunk investments to serve the domestic market. There our formal results are
derived in the setting of an investment agreement, again consistent with our discussion in section
2 and reecting the dominance of such issues for investment treaties; and there we comment on
how our results extend to commitment issues that are handled in trade agreements.
     To isolate the standing issue, we make two simplifying assumptions in this section. First,
we assume that damage payments are not part of the court'
                                                        s ruling - when a case is ...led and
the court sides with the complainant, the defendant has no choice but to "cease and desist"
whatever policy is found to be illegal. Second, we assume that compliance with any such ruling
is instantaneous so that there is no pre-compliance harm su¤ered by exporters or investors for
which additional remedies might be desirable. We relax these assumptions in sections 4 and 5
respectively, where we analyze the optimal nature of the remedy (cash versus retaliation) and
the optimal remedial period (prospective versus retrospective).

3.1. Disputes over Market Access in Trade Agreements

We begin by considering the standing issue in a trade agreement building on the model of Maggi
and Staiger (2011). We focus on a single industry in which Home is an importer and Foreign is
an exporter, and where their trade is governed by a trade agreement with a dispute settlement
body (DSB) to resolve disputes. Home has to make a binary policy choice                     2 fF T; P g (free
trade or protection) and Foreign has to decide whether to ...le a complaint with the DSB (there
are no export policy instruments). We distinguish between a system of SSDS in which the ...ling
choice is made by the Foreign government and a system of ESDS in which the ...ling choice is
made by the Foreign exporting industry.
     There are s         (s1 ; s2 ; : : : ; sN ) binary states of the world, such as "there is/is not an import
surge," and we let p(s) denote the probability that state s occurs. We assume that Home
gains from protection and that both the Foreign government and its exporting industry suf-
fer from protection in all states of the world. Denoting the Home government'
                                                                            s payo¤ from
choosing policy          in state s as ! ( ; s), we then have Home'
                                                                  s gain from protection given by
 G   (s)   ! (P ; s)      ! (F T ; s) > 0 for all s; and similarly, denoting the Foreign agent'
                                                                                              s payo¤ as
! f ( ; s), where f 2 fG ; E g depending on whether we consider the government'
                                                                              s (G ) or the
exporting industry'
                  s (E ) payo¤, we have that Foreign agent f '
                                                             s loss from protection is given by
 f   (s)   ! f (P ; s)     ! f (F T ; s) < 0 for all s. These assumptions can be given a terms-of-trade


                                                        10
interpretation and would hold in any standard trade model. Moreover, ! ( ; s) and ! G ( ; s)
can also capture distributional/political economy considerations in government objectives such
as would be reected by over-weighting producer surplus.
                                                                             FT
          Free trade is the "...rst best" policy in all states s 2                and protection is the "...rst-best"
                                  P
policy in all states s 2              , where we de...ne the ...rst-best policy as the policy that maximizes
the governments'joint payo¤. Letting                  (s)        G   (s) +   G    (s) denote the governments'joint
                                                                                          FT                          P
(positive or negative) gain from protection, we then have that s 2                             if   (s)   0 and s 2
if        (s) > 0. In the absence of a trade agreement, the Home government would choose                          =P
in all states of the world. This noncooperative policy choice would correspond to the ...rst best
               P                                                             FT
for s 2            , but it would di¤er from the ...rst best for s 2              , giving rise to the possibility that
the two governments could do better under a trade agreement. We assume that the realized
state s is observed by all agents including the DSB, but that the DSB does not observe                            and
hence payo¤ levels are not veri...able. This means that the ...rst-best outcome cannot be trivially
achieved with a contract that requires F T if and only if                         0.
          Following Maggi and Staiger (2011), we assume as well that it is prohibitively costly to
describe precisely all the relevant state variables (s1 ; s2 ; : : : ; sN ) that would be necessary to
write a complete contingent contract covering the policy . We focus instead on what Maggi
and Staiger call a "vague contract"that takes the form " = P allowed if and only if ,"where
     is a vague sentence such as "there is serious injury to the domestic industry due to increased
imports."This o¤-the-shelf language makes the vague contract essentially costless to write, and
following Maggi and Staiger we assume that it speci...es the ...rst-best policy choice in those
states of the world where its meaning is unambiguous. But the meaning of this contract is
ambiguous in some states of the world, and it is in such states that a dispute over the setting
of         may arise in our model.
          Speci...cally, we assume that governments have given the DSB a mandate to serve an "in-
terpretive"role: if invoked, the DSB observes an unbiased but noisy signal of , which can be
thought of as the outcome of an independent investigation in which the DSB "interprets" the
                                                                                   DSB
contract. The DSB then issues a "cease-and-desist" ruling                                = F T if its signal indicates
                                              DSB
            0, and it issues the ruling             = P if its signal indicates             > 0.12 The DSB ruling
     12
     We follow Maggi and Staiger (2011) and Staiger and Sykes (2017) and abstract from the possibility of nego-
tiated settlements to a dispute (i.e. negotiations between the two governments over the importer government'    s
policy choice after the state s is realized). See Maggi and Staiger (2018) for an analysis of trade disputes that
features the possibility of settlement.



                                                            11
can therefore be thought of as simply a policy determination that maximizes the expected
joint payo¤ of the governments given the DSB signal.13 We assume that the ruling is auto-
matically enforced, and we denote the probability that the DSB issues the "wrong" ruling by
qk (s) 2 (0; 1=2) where k (s) 2 (0; 1=2) for all s and q 2 (0; 1) parameterizes the (inverse) quality
of the court.14 Invoking the court is costly and we write the litigation costs incurred by Home'
                                                                                               s
government and Foreign'
                      s complainant as c (s) = c (s) and cf (s) = cf                     (s), where (s) and
  (s) are positive state-dependant constants and c and cf parameterize the litigation costs.
       The timing of events is as summarized in Figure 1. First, the state of the world is realized
                   FT            P
and either s 2          or s 2       . Then, the Home government moves and makes its binary policy
choice      2 fF T; P g. If the Home government chooses             = F T , the Foreign complainant has no
incentive to invoke the DSB and free-trade prevails. If the Home government instead chooses
  = P , the Foreign complainant has to weigh its options and may or may not invoke the
DSB. If the Foreign complainant does not invoke the DSB, protection prevails. If the Foreign
                                                                                               DSB
complainant instead invokes the DSB, the DSB moves and issues its ruling                             = F T or
 DSB
         = P which is then adopted instantaneously.
       This game is straightforward to solve by backwards induction. Consider ...rst the Foreign
complainant'
           s ...ling behavior. The complainant ...les a complaint if and only if                 = P and the
expected bene...t to the complainant of ...ling exceeds the complainant'
                                                                       s cost of ...ling, that is

                              Pr(DSB ruling is F T j s)         j   f (s)j   > cf (s):                     (3.1)

Condition (3.1) is the "...ling" condition for the agent with standing in the Foreign country to
invoke the DSB in response to a policy choice by the Home government of                     = P.
       Next consider the Home government'
                                        s policy choice. The Home government chooses                       =P
if either (3.1) fails ­ because then        = P can be set without triggering a dispute ­ or if (3.1)
holds and the expected bene...t to the Home government from trade protection exceeds the cost
to the Home government of a dispute:

                                 Pr(DSB ruling is P j s)            G (s)   > c(s):                        (3.2)

       We can now derive the equilibrium actions for each state s. For simplicity, in what follows
  13
     See Maggi and Staiger (2011) for a defense of this interpretation of DSB rulings in the context of the
GATT/WTO.
  14
     Maggi and Staiger (2011) derive conditions under which it is optimal for the governments to write a vague
contract and install a court with a mandate to interpret the contract if invoked. We take these two institutional
features as given so that we may focus on other dimensions of the design of dispute settlement procedures.

                                                       12
we assume that the states where the vague contract is unambiguous are measure zero, so we
can focus only on states where the court if invoked must interpret the contract.15 De...ning the
                 FT                c(s)                  c (s)                                 cf (s)                               c(s)
thresholds       1      (s)              , F T
                                           2;f (s)   1 j f (s)j , P
                                                                  1;f (s)                              ,   and   P
                                                                                                                 2   (s)    1             ,   and
                                   G (s)                  f                                j    f (s)j                              G (s)
                   FT                FT            P          P
noting that        1     (s) <       2;f (s) and 1;f (s) < 2 (s) if the                   dispute costs are low relative to the
dispute stakes for each disputant, conditions (3.1) and (3.2) imply the following result:

Lemma 1. Assuming that dispute costs are low relative to dispute stakes for all s so that
 FT             FT                      P             P
 1     (s) <    2;f   (s) and           1;f   (s) <   2   (s), equilibrium actions can be characterized as follows:

                                   FT                                                                                      FT
   1. In states s 2                     : If DSB quality is high in the sense that qk (s) <                                1    (s), we have
           = F T and no dispute; if DSB quality is intermediate in the sense that qk (s) 2
           FT            FT
           1    (s) ;    2;f   (s) , we have                  = P and a dispute; if DSB quality is low in the sense
                                FT
         that qk (s) >          2;f     (s), we have           = P and no dispute.

                               P                                                                                 P
   2. In states s 2                : If DSB quality is high in the sense that qk (s) <                           1;f   (s), we have           =P
                                                                                                                           P             P
         and no dispute; if DSB quality is intermediate in the sense that qk (s) 2                                         1;f   (s) ;   2    (s) ,
                                                                                                                                     P
         we have        = P and a dispute; if DSB quality is low in the sense that qk (s) >                                          2   (s), we
         have     = F T and no dispute.

       The content of Lemma 1 is depicted in Figure 2a. Notice that the court has its best
impact o¤-equilibrium, when due to its high accuracy it induces both the Home government
and the potential Foreign complainant to behave e¢ ciently in order to avoid a dispute. Where
a dispute arises in equilibrium, there must be opportunistic behavior on the part of either
                                               FT
the Home government (in                             , if the Home government is exploiting the incompleteness of
the contract and the inaccuracy of the DSB and trying to get away with protection when free
                                                                            P
trade is e¢ cient) or the Foreign complainant (in                               , if the Foreign complainant is exploiting the
incompleteness of the contract and the inaccuracy of the DSB and trying to force free trade when
                                                                                                                                          FT
protection is e¢ cient). And ...nally, if the DSB is inaccurate enough (i.e., for qk (s) >                                                2;f   (s)
                      FT                                  P                          P
in states s 2              and for qk (s) >               2   (s) in states s 2          ) its bene...cial o¤-equilibrium impact
will erode, and such opportunistic behavior can arise while the DSB sits on the sideline.
       We can now write down the expected e¢ ciency loss, relative to the ...rst-best outcome,
that is associated with standing choice f 2 fG ; E g in combination with the vague con-
  15
    This is without loss of generality, because under our assumptions in states where the vague contract is
unambiguous the Home government would make the ...rst best policy choice and there would be no ...ling by the
Foreign complainant, and hence nothing of consequence for any of the results we emphasize.

                                                                       13
tract and interpretive court mandate, a combination of design features that we denote by
Vf and refer to as the Vf institution. Denoting this e¢ ciency loss by L(Vf ) and de...ning
             FT                      FT                       FT                 FT               FT                  FT            FT
the sets     1           s2                j qk (s) <         1     (s) ,        2;f         s2        j qk (s) 2     1    (s) ;    2;f   (s)   ,
      FT                 FT                           FT                               P                P                  P              P
and   3;f         s2            j qk (s) >            2;f   (s) , as well as           1;f        s2        j qk (s) <     1;f   (s) ,    2;f
       P                       P                P                      P                P                   P
 s2         j qk (s) 2         1;f   (s) ;      2   (s)     , and,     3          s2         j qk (s) >     2   (s) , we can write:
                                                                   X
                                       L (Vf ) =                              p (s) qk (s) j (s)j +                                        (3.3)
                                                              s2   FT [ P
                                                                   2;f  2;f
                                                                   X
                                                                              p (s) c (s) + cf (s) +
                                                              s2   FT [ P
                                                                   2;f  2;f
                                                                   X
                                                                            p (s) j (s)j .
                                                              s2   FT [ P
                                                                   3;f  3



   Each line of expression (3.3) captures a distinct source of ine¢ ciency arising under the Vf
institution. The ...rst line captures the loss associated with DSB error, and it is the product of
the probability that state s occurs, p (s), the probability that the DSB makes a mistake, qk (s),
and the e¢ ciency loss associated with that mistake, j (s)j, summed over all states in which
                                          FT          P
the DSB is invoked, s 2                   2;f   [     2;f .   The second line captures the e¢ ciency loss arising from
the cost of a dispute, and it is the product of the probability that state s occurs, p (s), and the
joint cost of a dispute in state s, c (s) + cf (s), again summed over all states in which the DSB
                       FT            P
is invoked, s 2        2;f   [       2;f .   The third line is the e¢ ciency loss arising from distorted choices
made "in the shadow of the court,"and it is the product of the probability that state s occurs,
p (s), and the e¢ ciency loss from getting the ine¢ cient outcome in state s, j (s)j, summed over
all states in which the DSB quality is so poor that the ine¢ cient policy choice prevails without
                         FT           P
any dispute, s 2         3;f    [     3.



SSDS versus ESDS We now evaluate the desirability of adopting SSDS versus ESDS. Under
SSDS (the VG institution), the Foreign government has standing, in the sense that it alone
has the right to ...le a dispute with the DSB. Under ESDS (the VE institution), the Foreign
exporting industry/...rm has standing, in the sense that it alone has the right to ...le a dispute
with the DSB. In reality, the relevant thought experiment would more likely be to compare
the institution with SSDS to a counterfactual alternative institution that features both SSDS
and ESDS where both the Foreign government and the Foreign exporter have standing: for
simplicity, we choose to proceed formally in this more parsimonious way, and with our formal

                                                                            14
arguments in hand to then draw observations relevant to the more realistic possibility of ESDS
as an addition to (rather than a replacement for) SSDS.
       According to (3.3), the relative merits of SSDS versus ESDS can be evaluated once we
specify the complainant'
                       s cost of ...ling cf (s) and payo¤ from winning in court                            f   (s) under
each choice of standing. This is because cf (s) enters equation (3.3) directly and cf (s) and
                                                                   FT      P             FT
  f    (s) enter it indirectly by determining the sets             2;f ,   2;f ,   and   3;f   through the conditions
(3.1) and (3.2).
       We assume that the cost of ...ling is independent of the identity of the complainant. Formally,
and recalling that cf (s) = cf        (s), we set the cost of ...ling for the Foreign exporting industry
equal to the cost of ...ling for the Foreign government with the assumption that

                                                cG = cE            c                                   (Assumption 1)

implying cG (s) = cE (s)            c (s) for all s. Our key assumption, under which the choice of
standing is consequential for the e¢ ciency properties of the trade agreement, is that the loss
from protection su¤ered by the Foreign exporting industry is greater than the loss su¤ered by
the Foreign government, or
                                            j   G   (s)j < j   E   (s)j.                               (Assumption 2)

Assumption 2 would hold, for example, in any model where the removal of the Home tari¤, by
increasing the price of the Foreign export good, would hurt Foreign consumers of that good, or
would hurt other Foreign producers who compete for the same factors of production and do not
also export the same good to Home. The Foreign government would in some fashion (i.e., with
non-zero weight) take all of these e¤ects ­both the gains to Foreign exporters and the losses
to other agents in the Foreign economy ­into account when calculating j                           G   (s)j; but Foreign
exporters would ignore the cost imposed on Foreign consumers and other Foreign producers
when calculating j      E   (s)j. Assumption 2 could also reect the fact that the Foreign government,
unlike the Foreign exporting industry, might apply a "political ...lter" when evaluating the
bene...ts of winning in court against Home in light of the broader diplomatic relations between
the two countries. In e¤ect, then, by Assumption 1 and Assumption 2 adopting ESDS rather
than SSDS amounts to the Foreign government delegating ...ling decisions to a more aggressive
...ler than itself.16
  16
    We are abstracting here from a potentially important free-rider issue that could arise under ESDS, namely,
the same free-rider issue that can arise in an industry lobbying setting. If the ...rms in an industry cannot


                                                        15
    The comparison between the VG and VE institutions can be made by comparing their
respective losses relative to the ...rst best using (3.3). To facilitate this comparison, we de...ne
two sets that embody the two key changes that would occur according to Assumption 1 and
Assumption 2 if standing were taken from the Foreign government and given instead to the
                                                                                                                      P
Foreign exporting industry. These sets are illustrated in Figure 2b. The ...rst set is                                S
        P                  P             P                             P
 s2         j qk (s) 2     2;E   (s) ;   2;G    (s)    : for s 2       S   the Foreign government would allow the
e¢ cient choice      = P to go unchallenged under the VG institution but a court ...ling would occur
                                         FT                FT                  FT            FT                      FT
under VE . The second set is             S            s2        j qk (s) 2     2;G   (s) ;   2;E   (s)   : for s 2   S    the
Home government would choose the ine¢ cient                          = P with impunity under the VG institution
but a court ...ling would occur under VE . De...ning E ;G         L (VE )                          L (VG ), we then have:
                             X
                   E ;G   =       p (s) [qk (s) j (s)j + c (s) + c (s)] +                                             (3.4)
                                    s2   P
                                         S
                                     X
                                               p (s) f[qk (s) j (s)j + c (s) + c (s)]          j (s)jg .
                                    s2   FT
                                         S


    Expression (3.4) highlights the costs and bene...ts associated with the additional litigation
arising under ESDS relative to SSDS. The ...rst line is clearly positive. It captures the fact
                                                           P
that the added litigation in states s 2                    S   is undesirable, since this litigation challenges an
e¢ cient policy and thus introduces nothing but court error and litigation costs: qk (s) j (s)j is
the expected loss associated with court error, and c (s) + c (s) is the joint litigation cost under
Assumption 1. The second line is also positive, reecting the fact that the added litigation in
                FT
states s 2      S    is also undesirable, but the sign is less obvious this time. This is because the
added litigation now challenges an in e¢ cient policy so that the loss associated with court error
and litigation costs is counterbalanced by an e¢ ciency gain j (s)j. However, using the ...ling
condition of the Foreign government (equation (3.1) with f = G ), it is easy to show that the loss
associated with court error and litigation costs is greater than the e¢ ciency gain.17 Evidently,
overcome this free-rider issue, ...ling might not occur under ESDS even though it would be in the collective
interest of the ...rms in the industry to ...le. In the extreme, this free-rider issue could dilute the ...ling behavior of
the Foreign export industry to the point where it would be a less aggressive ...ler than the Foreign government,
just the opposite of what is implied by Assumption 2. However, as we noted at the outset of this subsection,
while we formally evaluate the desirability of adopting ESDS rather than SSDS, in reality the relevant thought
experiment would more likely be to add ESDS to SSDS so that both the Foreign government and the Foreign
exporting industry have standing. And in that more realistic case, the SSDS would handle ...lings for situations
where the free-rider issue caused the Foreign export industry to be a less aggressive ...ler than the Foreign
government, and the ESDS would only be relevant for cases where Assumption 2 applies. Hence, we feel
justi...ed in abstracting from this free-rider issue.
  17
     In particular, in states s 2 F  T
                                    S the Foreign government would not have ...led so that [1         qk (s)] [ G (s)]

                                                                16
            FT
for s 2     S    the Foreign government does not see a ...ling as worth the dispute cost while
the Home government never bene...ts from a ...ling, and the fact that Foreign exporters would
nevertheless choose to ...le simply reduces the value of the agreement to the two governments.
                                                                    P        FT
Hence,    E ;G   > 0 provided that at least one of the sets         S   or   S    is non-empty.
    The two governments would therefore choose to include SSDS rather than ESDS in their
trade agreement. Intuitively, this is because under SSDS the Foreign government is itself
overly litigious, owing to the negative external e¤ects on the Home government that it does
not internalize when making its ...ling decision; and so granting standing to private actors
that would add to this (overly-) litigious behavior will lower the joint surplus obtained by the
governments under the agreement. And it is immediate that including both SSDS and ESDS
would be outcome equivalent to including ESDS instead of SSDS. Hence, if given a choice
between including both SSDS and ESDS in a trade agreement or including just SSDS, the two
government would choose the latter option.
    We summarize with:

Proposition 1. Governments, but not their exporters, should have standing to bring disputes
in an optimally designed trade agreement. That is, an optimally designed trade agreement
should include SSDS, but not ESDS.


Standing for market access disputes more generally While we have thus far analyzed
market access issues in the context of trade agreements, similar issues could also arise in the
context of investment treaties , given the close relationship between exporting and (horizontal)
foreign direct investment (FDI). Exporting and FDI are typically viewed as two alternative ways
of serving a foreign market, between which ...rms choose based on a proximity-concentration
trade-o¤ (Brainard, 1997; Helpman, Melitz, and Yeaple, 2004). Exporting has the advantage
that it allows ...rms to concentrate production in one location, while FDI has the advantage
that it allows ...rms to avoid trade costs, so that the optimal mode of accessing a foreign market
is determined by the relative importance of plant-level economies of scale and trade costs.
    In a companion paper (Ossa, Staiger, and Sykes, in progress), we exploit the close rela-
tionship between exporting and FDI and show that countries have a terms-of-trade motive for
c (s) < 0. We can then use this inequality to prove that the second line of (3.4) is positive using
[qk (s) j (s)j + c (s) + c (s)] j (s)j = [1 qk (s)] [ G (s) + G (s)] + c (s) + c (s) = [1 qk (s)] G (s) + c (s)
f[1 qk (s)] [ G (s)] c (s)g > [1 qk (s)] G (s) + c (s) > 0.


                                                      17
restricting the market access of foreign multinationals just as they do for restricting the mar-
ket access of foreign exporters: both restrictions reduce the demand for foreign products and
thus improve the terms-of-trade. However, this motive is weaker in the context of FDI than in
the context of exporting, because local a¢ liates of foreign multinationals typically also employ
local factors which reduces the ability to shift costs to foreign countries. This implies in turn
that market access considerations should play less of a role in investment treaties than in trade
agreements.18
      In light of this, we view the results of this section as applying to market access disputes more
generally, whether they arise in trade agreements or in investment agreements: with regard to
market access/terms-of-trade issues, only governments should have standing to bring disputes
in an optimally designed trade or investment agreement. That is, for the purpose of settling
market access disputes, an optimally designed trade agreement should include SSDS, but not
ESDS, while an optimally designed investment treaty should include SSDS, but not ISDS.

3.2. Disputes over Commitments to Investors in Investment Agreements

We consider next the issue of standing in investment agreements, and thus the question whether
investment treaties should include SSDS or ISDS. For simplicity and consistent with our discus-
sion in section 2, we assume that investment treaties are only concerned with helping the Home
­which we now refer to as Host ­government make policy commitments to Foreign investors
(i.e., we abstract from any market access issues associated with Foreign investors). To this end,
we make three main modi...cations to our earlier model. First, we add an ex-ante investment
stage at which Foreign investors make their investment choices and after which their invest-
ments are sunk. This adds a new ex-ante ine¢ ciency arising from distorted investment choices,
which we allow the Host government to address with up-front investment incentives. Second,
the Host government now applies an investment policy            = fF T; T g (free trade or "taking")
to these sunk investments, where = T is a stand-in for a variety of investment policies (e.g.,
tax, regulatory, nationalization) that could amount to a taking broadly de...ned. This gives rise
to an ex-post ine¢ ciency similar to our earlier model, which the Host government can address
through the investment treaty. And third, while our reduced-form trade model was su¢ cient
for capturing the market access issues highlighted in the previous subsection, the commitment
problem on which we focus here warrants a more explicit modeling of the investment setting
 18
      Sykes (2019) draws a similar conclusion.


                                                  18
and the various ine¢ ciencies that can arise. Otherwise, the model essentially follows our earlier
structure and we summarize the timing of events in Figure 3.
     Finally, as with trade agreements, real-world investment agreements include vague language
which is subject to interpretation. For example, Article 3 of the US Model BIT states:

       "Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party treatment no less favorable
       than that it accords, in like circumstances, to its own investors with respect to the
       establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or
       other disposition of investments in its territory."

Here, what constitutes "like circumstances"is clearly a matter of interpretation, as might be the
phrase "treatment no less favorable."Broadly speaking, we will therefore model the investment
treaty as we did the trade agreement, that is, as a vague contract combined with a DSB whose
mandate is to interpret the contract when invoked.


Model Preliminaries To ...x ideas, we consider a speci...c FDI opportunity in the Host coun-
try that, to exploit, requires a sunk capital investment by a risk-neutral Foreign investor. To
abstract from market access issues, we assume that the Host country is small in world capital
markets, so that it faces an in...nitely elastic ex-ante supply of Foreign capital at the world rate of
return r . A single Foreign investor makes a sunk investment I , which is converted one-for-one
into output through the production function Q = I . We assume that Host-country demand
                                     D0 (P )P
D (P ) for this output is elastic,      Q
                                            1, so that the investor always ...nds it optimal to sell
                                                <
all output ex-post. We denote the resulting market clearing price by P    ~ = D 1 (I )       ~ (I )
                                                                                             P
and note that P~ (I ) is decreasing in I for P~ > 0.
     Host-country consumer surplus, conditional on a level of FDI I , is then given by CS (I ) =
R1                                              0
 ~ (I ) D (P ) dP and is increasing in I with CS (I ) =    P~ 0 (I ) I > 0. Similarly, the ex-post
 P
(conditional on sunk investment I ) Foreign operating pro...ts or producer surplus is given by
          RP ~ (I )
P S (I ) = 0               ~ (I ) I and is increasing in I with P S 0 (I ) = P
                    I dP = P                                                 ~ 0 (I ) I + P
                                                                                          ~ (I ) > 0
given our assumption that demand is elastic. As a result, the sum of consumer and producer
                                                                            ~ (I ) > 0.
surplus in the market is also increasing in I with CS 0 (I ) + P S 0 (I ) = P
     Production or consumption of this output may generate a negative (local) externality that
is ignored by investors and individual consumers. As in the model of the previous subsection,
we assume that s       (s1 ; s2 ; : : : ; sN ) is a vector of state variables with each si corresponding

                                                    19
to a binary event: here the realization of these state variables determines the magnitude of
the utility cost of the negative externality from the investment, which we denote by e (I ; s).
We assume that e (I ; s) = e (s) I so that the utility cost is proportional to the size of the
investment I with e (s)          0 for all s. Moreover, we assume that in any state for which
a negative externality is present (i.e., any s for which e (s) > 0), the externality e(I ; s) is
large enough to turn the ex-post social value of the investment negative ­ that is, to ensure
P S (I ) + CS (I )       e (I ; s) < 0 ­ for any positive investment level I .19 This assumption
simpli...es the ensuing analysis by preserving the binary-policy-choice structure of the previous
subsection, but it is not necessary for any of the results we emphasize. Under this assumption,
the states of the world may be partitioned into those where a negative externality turns the
                                                                                        T
ex-post social value of the investment negative, which we denote by s 2                     , and those where
there is no externality (e (s) = 0) and the ex-post social value of the investment is positive and
                                                               FT
given by P S (I ) + CS (I ), which we denote by s 2                 .
       Conditional on a given level of FDI, the Foreign investor'
                                                                s ex-post payo¤ is determined by
the operating pro...ts     that it collects; and these operating pro...ts depend only on whether or
not there is a "taking."If the investor is subject to a taking, the investor earns operating pro...ts
  (I ; T ) = 0 from the investment (regardless of the state of the world) implying a return on
FDI of zero in that case. If the investor is not subject to a taking, the investor collects the
                      ~ (I ) for the output from the investment (regardless of the state of the
market-clearing price P
                                                           ~ (I ) I = P S (I ) implying a return
world) and therefore earns operating pro...ts (I ; F T ) = P
          ~ (I ) in that case.
on FDI of P
       By contrast, conditional on a given level of FDI, the Host government'
                                                                            s ex-post payo¤
                                                                                                           T
depends both on the state of the world and on whether or not there is a taking. For s 2                        ,
the Host government receives ! (I ; T; s) = 0 if there is a taking and the output from the
investment is destroyed, and if there is not a taking the Host government su¤ers the negative
payo¤ ! (I ; F T; s) = CS (I )        e (I ; s) < 0.20 For s 2          FT
                                                                             , the Host government receives
! (I ; T; s) = CS (I )+ P S (I ) if there is a taking and receives ! (I ; F T; s) = CS (I ) if there
is not a taking, where        2 (0; 1) parameterizes the degree of ex-post ine¢ ciency associated
                                              F T 21
with the Host-government'
                        s taking in              .      In particular, if       were equal to one then the
  19                                            ~ (0) whenever e (s) > 0, where P
     This amounts to an assumption that e (s) > P                               ~ (0) is the "choke" price at
which demand drops to zero.
  20
     Here and throughout, we use "over-bars" to distinguish notationally between functions in our analysis of
investment agreements that also appear in our analysis of trade agreements.
  21
     There is no role for the parameter when a taking occurs in T , because by de...nition such takings are

                                                       20
taking would amount to a zero-sum transfer of surplus from the Foreign investor to the Host
government and would have no ex-post e¢ ciency consequences (though, of course, possibly still
ex-ante e¢ ciency consequences for the level of investment), whereas when                              2 (0; 1) the Host
government gains less from the taking than the Foreign investor loses and the taking therefore
amounts to a negative-sum transfer between the parties. As we will show, the role of                                  is
central to the nature of the ine¢ ciency facing the Host government and to the potential role of
an investment treaty in helping to address that ine¢ ciency.
     We can de...ne the ex-post gain that the Host government enjoys from a taking in state s as
                                                      8
                                                      < e (I ; s) CS (I ) for s 2 T
           G (I ; s)    ! (I ; T; s) ! (I ; F T; s) =                                      (3.5)
                                                      :
                                                              P S (I ) for s 2 F T
and the lost rents su¤ered by the Foreign investor in a taking as

                                                 I       (I )    P S (I ) for all s:                               (3.6)

The joint ex-post gain from a taking for the Host government and Foreign investor is then given
by    (I ; s)       G   (I ; s) +   I   (I ), and we have
                                    8                                                              T
                                    <     [P S (I ) + CS (I )             e (I ; s)] > 0 for s 2
                        (I ; s) =                                                                                  (3.7)
                                    :                                                     FT
                                                           (1    ) P S (I ) < 0 for s 2        :
                                                     T
Hence, in states of the world s 2                        the policy that maximizes the joint ex-post surplus for the
Host government and Foreign investor, which we refer to as the "...rst best"policy, is complete
expropriation (a "taking") and destruction of the output from the investment (T ); and in states
                        FT
of the world s 2              the ...rst best policy is no expropriation, amounting to a government policy
that allows the sale of the output from the investment to proceed unhindered (F T ). Formally,
and denoting by          FB   the ...rst-best policies when I is taken as given, we have                  FB   = F T for
      FT                                 T
s2         and   FB     = T for s 2          .
     We emphasize that our stylized description of a taking can be given a broad interpretation.
The essential element is that states of the world exist in which the government action is socially
e¢ cient, and states of the world exist in which the government action is ine¢ cient. For example,
nationalization of an investor'
                              s property may transfer it to a higher valued use, or it may lead
to a lower valued use. New regulations applicable to an investment may impose costs that are
less than the social bene...ts, or may impose costs that exceed the social bene...ts. And so on.
ex-post e¢ cient.

                                                                  21
Limited Commitment If the Host government did not have access to any commitment
technology, it would choose = T in all states of the world, expropriating the Foreign investment
                      FT                 T
in good states (           ) and bad (       ), owing to the sunk nature of the FDI at the time that the
Host government makes its taking decision. This policy choice would correspond to the ...rst
                T                                                                       FT
best for s 2        , but it would di¤er from the ...rst best for s 2                        . Moreover, anticipating this
ex-post treatment and hence a zero return on FDI, no Foreign investment would be forthcoming,
and the Host government'
                       s welfare would be driven to zero in this market.
   We assume that this stark commitment problem is mitigated by domestic institutions which
limit the Host government'
                         s ability to expropriate Foreign investors. We have in mind domestic
institutions that already protect the property rights of Foreign investors in the Host country,
such as the domestic property law itself and the courts that enforce it. We capture this in a
reduced-form fashion by assuming that the Host government is forced to implement the ...rst-
best policies with probability p and can act at its own discretion with probability 1 p. We think
of p as a parameter that varies across countries capturing di¤erences in institutional quality,
with p < 1 signifying a lack of full commitment. Denoting by                        C   the policies implemented under
this regime of limited commitment, we thus have                        C   = F T with probability p and         C   = T with
                                             FT                                           T
probability 1        p for states s 2             and   C   = T in states s 2                 . Notice that these policies
correspond to the ...rst-best policies for p = 1 and to the no-commitment policies for p = 0.
   Under limited commitment and absent any further policy interventions, the Foreign investor
                                                               ~ (I ), since the Host government
therefore receives an expected return of Es [ (I ; s)] = pF T pP
                                                            C

expropriates the Foreign investor unless a state s 2 F T is realized (which happens with proba-
             P
bility pF T    s2 F T p (s)) and the Host government is constrained by domestic institutions to
implement the ...rst-best policy (which happens with probability p). The equilibrium investment
IC is then implicitly de...ned by
                                                          ~ (I ) = r ,
                                                   p F T pP                                                             (3.8)
                                                              C

since the Foreign investor adjusts its investment to make the expected return equal its outside
option r . This implies that the Host government achieves an expected welfare of

        Es [! (IC ;     C ; s)]   = pF T [CS (IC ) + (1               p) P S (IC )]                                     (3.9)
                                  = pF T [CS (IC ) + P S (IC )               (1   p) (1         ) P S (IC )]   r IC ,

                                                                T
since it shuts down production in states s 2                        , always enjoys the ex-post consumer surplus in
               FT                                                                                                         FT
states s 2          , and further seizes a fraction                 of the ex-post pro...ts P S (IC ) in states s 2

                                                                22
if its hands are not tied by domestic institutions (which occurs with probability 1 p).
                             @Es [! (IC ; C ;s)]
     It is easy to show that         @p
                                                 > 0 for p 2 [0; 1) by di¤erentiating (3.8) and (3.9),
which con...rms that the Host government indeed has a commitment problem vis-a-vis Foreign
investors. Intuitively, the Foreign investor gets an expected return of r regardless of the Host
government'
          s investment policy so that the Host government ultimately pays the price for any
deviation from the ...rst-best. A corollary of this is that the ...rst-best policies also maximize the
Host government'
               s expected welfare and not just the ex-post surplus of the Host government
and the Foreign investor as established above. For future reference, we de...ne the ...rst-best
investment level, IF B , as the investment level solving (3.8) when p = 1.
   The commitment problem that arises with p < 1 implies that, by controlling its ex-post
incentive to expropriate and inducing more Foreign investment into the domestic market, the
Host government could do better under an investment treaty. But it should also be clear
that, in light of our assumption that the Host country is small in world markets and therefore
cannot impact the world interest rate r , the Foreign investor stands to gain nothing from the
investment treaty with the Host country, as it can expect to earn the world interest rate on its
investments wherever it invests.
   Put di¤erently, according to our model and in contrast to our analysis of trade agreements
in the previous subsection, in the absence of an investment treaty there is no ine¢ ciency
that can be traced to a government-to-government international policy externality : instead,
the commitment problem at the heart of investment agreements is a government-to-investor
policy commitment problem that creates a Host-country (domestic) ine¢ ciency, the costs of
which are borne entirely by the Host government. What an investment treaty can do is serve
as a way for the Host government to make policy commitments to Foreign investors ex ante,
and thereby address this domestic ine¢ ciency. And this has an important implication: we can
evaluate the investment treaty based on how close it comes to achieving Es [! (IF B ;         F B ; s)],   the
level of the Host government'
                            s ex-ante expected welfare under the ...rst-best policies           F B.



Investment Incentives As a preliminary step, we ...rst ask whether the Host government can
correct this domestic ine¢ ciency with a simpler policy response, namely, by o¤ering an up-front
investment incentive to the Foreign investor to compensate it for the ex-post treatment to follow.
Such a policy response is potentially appealing, because the Host government can induce any
desired level of Foreign investment I by o¤ering an up-front payment of fr         Es [   C   (I ; s)]g I


                                                 23
to Foreign investors that is conditional on investing I . Since Foreign investors expect a return
on their investment of Es [         C   (I ; s)] given the subsequent policy choices                      C,   the additional
return r    Es [   C   (I ; s)] makes the overall return from investing in the Host country exactly
equal to their outside option r .
   Under such a program of up-front investment incentives, the Host government'
                                                                              s welfare for
any level of I would be equal to

        Es [! (I ;     C ; s)]   = pF T [CS (I ) + (1        p) P S (I )]            fr        Es [   C   (I ; s)]g I
                                 = pF T [CS (I ) + P S (I )       (1        p) (1          ) P S (I )]         r I .

With probability pF T , the Foreign production facility is not shut down once the state of the
world is realized thus generating consumer surplus CS (I ). With additional probability 1                                    p,
the Host government is allowed to expropriate the Foreign facility which then further generates
producer surplus of P S (I ). The Host government'
                                                 s welfare consists of this expected surplus
minus the costs of the up-front investment incentive scheme fr                            Es [   C   (I ; s)]g I .
    To determine the optimal level of investment to induce under an up-front investment incen-
              ^ , the Host government solves maxI Es [! (I ; C ; s)]. This yields the ...rst-order
tive program, I
condition
                                                                               ^
                                                                          @P S I
                                 ~ I
                                   ^        r
                                 P        = F T + (1     p) (1        )                    ,                             (3.10)
                                           p                                    @I
                          ^ . It is easy to verify using equations (3.8) and (3.10) that I
which implicitly de...nes I                                                              ^ is smaller
than the ...rst-best level of investment IF B but larger that the limited-commitment investment
                                                   ^ )
                                                ~ (I
                                               @P                    ^ )
                                                               @P S (I
level IC as long as (1 p) (1        ) > 0 since @I < 0 and @I            > 0.
   Finally, with this optimal level of FDI secured by the appropriate up-front investment
incentives program, the welfare enjoyed by the Host government would then be given by
        h                   i          h                                                                       i
           ^;
      Es ! I         C; s
                                           ^
                                 = pF T CS I             ^
                                                    + PS I             (1       p) (1                ^
                                                                                                 )PS I                 ^ (3.11)
                                                                                                                     r I
                                       2                                                            3
                                                                                 ~ I
                                                                                @P ^                  2
                                 = pF T 4CS I
                                            ^       + (1      p) (1         )                    ^
                                                                                                 I        5.
                                                                                 @I

Equations (3.8)-(3.11) immediately imply that the up-front investment program improves on
the limited commitment scenario as long as (1 p) (1      ) > 0 since the Host government then
                  ^ > I . It is also easy to see from these equations that this same condition
optimally chooses I    C



                                                        24
ensures that the up-front investment program cannot achieve the ...rst-best outcome since:
                                 h                  i
                                    ^;
                               Es ! I        C; s
                                                                  ^
                                                        < pF T CS I
                                                              h                    i
                                                        = Es ! I ^;       F B; s

                                                        < Es [! (IF B ;   F B ; s)] .


We summarize with:

Lemma 2. As long as (1            p) (1      ) > 0, an up-front investment incentive program can help
solve the Host-government commitment problem with regard to Foreign investors, but it cannot
achieve the ...rst best.

       According to Lemma 2, up-front investment incentive programs fall short of being able
                                  s commitment problem.22 Intuitively, this is because such
to fully solve the Host-government'
programs can address the ex-ante ine¢ ciency due to underinvestment, but they cannot address
                                                                           FT
the ex-post ine¢ ciency resulting from takings in states s 2                    . The possibility of correcting
these latter ine¢ ciencies provides a natural role for an investment treaty. We next turn to
assessing this role, and evaluating whether it is best served by an investment treaty that features
ISDS or rather SSDS.


Investment Agreements We are now ready to dive into our full analysis allowing for both
up-front investment incentives and an investment agreement. The investment agreement deter-
mines what happens once the investment is sunk and works exactly like our trade agreement
from before. In particular, the Host government chooses its investment policy; if it chooses a
taking, the Foreign investor (in the case of ISDS) or Foreign government (in the case of SSDS)
then decides whether to ...le a complaint with the DSB; and if a complaint is ...led, the DSB then
issues a ruling based on a noisy signal of which policy is ...rst-best in the realized state of the
world. The up-front investment incentive determines the ex-ante investment, and the Host gov-
ernment chooses the level of the investment incentive to maximize its ex-ante expected payo¤
  22
    In fact, our model overstates the likely e¤ectiveness of up-front investment incentives in reality to solve the
Host government'   s ex ante commitment problem, because we abstract from incentive issues on the side of the
investor (e.g., to deliver worthless investment once the up-front payment has been received). Nevertheless, as
we will show, this serves a useful pedagogical purpose, in that it allows for a clean targeting of the up-front
investment incentive to the ex ante investment ine¢ ciency and permits targeting the BIT design to addressing
the ex-post ine¢ ciency.


                                                        25
keeping the implications of the investment agreement in mind. We proceed by backwards induc-
tion, considering ...rst the Foreign agent'
                                          s ...ling choice, then the Host government'
                                                                                    s investment
policy choice, and ...nally the Host government'
                                               s up-front investment incentive choice.
       Recall that for the Host government, the ex-post gain from a taking,              G   (I ; s), is de...ned
in (3.5) and note that it is positive in all states of the world, while the loss to the Foreign
investor is de...ned in (3.6) and given by        I   (I ) =     P S (I ). Similarly to our earlier analysis
of trade agreements, here we allow the Foreign government'
                                                         s loss from a taking (and hence
payo¤ from winning in court) to di¤er from that of the Foreign investor, and we capture the
loss from a taking for each of these potential Foreign claimants with the simple parameterization
 f   (I )       fPS   (I ) for f 2 fG ; I g, where the parameter         I     1 by (3.6) and where we will
later place restrictions on the parameter         G    but for now only assume that it is positive. We
denote by cf ( ) the cost incurred by Foreign complainant f 2 fG ; I g whenever it invokes the
DSB, and we allow this cost to be a function of the level of investment I , and in particular we
assume that this cost rises in proportion to the magnitude of the producer surplus (operating
pro...ts) that is at stake in the taking. Formally, we assume that the cost incurred by foreign
complainant f if it invokes the DSB in state s is given by cf (I ; s)                  cf (s) P S (I ). We
make the analogous assumption for the Host government: if the Host government is taken to
court in state s, it incurs a cost c (I ; s)      [c (s)]   G   (I ; s) to defend the taking.23 As with our
earlier analysis of trade agreements, we will later introduce assumptions about how the cost
of ...ling and payo¤ from winning in court varies across complainants and explicitly consider
equilibrium outcomes under ISDS and SSDS, but for now we develop the model for general
complainant f 2 fG ; I g.
       As before, we assume that the realized state s is observed by all agents including the DSB,
and that       is observed by the agents but not by the DSB.24 As in the previous subsection,
                                                                                                            DSB
we will think of the DSB as issuing a policy ruling, in the present context denoted by
and corresponding either to F T or T , to maximize the expected ex-post (once-the-foreign-
investment-is-sunk) joint payo¤ of the Host government and the Foreign investor given its
noisy signal of .
  23
     As will become clear below, allowing dispute costs to rise with the level of foreign investment in this way
ensures that the Foreign ...ling decision and Host policy choice are independent of the level of investment I ,
simplifying the analysis to follow.
  24
     And we are assuming implicitly that the DSB cannot observe what the Host government does with the
production facility if it expropriates it, i.e., whether or not the facility is shut down.



                                                       26
       It is worth pausing here to elaborate on what we have in mind more broadly regarding the
DSB ruling. Under the interpretation that T represents a "regulatory taking,"the DSB ruling
could be seen in a richer model as corresponding to a determination of whether the regulation
complies with some explicit but vaguely worded commitment included in the contract, such
as national treatment or the MFN clause, which itself can be interpreted as an attribute of
internationally e¢ cient policy intervention. Alternatively, under the interpretation that T
represents an outright expropriation, the decision to expropriate could be left in the hands
of the Host government subsequent to the DSB ruling under the interpretation that the DSB
rules on a level of compensation to be paid by the Host government to the Foreign investor in
the event of expropriation, with the ruling F T then corresponding to a level of compensation
su¢ ciently high to prevent the Host government from following through with the expropriation
and the ruling T corresponding to a level of compensation (which could be set arbitrarily to
zero) under which the Host government would go through with expropriation.25
       Consider ...rst the Foreign complainant'
                                              s ...ling behavior. The complainant ...les a complaint if
and only if = T and the expected bene...t to the complainant of ...ling exceeds the complainant'
                                                                                               s
cost of ...ling, that is

                             Pr(DSB ruling is F T j s)           j   f (I   )j > cf (I ; s):                    (3.12)

Condition (3.12) is the "...ling"condition for the agent with standing in the Foreign country to
invoke the DSB in response to a policy choice by the Host government of = T .
       Next consider the Host government'
                                        s policy choice, keeping in mind now that the Host
government is constrained to implement the ...rst-best policies with probability p. If the Host
government is constrained, it chooses               =   F B.   Otherwise, it chooses           = T if either (3.12)
  25
     More speci...cally, in the case of outright expropriation there would in practice typically be no question that
this expropriation has occurred, and the main legal question before the court is simply to determine the level of
damages. To see how our model maps over to this case, and in analogy with our simpli...cation of two policies T
and F T , suppose that there are two possible levels of damages associated with expropriation, High and Low,
and T then corresponds to states of the world where damages are Low and expropriation is e¢ cient, while F T
corresponds to states of the world where damages are High and expropriation is ine¢ cient. And suppose that
the Host country would choose to expropriate in every state of the world if it only had to pay Low damages
but would never choose to expropriate in any state of the world if it had to pay High damages. With these
assumptions, if the Host country expropriates and the Foreign investor invokes the court, then if the court rules
for Low damages the Host country will pay the Low damages and maintain its decision to expropriate (the
analogue of a ruling of T , which is e¢ cient if the state is in T but ine¢ cient if the state is in F T ), while if the
court rules for High damages the Host country will reverse its decision to expropriate (give back the property
to the Foreign investors) to avoid paying the high damages (the analogue of a ruling of F T , which is e¢ cient if
the state is in F T but ine¢ cient if the state is in T ).


                                                          27
fails ­because then = T can be set without triggering a dispute ­or if (3.12) holds and the
expected bene...t to the Host government from a taking exceeds the cost to the Host government
of a dispute:
                                                Pr(DSB ruling is T j s)                          G (I   ; s) > c(I ; s):                               (3.13)

      We can now derive the equilibrium actions, conditional on investment level I , for each state
s. For simplicity and as before, in what follows we assume that the states where the vague
contract is unambiguous are measure zero, so we can focus only on states where the court
                                                                                                                     FT                          FT
if invoked must interpret the contract. De...ning the thresholds                                                     1     (s)        c (s),     2;f   (s)
          cf            T                   cf                         T                                                         FT            FT
1              (s),     1;f   (s)                     (s), and         2    (s)        1    c (s), and noting that               1    (s) <    2;f   (s) and
           f                                    f
    T              T
    1;f   (s) <    2   (s) if the dispute costs are low relative to the dispute stakes for each disputant,
conditions (3.12) and (3.13) immediately imply the following result:

Lemma 3. Assuming that dispute costs are low relative to dispute stakes for all s so that
    FT            FT                            T               T
    1     (s) <   2;f   (s) and                 1;f   (s) <     2   (s), equilibrium actions can be characterized as follows:

                                    FT
      1. In states s 2                      :

               1. If the Host government is constrained: We have = F T and no dispute.

               2. If the Host government is unconstrained: If DSB quality is high in the sense that
                                        FT
                  qk (s) <              1       (s), we have                = F T and no dispute; if DSB quality is intermediate
                                                                            FT             FT
                  in the sense that qk (s) 2                                1     (s) ;    2;f   (s) , we have      = T and a dispute; if DSB
                                                                                                  FT
                  quality is low in the sense that qk (s) >                                       2;f   (s), we have = T and no dispute.

                                    T
      2. In states s 2                  :

                                                                                                                                                       T
               1. If the Host government is constrained: We have = T , no dispute if qk (s) <                                                          1;f   (s),
                                                                      T
                  and a dispute if qk (s) >                           1;f   (s).

               2. If the Host government is unconstrained: If DSB quality is high in the sense that
                                    T
                  qk (s) <          1;f     (s), we have = T and no dispute; if DSB quality is intermediate in the
                                                              T              T
                  sense that qk (s) 2                         1;f   (s) ;    2    (s) , we have = T and a dispute; if DSB quality is
                                                                                  T
                  low in the sense that qk (s) >                                  2   (s), we have = F T and no dispute.

      Note that Lemma 3 is analogous to Lemma 1 if the Host government is unconstrained
by domestic institutions, in the sense that the equilibrium actions follow an intuitive sorting

                                                                                       28
along the dimension of DSB quality. If the DSB quality is high, the Host government makes
the e¢ cient policy choice and there is no dispute; if the DSB quality is intermediate, the
Host government chooses                               = T and there is a dispute; and if the DSB quality is low, the
Host government chooses the ine¢ cient policy and there is no dispute. The only substantive
di¤erence between Lemma 3 and Lemma 1 is that the Host government is now constrained
by domestic institutions with probability p which forces it to implement the e¢ cient policy no
                                                                                                     FT                 FT                      FT
matter what. For future reference, we again de...ne the sets                                         1         s2            j qk (s) <         1     (s) ,
 FT                       FT                          FT             FT                   FT                 FT                       FT
 2;f             s2            j qk (s) 2             1     (s) ;    2;f   (s)    , and   3;f        s2            j qk (s) >         2;f   (s) , as well
       T                       T                       T                   T              T                    T             T                        T
as     1;f            s2           j qk (s) <          1;f     (s) ,       2;f     s2           j qk (s) 2     1;f   (s) ;   2   (s) , and,           3
             T                     T
 s2              j qk (s) >        2   (s) .
     With Lemma 3 in hand, we can now roll back to the ...rst stage and solve for the optimal
investment incentives o¤ered by the Host government. The Host government can induce any
level of investment I by o¤ering up-front investment incentives of                                                     r         Es     f   (I ; s)       I ,
where Es              f   (I ; s) is the expected return to the Foreign investor on an investment of I
under an investment treaty with standing choice f 2 fG ; E g. In the Appendix, we provide
the expression for Es                        f   (I ; s) and use it to show that the expected welfare of the Host
government associated with Foreign investment choice I is given by:
                                                  X
Es [! f (I ; s)] = (1                       p)             p (s) [CS (I ) + P S (I )]                                                                                (3.14)
                                                 s2   FT
                                                      1
                                                      X
                                   + (1          p)              p (s) CS (I ) + P S (I )             qk (s) (1            ) P S (I )         c (I ; s)         cf (I ; s)
                                                      s2   FT
                                                           2;f
                                                      X
                                   + (1          p)              p (s) [CS (I ) + P S (I )]
                                                      s2   FT
                                                           3;f
                                                      X
                                       (1        p)              p (s) qk (s) [e (I ; s)          CS (I )         P S (I )] + c (I ; s) + cf (I ; s)
                                                      s2   T
                                                           2;f
                                                      X
                                       (1        p)            p (s) [e (I ; s)        CS (I )      P S (I )]
                                                      s2   T
                                                           3
                                         FT
                                   +pp       [CS (I ) + P S (I )]
                                             X
                                    p             p (s) qk (s) [e (I ; s)                     CS (I )        P S (I )] + c (I ; s) + cf (I ; s)
                                        s2   T [ T
                                             2;f 3

                                    r I .

     The interpretation of this expression is intuitive, once it is understood that the Host gov-

                                                                                  29
ernment must pay the Foreign investor the amount r I in equilibrium, as reected in the last
line of (3.14); and with this paid, it is as if the Host government then keeps for itself all of
the ex-post net-of-litigation-cost surplus generated by I according to the equilibrium behavior
in the presence of an investment treaty with standing choice f 2 fI ; G g as characterized
above. The ...rst ...ve lines of (3.14) record this ex-post surplus for the ...ve sets of states where
this surplus is non-zero for the case that the Host government is unconstrained in its policy-
making (which happens with probability 1                          p). And the next two lines add the surplus that
is generated if the Host government is constrained to implement the ...rst-best policies (which
happens with probability p). To see this, note that the e¢ cient policy yields a surplus for the
                                                                              FT                         T
Host government of CS (I ) + P S (I ) in states s 2                                and 0 in states s 2       , the ine¢ cient
                                                                                                                     FT
policy yields a surplus for the Host government of CS (I ) + P S (I ) in states s 2                                       and
                                                                       T
CS (I ) + P S (I )    e (I ; s) < 0 in states s 2                          , the DSB makes a mistake with probability
qk (s), and invoking the DSB costs cf (I ; s) + c (I ; s).
   Using the expression for Es [! f (I ; s)] in (3.14), we can now solve for the optimal level
of FDI in the presence of an investment treaty with standing choice f 2 fI ; G g, which we
                                              @Es [! f (If ;s)]
denote by If , de...ned implicitly by              @I
                                                                  = 0. The associated ...rst order condition can be
manipulated to yield the following implicit characterization of If :

             ~ I           r
             P  f     =                                                                                               (3.15)
                          pF T
                                                        P
                                                        p (s) qk (s) + pF
                                                            s2     FT
                                                                             T
                                                                           3;f @P S If
                                                                   2;f
                          + (1 p) (1       )
                                                           pF T                    @I
                                                      "                               #
                                     X p (s) @ c If ; s                 @ cf If ; s
                          + (1 p)                                    +
                                     T      F T
                                                pF T       @I                @I
                                  s2 2;f ; 2
                                  2                                       3
                                     X p (s) qk (s) X p (s) h                             i
                          + (1 p) 4                        +              5             ~
                                                                               e (s) P If
                                                 pF T                pF T
                                    s2 T2;f                   s 2 T
                                                                  3
                                             "                               #
                              X p (s) @ c If ; s               @ cf If ; s
                          +p                               +
                               T  T
                                     pF T         @I                @I
                               s2   2;f ; 3

                                    X         p (s) qk (s) h                    ~ I
                                                                                       i
                          +p                                 e (s)              P  f       .
                                    T ; T
                                                  pF T
                               s2   2;f 3



   We can see from the terms on the right-hand-side of (3.15) that there are a number of forces
that determine the optimal level of investment If in the presence of an investment treaty with

                                                                  30
standing choice f 2 fI ; G g. The term in the ...rst line simply reects the ...rst-best benchmark
forces: if it were the only term on the right-hand-side of (3.15), then this expression would
imply If = IF B . The terms on the remaining lines then capture various ine¢ ciencies that make
If < IF B , ...rst considering the case in which the Host government is unconstrained and then
turning to the case in which the Host government is constrained. The second line reects the
                                                               FT
ine¢ ciencies associated with takings in                              , similar to those in (3.10) but down-weighted by
                                                           FT
the reduced probability of a taking in                            under the investment treaty. The third line reects
the impact of greater investment on the expected costs of litigation, both complainant and
defendant, which the Host government must ultimately bear. And the fourth line reects the
expected welfare costs that arise when e¢ cient takings are prevented, either by an incorrect
DSB ruling or in the shadow of a low-quality DSB. The terms in the last two lines make clear
that there would still be ine¢ ciencies even in the special case p = 1, since the Foreign agent
                                                       T        T
f then still litigates whenever s 2                    2;f ;    3          which brings about litigation costs and prevents
e¢ cient takings in case of court mistakes.26
       Finally, plugging If into the expression for Es [! f (I ; s)] in (3.14) and simplifying yields
                                    2                                                3
                                                               X
Es ! f If ; s       = (1          p) 4pF T + pT
                                              3 +                          p (s) qk (s)5 CS If                                        (3.16)
                                                             s2      T
                                                                     2;f
                                                     2                                   3
                                                           X                                        2    @P~ I
                                                                                                                f
                        + (1        p) (1           )4               p (s) qk (s) + pF T5
                                                                                     3;f  If
                                                               FT
                                                                                                           @ If
                                                        s2     2;f
                                                                     (                                     "                          #)
                                               X                                                             @ c If ; s   @ cf If ; s
                           (1       p)                    p (s) c If ; s + cf If ; s                    If              +
                                               FT [ T
                                                                                                                 @I           @I
                                         s2    2;f  2;f
                              2                                                 3
                                                   X
                        +p 4pF T +                         p (s) qk (s)5 CS (I )
                                              s2   T [ T
                                                   2;f 3
                                                     (                                        "                              #)
                                   X                                                              @ c If ; s   @ cf If ; s
                          p                   p (s) c If ; s + cf If ; s                 If                  +                    .
                                   T [ T
                                                                                                     @I            @I
                              s2   2;f 3


This expression reveals that the investment treaty only improves upon the program of up-front
investment incentives if court quality is su¢ ciently high and domestic institutions are su¢ -
  26
     We have assumed for simplicity that the probability of court mistakes qk (s) is independent of p, the prob-
ability that the Host government has its hands tied to implement the ...rst-best policy, but we could allow the
probability of court mistakes to depend on p without altering in a substantial way any of our results.


                                                                           31
                                             FT            T                                        FT      FT      T       T
ciently weak. If qk (s) > max                2;f   (s) ;   2   (s) for all s so that the sets       1 ;     2;f ;   1;f ;   2;f

are empty, the court quality is then so low that the ine¢ cient policy is always implemented
without any dispute. In this case we have using (3.11) and (3.14) that Es ! f If ; s
   h             i
        ^
Es ! I ; C ; s so that the investment treaty makes things worse. Also, if p = 1 so that do-
                                                                                   h           i
mestic institutions alone would solve the Host government commitment problem and Es ! I^ ; C; s =
Es [! (IF B ;   F B ; s)],   then the investment treaty cannot make things better and makes things
                                   T
worse as long as qk (s) >          1   (s) for some s and there is some litigation in equilibrium. On the
                                        FT            T                                         FT      FT      T       T
other hand, if qk (s) < min             1    (s) ;    1    (s) for all s so that the sets       2;f ;   3;f ;   2;f ;   3   be-
come empty, the court quality is so high that the e¢ cient policy is always implemented without
                                                                 h             i
                                                                       ^
any dispute and thus Es ! f I ; s = Es [! (I ; F B ; s)] > Es ! I ; C ; s .27
                                         f                        FB

    We summarize with:

Proposition 2. The introduction of an investment treaty can lead to e¢ ciency gains and
bene...t the Host government relative to a stand-alone program of o¤ering up-front investment
incentives to foreign investors if and only if the quality of the court is su¢ ciently high and the
quality of domestic institutions is su¢ ciently weak.

The possibility described by Proposition 2, that a purely unilateral intervention could dominate
an international agreement, does not arise for the case of trade agreements. This di¤erence
reects the di¤erent nature of the ine¢ ciencies addressed across the two kinds of agreements,
a fundamentally domestic ine¢ ciency in the case of investment treaties and a fundamentally
international ine¢ ciency in the case of trade agreements. Henceforth we will assume that court
quality is su¢ ciently high and the Host-country commitment problem is su¢ ciently severe to
allow the introduction of an investment treaty to improve upon up-front investment incentives
by themselves, at least when standing is optimally allocated in the investment treaty.


SSDS versus ISDS We now evaluate the desirability of adopting SSDS versus ISDS. This
again requires us to take a stance on the complainant'
                                                     s cost of ...ling and payo¤ from winning
in court under each choice of standing, and we impose analogous assumptions to our earlier
  27
     We are ignoring the issues associated with the endogeneity of contract choice and court mandate to the
quality of the court that are highlighted in the analysis of Maggi and Staiger (2011). But the point we emphasize
here would survive endogenizing the institutional choice in this way: our point is simply that with low enough
court quality, it would not be optimal to introduce a BIT-like institution where a court is endowed with the
ability to settle investment disputes and where these disputes do occur along the equilibrium path.


                                                                  32
Assumption 1 and Assumption 2. In particular, we assume that the cost of ...ling for the Foreign
government is the same as the cost of ...ling for the Foreign investor, namely

                                                cG = cI             c                               (Assumption 10 )

implying cG (I ; s) = cI (I ; s) = [c           (s)] P S (I )           c (I ; s) for all s. And we assume that
the Foreign investor su¤ers more from a taking than the Foreign government in the sense that

                                            j   G   (I )j < j   I   (I )j                           (Assumption 20 )

which amounts to the parameter restriction                G     <       I   since then j   G   (I )j =   G   P S (I ) <
P S (I ) = j    I   (I )j.
       Since the Host country is assumed to be small so that its choice of investment policy does not
a¤ect the world interest rate r or any other international prices, we cannot justify Assumption
20 on the same economic grounds as our earlier Assumption 2. But we can again invoke the
argument that the Foreign government applies a "political ...lter," which takes into account
the broader political, diplomatic and public relations repercussions of winning in court against
Home.28 In the end, Assumption 10 and Assumption 20 again imply that adopting ISDS rather
than SSDS amounts to the Foreign government delegating ...ling decisions to a more aggressive
...ler than itself.
       Given Assumption 10 and Assumption 20 , are there conditions (model parameter ranges)
under which ISDS could be part of an optimally designed investment treaty? To answer this
question, we do not derive expressions for the expected e¢ ciency loss under ISDS and un-
der SSDS relative to the ...rst-best outcome as we did for the analysis of trade agreements
in the previous subsection, because the changes in optimal investment levels under each pol-
icy regime complicate such comparisons in the context of investment treaties. Instead we
  28
     For example, if the series of tobacco plain-packaging disputes brought by Philip Morris under the ISDS
provisions of various US BITs had instead been brought by the United States government, it seems plausible in
light of the public controversy surrounding these disputes that the United States government would have enjoyed
diminished gains from a win at court relative to the gains that would be enjoyed by Philip Morris (re     ecting,
for example, the political costs of having the name of the United States government associated with litigation
aimed at weakening the health regulations of other countries and dealing with various constituencies in the
United States on these issues). We note also that we have modeled these di¤erences as entering through the
complainant'  s payo¤ of a win in court. An alternative would be to capture these di¤erences in the complainant's
cost function of bringing a dispute, with the foreign government then bearing higher costs of bringing a dispute
than the foreign investor. The results that we emphasize below concerning conditions under which ISDS is
optimal for a BIT would only be strengthened under this alternative modeling approach, as in that case there
would also be a direct dispute costs savings from adopting ISDS rather SSDS.


                                                         33
hold investment at the optimal level under an investment treaty with SSDS (IG ) as char-
acterized by (3.15), and we use (3.14) to calculate Es [! I (IG ; s)]                                           Es [! G (IG ; s)], seeking
conditions under which this di¤erence is positive, which then provide su¢ cient conditions for
Es [! I (II ; s)] > Es [! G (IG ; s)] and hence for ISDS to be part of an optimal investment treaty,
given that Es [! I (II ; s)]                    Es [! I (IG ; s)].
     To express Es [! I (IG ; s)]                          Es [! G (IG ; s)], we proceed as above and ...rst de...ne the sets
 FT                     FT                           FT              FT                     T            T                   T              T
             s2              j qk (s) 2              2;G    (s) ;    2;I    (s)     and          s2          j qk (s) 2      1;I   (s) ;    1;G   (s)     .
                                      FT                                       FT
As de...ned, the set                       describes states in                         where the Host government would implement
a taking with impunity under SSDS but would face litigation under ISDS (i.e., states that are
      FT                                                            FT                                                  T
in    3;G    under SSDS but switch to                               2;I    under ISDS). Similarly, the set                   describes states
      T
in         where the Host government would implement a taking without court challenge under
                                                                                                                  T
SSDS but would face litigation under ISDS (i.e., states that are in                                               1;G       under SSDS but
                  T
switch to         2;I    under ISDS). With these new sets de...ned and using (3.14), we can now write
  BIT         Es [! I (IG ; s)] Es [! G (IG ; s)] as
                        X
          BIT   =            p (s) qk (s) e IG ; s                                CS IG         P S IG                                      (3.17)
                             s2   T
                             X
                                      p (s) fc IG ; s + c                  IG ; s g
                             s2   T
                                            X
                        + (1          p)             p (s) (1             qk (s)) (1       ) P S IG          c IG ; s        c     IG ; s    :
                                           s2   FT


     Expression (3.17) summarizes the costs and bene...ts associated with the additional litigation
arising under ISDS relative to SSDS. It is analogous to our earlier expression (3.4) pertaining
to trade agreements, except that (3.17) expresses net gains rather than net losses (and thus has
the opposite sign). The ...rst line of (3.17) is negative since e IG ; s                                       CS IG             P S IG       >0
                        T
in states s 2               , as is the second line. These two lines argue against ISDS, reecting the fact
                                                                                                                                                  T
that the extra litigation induced under ISDS relative to SSDS is undesirable in states s 2                                                            ,
since this litigation challenges an e¢ cient policy and thus introduces nothing but court error
and litigation costs. But the sign of the third line in (3.17) is ambiguous. This can be con...rmed
by rearranging terms and rewriting this line in the equivalent form
        X
(1 p)        p (s) [(1 qk (s)) P S IG       c IG ; s ] [(1 qk (s)) P S IG                                                        + c IG ; s ] ;
            s2   FT


and noting that the ...rst term in square brackets must be positive by the ...ling condition for
                                                                             FT                                         FT
Foreign investors in the set of states s 2                                        , which recall are states in               where the Host

                                                                                  34
government would implement a taking with impunity under SSDS but would face litigation
under ISDS. Evidently, this expression will be positive if         and c are su¢ ciently small so that
the second term in square brackets is su¢ ciently small. And the set of states over which this
                            FT
expression is summed,            , will be larger the smaller is   G   , i.e., the greater the divergence
is between the Foreign government and Foreign investors in the payo¤ to ...ling according to
Assumption 20 . Finally, note that the ...rst two lines of (3.17) can be set arbitrarily close to
                                                                   P
zero by reducing the probability that states s 2 T occur, pT         s2 T p (s). Hence, with the

third line of (3.17) guaranteed to be positive if , c and     G    are su¢ ciently low, ISDS dominates
SSDS if pT is also su¢ ciently low so that it is su¢ ciently rare for a taking to be socially e¢ cient.
     Finally, as we noted at the outset of this subsection, we have proceeded with our formal
analysis by considering the choice of either ISDS or SSDS to be included in an investment
treaty. In reality, the relevant design choice is more aptly described as whether to include ISDS
in an investment treaty in addition to SSDS. Suppose we assume that when both are included,
ISDS ...ling trumps SSDS ...ling whenever both are incentivized to ...le. Then our discussion
above applies equally well to this design choice. We may now state:

Proposition 3. Whether investors, in addition to their governments, should have standing
to bring disputes in an optimally designed investment treaty depends on a number of subtle
tradeo¤s. But if the foreign government faces high political costs of initiating a dispute, the
                                                                              FT
Host government is highly ine¢ cient in orchestrating takings for s 2              and bears little cost of
defending itself in court, and if expropriation is socially e¢ cient only in unusual circumstances,
then it is optimal to give investors standing to bring disputes in an investment treaty. That is,
if   G   , , c, and pT are su¢ ciently low, an optimally designed investment treaty should include
both an SSDS and an ISDS.

     Summarizing, we can conclude from Propositions 1 and 3 that, in contrast to trade agree-
ments, in the context of investment agreements there is a case to be made for going beyond
SSDS and including standing for private agents in the form of ISDS, though even in this context
the case for ISDS is far from absolute. At a broad level, the intuition for these conclusions can
be understood in two steps. A ...rst step follows from our earlier observation that a trade agree-
ment is a contract between governments to address a government-to-government international
policy externality, while an investment agreement is a contract between a Host government and
foreign investors to address a government-to-investor policy commitment problem. So, if the

                                                    35
Foreign export industry is an imperfect agent of the Foreign government (which we impose in
Assumption 2), it does not make sense to give Foreign exporters standing in trade disputes;
and if the Foreign government is an imperfect agent of the Foreign investor (which we impose
in Assumption 20 ), it does not make sense to give the Foreign government standing in invest-
ment disputes. This ...rst step therefore suggests that trade agreements should adopt SSDS
while investment agreements should adopt ISDS. The second step of the intuition is then to
observe that Foreign complainants never internalize the costs that ...ling a dispute imposes on
the Home/Host government, and this negative externality leads to a general tendency to over...le
relative to e¢ cient litigation levels. Hence, beginning from the position that trade agreements
should adopt SSDS, it would never make sense to introduce the possibility of an even more
aggressive ...ler in the form of ESDS (as is implied by Assumption 2); whereas beginning from
the position that investment agreements should adopt ISDS, it might make sense to restrict
standing to a less aggressive ...ler in the form of SSDS (as implied by Assumption 20 ).


Standing for disputes over commitments to investors more generally We have ana-
lyzed commitment issues with respect to foreign investors within the context of investment
treaties.    Arguably, similar issues may arise in the context of trade agreements: indeed,
Yarbrough and Yarbrough (1992) argue that a central role for trade agreements is to allow
importer governments to make policy commitments to foreign exporters who must make sunk
investments in order to export to their markets.29 In principle, our analysis above (with the
interpretation now excluding the possibility of outright expropriation) could be applied directly
to trade agreements wherever these agreements are designed to address such commitment is-
sues, with an ESDS mechanism playing the role in trade agreements that is played by ISDS
mechanisms in investment treaties.
       However, it may be plausible to view such commitment issues as less important in the
context of trade agreements than they are in the context of investment treaties, because the
issue of sunk investments may be more important in the context of FDI than in the context of
exporting. There are several reasons to think that this distinction may be important. First,
and most obviously, there is a lack of any outright expropriation threat to the investments
of exporters, in contrast to the case for FDI. But beyond this, in a multi-country world the
investments made by exporters will commonly have alternative uses to produce exports to other
  29
     See also McLaren (1997) whose analysis of a trade agreement between a large and a small country turns
this argument for trade agreements on its head.

                                                   36
markets ­and to this extent therefore not be sunk ­whereas FDI would continue to be largely
sunk and therefore highly susceptible to hold-up by the Host country in a multi-country world.
   If one accepts this distinction, then it follows that the ex ante investment problem is more
important in the context of investment treaties than it is in the context of trade agreements.
And if setting up ISDS involves some ...xed-cost component so that it is not worth doing below
some minimal level of hold-up threat, then this distinction could account for the inclusion of
ISDS provisions in investment treaties when the conditions of Proposition 3 are satis...ed but
no analogous inclusion of ESDS provisions in trade agreements to handle commitment issues
there. Likewise, if it is di¢ cult to create an ESDS mechanism that limits private standing to
cases where serious commitment problems arise, but denies it for market access disputes, this
would provide a further rationale for the exclusion of ESDS from trade agreements even when
those agreements are designed to address important commitment issues.


4. Nature of the Remedy

We have assumed thus far that when a case is ...led and the court sides with the complainant,
the defendant has no choice but to "cease and desist" the policy that has been found to be
illegal. In reality, however, convicted violators of trade and investment agreements have the
alternative option to continue their violation and compensate the injured party through some
form of damage payment. There is a fundamental di¤erence in the nature of damage payments
across trade and investment agreements which is the source of much public controversy: while
trade agreements allow the injured party to engage in reciprocal retaliation, investment treaties
provide explicitly for cash payments.
   In this section, we extend our baseline models of trade and investment agreements from
section 3 to explore this di¤erence in the nature of the remedy. Rather than simply assuming
that the Home or Host government switches to         = F T or    = F T when convicted by the
DSB, we now allow the government to choose instead to maintain         = P or    = T and make
damage payments. We compare two forms of damage payment: one in which the court allows
the injured party to engage in reciprocal retaliation, and another in which the injured party
is awarded cash damages by the court. The key trade-o¤ featured by our extended models is
that retaliation is less e¢ cient but that cash damages can be di¢ cult to assess. Which remedy
is optimal then depends on which force is stronger. We demonstrate that it makes sense that
investment treaties provide for cash payments while trade agreements do not, provided that the

                                               37
cash value of the harm su¤ered by a foreign investor who is subject to a taking is su¢ ciently
easy to quantify relative to the cash value of the harm su¤ered by a foreign government whose
exporters face trade protection. And we argue that at a broad level this condition is plausibly
met in practice.
    To make our points as clearly as possible, we build on our analysis of standing and now
take as given that trade agreements limit standing to governments while investment agreements
a¤ord standing to investors. And we adopt two further simplifying assumptions in this section.
First, when retaliation is the remedy we assume that retaliation is su¢ ciently ine¢ cient and
costly that the Home or Host government switches to       = F T or = F T when convicted by the
DSB to avoid retaliation - this means that the analysis of trade and investment agreements with
retaliation is exactly the same as in our earlier baseline analysis of these agreements in section 3
(with the trade agreement featuring SSDS and the investment treaty featuring ISDS). Second,
when cash payments are the remedy, we assume that cash payments are perfectly e¢ cient so that
surplus can be costlessly transferred internationally. With these two simplifying assumptions
we adopt an extreme position on the ine¢ ciency of retaliation relative to cash, so that we can
focus our analysis of the optimal remedy in trade and investment agreements on the degree of
di¢ culty faced by the court in assessing damages in each setting.

4.1. Trade Agreements

We ...rst consider the choice of retaliation versus cash payments in the context of trade agree-
ments. As indicated above, we assume that the foreign government has standing in trade
disputes, and we take retaliation to be a su¢ ciently ine¢ cient form of damage payment that
under retaliation our earlier analysis of trade agreements with SSDS still applies. Our task is
then to introduce cash damages into our model of trade agreements, and compare the outcomes
from our earlier model (which we now refer to as the outcomes under the VR institution ) to the
outcomes under cash damages derived here (which we refer to as the outcomes under the VC
institution ).
    To capture the notion that the court may struggle to accurately assess cash damages, we as-
sume that the court-assessed damages are realizations of a random variable. Denoting the dam-
ages awarded to the injured foreign government by d (s), we assume Pr [d (s) = j          G   (s)j] =
1    2m (s), Pr [d (s) > j   G   (s)j] = m (s), and Pr [d (s) < j   G   (s)j] = m (s), with m (s) 2
    1
[0; 2 ]. Hence, the court awards the correct damages with probability 1          2m (s) and overes-


                                                 38
timates or underestimates the damages with symmetric probabilities m (s). De...ning dhigh
E [d (s) j d (s) > j         G   (s)j] and dlow           E [d (s) j d (s) < j          G   (s)j], we further assume that
dhigh >      G   (s) and dlow <         G   (s) for all s. So, if the court overestimates the damages, Home
can expect to be assessed damages in the amount of dhigh , which would be higher than Home'
                                                                                          s
valuation of the violation             G   (s). Conversely, if the court underestimates the damages, Home
can expect to be assessed damages in the amount of dlow which would be lower than its valu-
ation of the violation           G   (s). This ensures that damage assessment mistakes are consequential
in the sense that they inuence the choice of Home to cease and desist or pay damages.
    Notice also that the accuracy with which the court assesses damages (d (s)), as parame-
terized by m (s), is distinct from the accuracy of the court ruling (F T or P ), as parameterized
by qk (s). Thus, for example, the court might be good at determining whether or not the
imposition of protection was warranted in a particular state of the world (e.g., Does protection
preserve more jobs in the Home country than it destroys in the Foreign country?) but bad at
assessing the value of the harm done to the foreign government (e.g., What is the monetary
value of a job?).
    With equilibrium actions under the VR institution exactly the same as in the VG institution
of our baseline model, it only remains to characterize the equilibrium actions under the VC
institution. Under the VC institution, Foreign ...les a complaint if                          = P and

    Pr (ruling is F T j s) fPr ( = F T ) j            G    (s)j + Pr ( = P ) E [d (s) j             = P ]g > c (s)          (4.1)

and Home chooses             = P if either the above condition is violated or

Pr (ruling is P j s)        G   (s)+Pr (ruling is F T j s) Pr ( = P ) f             G   (s)    E [d (s) j       = P ]g > c (s) :
                                                                                                                            (4.2)
Here, Pr ( = F T ) is the probability that Home chooses to cease and desist in the face of a
court ruling of F T while Pr ( = P ) is the probability that Home instead continues with                                     =P
and pays damages, so that Pr ( = F T ) = 1                       Pr ( = P ). What is new relative to our earlier
equations (3.1) and (3.2) is that we allow for Pr ( = P ) > 0. So, when Home and Foreign
now decide on their actions, they have to account for the possibility that Home may choose to
continue the violation and make damage payments to Foreign.
     Based on these considerations, we can then derive the equilibrium actions for each state s.
                                             c(s) m(s)[ G (s) dlow ]                                           c (s)
De...ning the thresholds F          T
                                  1;C (s)                             , F     T
                                                                            2;C (s)          1                                    ,
                                             G (s) m(s)[ G (s) dlow ]                               j G (s)j m(s)[j G (s)j dlow ]
 P                        c (s)                                                                    G (s) c(s)
 1;C (s)                                    , and P  2 ;C (s)                                                                     ,
            j G j
                ( s ) m ( s ) [j G j low ]
                                    ( s ) d                          G ( s )  [1 2 m ( s )] [ G j G (s)j] m(s)[ G (s) dlow ]
                                                                                               ( s )


                                                               39
                                                    FT              FT                    P                P
and noting as before that                           1;C   (s) <     2;C   (s) and         1;C   (s) <      2;C   (s) if the dispute costs are low
relative to the dispute stakes for each disputant, conditions (4.1) and (4.2) immediately imply:

Lemma 4. Assuming that dispute costs are low relative to dispute stakes for all s so that
    FT                FT                      P               P
    1;C   (s) <       2;C   (s) and           1;C   (s) <     2;C   (s), equilibrium actions under the VC institution can be
characterized as follows:

                                        FT                                                                                           FT
     1. In states s 2                        : If DSB quality is high in the sense that qk (s) <                                     1;C   (s), we have
                 = F T and no dispute; if DSB quality is intermediate in the sense that qk (s) 2
                FT            FT
                1;C   (s) ;   2;C   (s) , we have                  = P and a dispute; if DSB quality is low in the sense
                                     FT
           that qk (s) >             2;C     (s), we have            = P and no dispute.

                                    P                                                                                       P
     2. In states s 2                   : If DSB quality is high in the sense that qk (s) <                                 1;C   (s), we have           =P
                                                                                                                                    P              P
           and no dispute; if DSB quality is intermediate in the sense that qk (s) 2                                                1;C   (s) ;    2;C   (s) ,
                                                                                                                                                 P
           we have            = P and a dispute; if DSB quality is low in the sense that qk (s) >                                                2;C   (s), we
           have         = F T and no dispute.

      Notice that the basic structure of the actions is the same as in the VG institution of our
baseline model (and hence the same as in the the VR institution). The court induces the ...rst-
best action in states where it is highly accurate, shields the ine¢ cient action in states where it
is highly inaccurate, and gets actively involved in states in between. Hence, damage payments
are made in equilibrium only in states of intermediate court quality, though the option of
making them a¤ects all action thresholds. For future reference, we denote the di¤erent action
                  FT                       FT                       FT                  FT                  FT                     FT             FT
sets by           1;C          s2               j qk (s) <          1;C   (s) ,         2;C           s2          j qk (s) 2       1;C   (s) ;    2;C   (s)   ,
           FT                   FT                          FT                                  P                  P                 P                  P
and        3;C          s2              j qk (s) >          2;C   (s) , as well as              1;C        s2          j qk (s) <    1;C    (s) ,       2;C
            P                        P                P                           P                    P                  P
    s2           j qk (s) 2          1;C     (s) ;    2;C   (s)     , and,        3;C         s2           j qk (s) >     2;C   (s) .
      We can now characterize the e¢ ciency loss associated with the VC institution, L (VC ), rel-
ative to the ...rst-best outcome. There are two main changes relative to our baseline analysis
(and thus two new terms relative to equation 3.3). First, if the court correctly rules F T there
is now still a probability m (s) that it awards excessively low damages dlow in which case Home
will continue to choose                       = P , leading to an additional e¢ ciency loss (the ...rst term on the last
line in equation 4.3 below). Second, if the court incorrectly rules F T there is still a probability
1         m (s) that it does not award excessively high damages in which case Home will continue


                                                                                  40
to choose       = P , leading to an additional e¢ ciency gain (the second term on the last line in
equation 4.3 below):
                                X
       L (VC ) =                            p (s) qk (s) j (s)j                                                                                 (4.3)
                          s2   FT [ P
                               2;C  2;C
                                    X
                          +                    p (s) [c (s) + c (s)]
                               s2   FT [ P
                                    2;C  2;C
                                    X
                          +                    p (s) j (s)j
                               s2   FT [ P
                                    3;C  3;C
                               X                                                         X
                          +               p (s) [1     qk (s)] m (s) j (s)j                         p (s) qk (s) [1        m (s)] j (s)j :
                               s2   FT                                                   s2   P
                                    2;C                                                       2;C



   Finally, as noted above the equilibrium actions under the VR institution are exactly the
same as in the VG institution of our baseline model, and hence the e¢ ciency loss associated
with the VR institution, L (VR ), is exactly the same as in the VG institution of our baseline
                                                                                FT            FT          P          P         FT         FT
model. To aid comparison, we use the notation                                   2;R           2;G    ,    2;R        2;G   ,   3;R        3;G    and
 P        P
 3;R      3   where the latter sets are de...ned in our baseline model. With this we then have
                                                                 X
                                           L (VR ) =                        p (s) qk (s) j (s)j
                                                           s2   FT [ P
                                                                2;R  2;R
                                                                     X
                                                           +                    p (s) [c (s) + c (s)]
                                                                s2   FT [ P
                                                                     2;R  2;R
                                                                     X
                                                           +                    p (s) j (s)j :
                                                                s2   FT [ P
                                                                     3;R  3;R



4.1.1. Cash versus Retaliation

By comparing L (VR ) and L (VC ), we can characterize the conditions under which the VR insti-
tution is preferred to the VC institution. Since the VR institution mirrors the VG institution
from the baseline model, all action thresholds are also exactly the same and we now refer to
              FT                FT             FT           FT               P                 P                     P               P
them as       1;R   (s)         1    (s),      2;R   (s)    2;G      (s),    1;R   (s)         1;G       (s), and    2;R   (s)       2   (s) to aid
comparison with the action thresholds associated with the VC institution. As is easy to verify,
the action thresholds associated with the VC institution are below (above) the action thresholds
                                                                                FT                          P
associated with the VR institution in states s 2                                     (states s 2                ). Intuitively, the VC insti-
tution gives the Home government the option to ignore the cease and desist order which makes


                                                                        41
it more attractive for the Home government to protect and less attractive for the Foreign gov-
                                                     FT
ernment to litigate. In states s 2                        , the Home government therefore starts protecting earlier
    FT               FT                                                                                           FT              FT
(   1;C   (s) <      1;R   (s)) and the Foreign government gives up litigating earlier (                          2;C   (s) <     2;R      (s))
                                                                         P
under the VC institution; and in states s 2                                  , the Foreign government starts litigating later
    P                P                                                                                           P                P
(   1;C   (s) >      1;R   (s)) and the Home government gives up protecting later (                              2;C    (s) >     2;R      (s))
                                                                              FT               FT                FT             FT
under the VC institution. De...ning the sets                                  1;C     s2            j qk (s) 2   1;C    (s) ;   1;R   (s)       ,
    FT                FT                   FT               FT                  P               P                P              P
    2;C         s2           j qk (s) 2    2;C   (s) ;      2;R   (s)     ,     1;C       s2        j qk (s) 2   1;R    (s) ;   1;C   (s)       ,
          P                   P                  P                P
and       2;C        s2           j qk (s) 2     2;R   (s) ;      2;C   (s)     , we can then write:
                                                       X
                  L (VR )         L (VC ) =                      p (s) [1       qk (s)] m (s) j (s)j                                      (4.4)
                                                     s2    FT
                                                           2;C
                                                       X
                                                 +               p (s) qk (s) [1       m (s)] j (s)j
                                                     s2    P
                                                           2;C
                                                       X
                                                                 p (s) [qk (s) j (s)j + c (s) + c (s)]
                                                     s2    FT
                                                           1;C
                                                       X
                                                 +               p (s) [qk (s) j (s)j + c (s) + c (s)]
                                                     s2    P
                                                           1;C
                                                       X
                                                 +               p (s) [qk (s) j (s)j + c (s) + c (s)            j (s)j]
                                                     s2    FT
                                                           2;C
                                                       X
                                                 +               p (s) [j (s)j        qk (s) j (s)j      c (s)   c (s)]
                                                     s2    P
                                                           2;C



      Each line in this expression has an intuitive interpretation. The ...rst line captures a dis-
advantage of the VC institution, which is that correct court rulings are e¤ectively overturned
                       FT
in states s 2          2;C   if the court underestimates the damages. The second line then summarizes
the corresponding advantage of the VC institution, which is that incorrect court rulings are
                                                          P
e¤ectively overturned in states s 2                       2;C    unless the court overestimates the damages. All other
                                                                                                                                           FT
lines capture e¤ects associated with movements in the action thresholds. In states s 2                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                      P
the ine¢ cient policy is introduced earlier under the VC institution, while in states s 2                                                 , the
e¢ cient policy is challenged later under the VC institution, which is captured in the third and
                                                                 FT
fourth line, respectively. In states s 2                              , litigation against the ine¢ cient policy is given up
                                                                                      P
earlier under the VC institution, while in states s 2                                     , the e¢ cient policy is given up later
under the VC institution, which is captured in the ...fth and sixth line, respectively.
      Two observations allow us to describe intuitive conditions under which expression (4.4) can

                                                                         42
be signed. The ...rst observation is that an improvement in the court'
                                                                     s ability to assess damages
                                                                                          FT      FT               P
tends to favor the VC institution. To see this, notice that the sets                      1;C ,   2;C ,   and      1;C   become
empty as m (s) ! 0 so that expression (4.4) reduces to:
                                                   X
           L (VR )      L (VC ) jm(s)!0 =                 p (s) qk (s) j (s)j
                                               s2   P
                                                    2;C
                                                     X
                                               +                p (s) [j (s)j   qk (s) j (s)j     c (s)      c (s)] :
                                                    s2    P
                                                          2;C


Correctly assessed cash damages make the Home government fully internalize the e¤ect its
trade policy choices have on the Foreign government, so that it stops protecting when (rightly)
                                 FT
convicted in states s 2          2;C   and continues protecting when (wrongly) convicted in states s 2
 P 30
 2;C .     As a result, there are no longer any ine¢ cient breaches of the court'
                                                                                s cease and desist
order, and the welfare gains associated with the e¢ cient breaches are captured in the ...rst line
of the expression above. However, the VC institution also brings about additional litigation in
                P
states s 2      2;C ,   which could be socially desirable or not. This is captured in the second line of
the above expression, which compares the welfare losses associated with the VR institution in
               P
states s 2     2;C   (j (s)j) to the expected welfare losses associated with the VC institution in these
states (qk (s) j (s)j + c (s) + c (s)). Notice that the second line is positive if the joint litigation
costs c (s) + c (s) are su¢ ciently small. Overall, the VC institution therefore dominates the VR
institution if the court'
                        s ability to assess damages is su¢ ciently good, assuming that the joint
litigation costs are su¢ ciently small.
       The second observation is that an increase in the probability that free trade is the e¢ cient
                                                                                                     P          P             P
policy tends to favor the VR institution. To see this, notice that the sets                          2;C ,      1;C ,   and   2;C

become empty as pF T ! 1 so that expression (4.4) reduces to:
                                               X
              L (VR )       L (VC ) =                    p (s) [1      qk (s)] m (s) j (s)j
                                              s2   FT
                                                   2;C
                                               X
                                                         p (s) [qk (s) j (s)j + c (s) + c (s)]
                                              s2   FT
                                                   1;C
                                               X
                                          +              p (s) [qk (s) j (s)j + c (s) + c (s)        j (s)j] :
                                              s2   FT
                                                   2;C

  30
    Notice, however, that even when cash damages are assessed with perfect accuracy, the VC institution still
delivers the ine¢ cient policy choice = F T in states s 2 P
                                                          3;C as well as = P in states s 2 F T
                                                                                           3;C , where court
quality is so bad that the court is not even invoked.


                                                                  43
If free trade is the e¢ cient policy, allowing the Home government to ignore the court'
                                                                                      s cease
and desist ruling by paying cash damages brings about a welfare loss, and this welfare loss is
captured in the ...rst line of the expression above. The other two lines summarize the welfare
e¤ects associated with the more aggressive protectionism of the Home government in states
       FT              FT
s2     1;C   and s 2   2;C .   While the second term is unambiguously negative (the e¢ cient policy
gets revoked earlier under the cash institution), the third term can be positive or negative (the
additional litigation under the cash institution may be socially desirable or not), and becomes
negative if the joint litigation costs c (s)+ c (s) are su¢ ciently small. Overall, the VR institution
therefore dominates the VC institution if free trade is su¢ ciently likely to be the e¢ cient trade
policy, assuming that the joint litigation costs are su¢ ciently small.
     Imposing that the joint litigation costs are su¢ ciently small, we can therefore summarize:

Proposition 4. Allowing for retaliation instead of cash damages in a trade agreement is op-
timal (1) if the court'
                      s ability to assess cash damages is su¢ ciently bad, and (2) free trade is
su¢ ciently likely to be the e¢ cient policy choice.

4.2. Investment Agreements

We now consider the choice of retaliation versus cash payments in the context of investment
treaties. As indicated above, we assume that foreign investors have standing in investment
disputes, and we again take retaliation to be a su¢ ciently ine¢ cient form of damage payment
that under retaliation our earlier analysis of investment treaties with ISDS still applies. Our
task is then to introduce cash damages into our model of investment treaties, and compare the
outcomes from our earlier model to the outcomes under cash damages derived here.
     As before, we assume that the court-assessed damages are realizations of a random vari-
able. Denoting the damages awarded to the injured foreign investor by d (I ), we assume
Pr d (I ) =      I   (I ) = 1 2m (s), Pr d (I ) >               I   (I ) = m (s), and Pr d (I ) <         I       (I ) =
                               1
m (s), with m (s) 2 [0;        2
                                 ].   As before, the court awards the correct damages with probability
1 2m (s) and overestimates or underestimates the damages with symmetric probabilities m (s).
De...ning dhigh (I )     E d (I ) j d (I ) >           I   (I ) and dlow         E d (I ) j d (I ) >          I    (I ) ,
we further assume that dhigh (I ) >           G   (I ; s) and dlow <     G   (I ; s) for all s. So as before, if the
court overestimates the damages, Home can expect to be assessed damages in the amount of
dhigh , which would be higher than Home'
                                       s valuation of the violation                      G   (I ; s). Conversely, if
the court underestimates the damages, Home can expect to be assessed damages in the amount

                                                           44
of dlow which would be lower than its valuation of the violation                           G   (I ; s). Again this ensures
that damage assessment mistakes are consequential in the sense that they inuence the choice
of Home to cease and desist or pay damages
      To assess whether there are conditions under which cash damages are optimal in an in-
vestment treaty, we again need to ...rst derive the equilibrium actions when cash damages are
available, keeping in mind that the equilibrium actions under retaliation remain unchanged
from our baseline model. With the possibility of cash damages, Foreign now ...les a complaint
if = T and

     Pr (ruling is F T j s) Pr ( = F T ) j           I   (I )j + Pr ( = T ) E d (I ) j = T                  > c (I ; s) .
                                                                                                                          (4.5)
If the Host government is constrained, it chooses =                          F B.   Otherwise, it chooses = T if either
the above condition is violated or

                                             Pr (ruling is T j s)        G   (I ; s) +                                    (4.6)
               Pr (ruling is F T j s) Pr ( = T )           G   (I ; s)       E d (I ) j = T          > c (I ; s) :

Analogous to before, here Pr ( = F T ) is the probability that the Host government chooses to
cease and desist in the face of a court ruling of F T while Pr ( = T ) is the probability that
the Host government instead continues with                       = T and pays damages, so that Pr ( = F T ) =
1         Pr ( = T ).
     We can now derive the equilibrium actions for each state s. De...ning the thresholds F                            T
                                                                                                                     1;C (s)
c (s) G (I ;s) m(s)[ G (I ;s) dlow ]
                                          , F  T
                                             2;C (s)      1 [1 2m(cs)]P(Ss)P S (I )
                                                                                         , T1;C (s)
                                                                                                                   c    (s)P S (I )
                                                                                                                                                   ,
    G (I ;s) m(s)[ G (I ;s) dlow ]
                                                                           (I )+m(s)dlow              m(s)P S (I )+[1 2m(s)]P S (I    )+m(s)dlow
  T                                      G (I ;s) c (s) G (I ;s)
  2;C (s)                                                                            , and noting as before that F      T
                                                                                                                      1;C (s) <
               G ( I ;s ) f [1 2 m ( s )][ G (I ;s) P S (I )]+m(s)[ G (I ;s) dlow ]g
  FT               P              P
  2;C (s) and 1;C (s) < 2;C (s) if the dispute costs are low relative to the dispute stakes for each

disputant, conditions (4.5) and (4.6) immediately imply the following result:

Lemma 5. Assuming that dispute costs are low relative to dispute stakes for all s so that
    FT            FT                 P             P
    1;C   (s) <   2;C   (s) and      1;C   (s) <   2;C   (s), equilibrium actions under cash damages can be
characterized as follows:

                            FT
     1. In states s 2            :

             1. If the Host government is constrained: We have = F T and no dispute.

                                                                45
          2. If the Host government is unconstrained: If DSB quality is high in the sense that
                                FT
             qk (s) <           1;C   (s), we have              = F T and no dispute; if DSB quality is intermediate
                                                                FT              FT
             in the sense that qk (s) 2                         1;C   (s) ;     2;C   (s) , we have              = T and a dispute; if DSB
                                                                                      FT
             quality is low in the sense that qk (s) >                                2;C   (s), we have = T and no dispute.

                            T
  2. In states s 2              :

                                                                                                                                                   T
          1. If the Host government is constrained: We have = T , no dispute if qk (s) <                                                           1;C   (s),
                                                             T
             and a dispute if qk (s) >                       1;C   (s).

          2. If the Host government is unconstrained: If DSB quality is high in the sense that
                            T
             qk (s) <       1;C       (s), we have = T and no dispute; if DSB quality is intermediate in the
                                                 T                  T
             sense that qk (s) 2                 1;C    (s) ;       2;C   (s) , we have = T and a dispute; if DSB quality
                                                                          T
             is low in the sense that qk (s) >                            2;C   (s), we have = F T and no dispute.

                                                                                                      FT                FT                        FT
For future reference, we denote the di¤erent action sets by                                           1;C    s2               j qk (s) <          1;C   (s) ,
 FT                  FT                        FT             FT                            FT                     FT                       FT
 2;C       s2             j qk (s) 2           1;C   (s) ;    2;C   (s)       , and         3;C             s2          j qk (s) >          2;C   (s) , as
           T                    T                      T                  T                       T                     T             T
well as    1;C        s2            j qk (s) <         1;C   (s) ,        2;C         s2              j qk (s) 2        1;C   (s) ;   2;C   (s)     , and,
 T               T                       T
 3;C      s2         j qk (s) >          2;C   (s) .
   With this lemma, we now characterize the expected welfare of the Host government under an
investment treaty with cash damages, Es ! C
                                          I (I ; s) , using the fact that the expected return to

the Foreign investor on an investment of I under cash damages must equal the world interest




                                                                           46
rate r net of the investment incentive. As we show in the Appendix, this yields:

    Es ! C
         I (I ; s)                                                                                                                       (4.7)
            X
  = (1 p)        p (s) [CS (I ) + P S (I )]
                    s2   FT
                         1;C
                         X
      + (1          p)               p (s) fCS (I ) +P S (I ) - fqk (s) + [1             qk (s)] m (s)g (1    ) P S (I ) -c (I ; s) -c (I ; s)g
                         s2   FT
                              2;C
                         X
      + (1          p)               p (s) [CS (I ) + P S (I )]
                         s2   FT
                              3;C
                          X
            (1      p)               p (s) fqk (s) m (s) [e (I ; s)     CS (I )          P S (I )] + c (I ; s) + c (I ; s)g
                         s2    T
                               2;C
                          X
            (1      p)               p (s) [e (I ; s)   CS (I )       P S (I )]
                         s2    T
                               3;C

      +ppF T [CS (I ) + P S (I )]
            X
       p           p (s) [c (I ; s) + c (I ; s)]
             s2   T [ T
                  2;C 3;C

            r I :

    There are three substantive di¤erences between this expression and its analog from the
                                                                                  FT
baseline model (equation 3.14): First, in states s 2                              2;C   there is now a higher probability of
losing (1           ) P S (I ) in social surplus since the Host government now chooses                              = T even
if it is rightly convicted by the DSB if the DSB awards excessively low damages (the third
                                                                        T
line of both expressions). Second, in states s 2                        2;C ,   there is now a lower probability of losing
e (I ; s) CS (I ) P S (I ) in social surplus since the Host government only follows an incorrect
cease and desist order if the assessed damage payments are excessively high (the fourth line of
                                                                  T         T
both expressions). And ...nally, in states s 2                    2;C   [   3;C   there is now a zero probability of losing
e (I ; s)        CS (I )         P S (I ) in social surplus if the Host government is constrained in its policy
choices simply because it is now possible to continue implementing the ...rst-best policy in case
of an erroneous conviction (the seventh line of both expressions).

4.2.1. Cash versus Retaliation

We now provide su¢ cient conditions under which the Host government'
                                                                   s ex-ante expected wel-
fare under an investment treaty with cash damages exceeds its ex-ante expected welfare under an
investment treaty that relies on retaliation, with the latter given by (3.14) and which we now de-

                                                                  47
note by Es ! R
             I I              R
                                  ; s . Noting that           FT
                                                              1;C      (s) <         FT
                                                                                     1;R   (s),        FT
                                                                                                       2;C   (s) <               FT
                                                                                                                                 2;R   (s),            T
                                                                                                                                                       1;C   (s) >         T
                                                                                                                                                                           1;R   (s),
      T                 T                                                                                            FT          FT            T                      T
and   2;C   (s) >       2;R   (s), it follows that we can again de...ne sets                                         1;C ,       2;C ,         1;C ,     and          2;C ,   using
                                                                                               R
the same notation convention as above. Denoting by I                                               the optimal level of investment under
an investment treaty with retaliation and an ISDS as characterized in (3.15), we may then use
(4.7) to write

      Es ! C
           I I          R
                        ;s              Es ! R
                                             I I     R
                                                         ;s                                                                                                                               (4.8)
                        X
                                                                                                   R
  =     (1        p)              p (s) [1     qk (s)] m (s) (1                  )PS I
                       s2   FT
                            2;C
                        X
                                                                                 R                           R                                 R
      + (1        p)              p (s) qk (s) [1        m (s)] e I                  ;s        CS I                          PS I
                       s2   T
                            2;C
                        X
                                                                             R                     R                             R
        (1        p)              p (s) qk (s) (1             )PS I                  +c I              ;s + c                I        ;s
                       s2   FT
                            1;C
                        X
                                                              R                            R                          R                            R                       R
      + (1        p)              p (s) qk (s) e I                ;s        CS I                       PS I                      +c I                  ;s + c          I        ;s
                       s2   T
                            1;C
                        X
                                                                                           R                     R                             R
        (1        p)              p (s) [1      qk (s)] (1                  )PS I                  c I               ;s           c        I       ;s
                       s2   FT
                            2;C
                        X
                                                                        R                              R                          R                          R                        R
      + (1        p)              p (s) [1      qk (s)] e I                 ;s        CS I                       PS I                              c I           ;s        c      I       ;s
                       s2   T
                            2;C
             X
                                        R                 R
      +p               p (s) c I            ;s + c   I        ;s
            s2   T
                 1;C
                 X
                                                     R                           R                           R
      +p                    p (s) qk (s) e I             ;s         CS I                       PS I                   :
            s2   T ; T
                 2;R 3;R



Clearly, if Es ! C
                 I I               R
                                       ;s      Es ! R
                                                    I I            R
                                                                       ;s             0, it must also be that Es ! C
                                                                                                                   I I                                                 C
                                                                                                                                                                           ;s
Es ! R
     I I     R
                 ;s           0, where I       C
                                                   is the level of investment optimal under an investment treaty
with cash damages and an ISDS. For this reason (4.8) allows us to establish su¢ cient conditions
under which an investment treaty with cash damages is preferred to an investment treaty with
retaliation, similar to how our earlier equation (4.4) allowed us to establish conditions under
which a trade agreement with retaliation is preferred to a trade agreement with cash damages.
The individual lines of both equations have a very similar interpretation, keeping in mind
of course that the Host government is now constrained to choose the ...rst-best policies with
probability p (the last two lines).
   Just as we saw in the case of a trade agreement, an improvement in the court'
                                                                               s ability to

                                                                            48
assess damages tends to favor the cash institution also in the case of investment agreements. To
                                                      FT          FT                T
see this, notice that the sets                        1;C ,       2;C ,   and       1;C   become empty as m (s) ! 0 so that equation
(4.8) becomes:

    Es ! C
         I I R; s      Es ! R
                            I   I R; s
           X
  = (1 p)       p (s) qk e I R ; s     CS I                                         R
                                                                                              PS I   R

                   s2    T
                         2;C
                         X
                                                                                R                    R                   R                        R                R
        + (1       p)                p (s) [1           qk (s)] e I                 ;s        CS I               PS I                c I              ;s   c   I       ;s
                        s2     T
                               2;C
                  X
                                                              R                           R                  R
        +p                      p (s) qk (s) e I                  ;s       CS I                 PS I
             s2   T ; T
                  2;R 3;R


The term on the second line is unambiguously positive (capturing the bene...ts of e¢ cient breach
under cash damages), while the term on the third line can be positive or negative in principle
but becomes positive if the joint litigation costs are su¢ ciently small (capturing the social net
bene...ts of the additional litigation under cash damages). The term on the fourth line is new
relative to our earlier discussion of trade agreements and refers to the case in which the Host
government can commit to implementing the ...rst-best policies. It is unambiguously positive
since the Host government is always able to implement the ...rst best policy under cash damages
by paying damages even if the court makes a mistake. Overall, an investment treaty with
cash damages therefore dominates an investment treaty with retaliation if the court'
                                                                                   s ability
to assess damages is su¢ ciently good, assuming that the joint litigation costs are su¢ ciently
small.
      Also just as in the case of a trade agreement, an increase in the probability that free trade
is the e¢ cient policy tends to favor an investment treaty with retaliation. To see this, notice
                        T            T                 T
that the sets           2;C ,        1;C ,   and       2;C    become empty as pF T ! 1 so that expression (4.8) reduces
to:

                  Es ! C
                       I I              R
                                       ;s              Es ! R
                                                            I I            R
                                                                               ;s
                                       X
                                                                                                                 R
           =        (1          p)                 p (s) [1        qk (s)] m (s) (1                )PS I
                                      s2     FT
                                             2;C
                                        X
                                                                                               R                 R                   R
                    (1          p)                 p (s) qk (s) (1                  )PS I          +c I              ;s + c      I       ;s
                                      s2     FT
                                             1;C
                                        X
                                                                                                         R              R                         R
                    (1          p)                 p (s) [1            qk (s)] (1             )PS I              c I        ;s       c        I       ;s
                                      s2     FT
                                             2;C



                                                                                    49
The terms on the second and third lines are unambiguously negative (capturing the costs of
ine¢ cient breach and more aggressive protectionism under cash damages, respectively). The
term on the last line can be positive or negative in principle but is negative if the joint litigation
costs are su¢ ciently small (capturing the social net bene...ts of the additional litigation under
                                 FT
cash damages in states s 2       2;C ).   Overall, an investment treaty with retaliation therefore
dominates an investment treaty with cash damages if free trade is su¢ ciently likely to be the
e¢ cient investment policy, assuming that the joint litigation costs are su¢ ciently small.
   Imposing that the joint litigation costs are su¢ ciently small, we can therefore summarize:

Proposition 5. Allowing for cash damages instead of retaliation in an investment treaty is
optimal if (1) the court'
                        s ability to assess cash damages is su¢ ciently good, and (2) there is a
non-trivial probability that a taking is the e¢ cient policy.

   In e¤ect, Propositions 4 and 5 imply that it makes sense that investment treaties provide
for cash payments while trade agreements do not, provided that the cash value of the harm
su¤ered by a foreign investor who is subject to a taking is su¢ ciently easy to quantify relative
to the cash value of the harm su¤ered by a foreign government whose exporters face trade
protection. In practice, this condition seems plausible at least at a broad level, in light of the
di¢ culty of placing a monetary value on the kinds of issues, such as lost jobs and distributional
considerations, that typically dominate the trade concerns of real-world governments, and the
relative ease by comparison of assessing lost pro...ts from a (regulatory or outright) taking.


5. The Remedial Period

Thus far we have assumed that litigation is e¤ectively instantaneous. When a case is ...led, it
is adjudicated immediately and the parties comply with the ruling immediately; hence, there
is no possibility of any "pre-compliance harm" to exporters or investors. In this section, we
augment our baseline models from section 3 to allow for the possibility of pre-compliance harm,
and consider in the context of both trade agreements and investment agreements the following
question: Can our models make sense of why trade agreements adopt prospective remedies while
investment treaties adopt retrospective remedies? That is, can our models help us understand
the conditions under which it might be optimal for investment treaties to include retrospective
damages in the remedy (damages for harm su¤ered before the case is ...nally adjudicated) and


                                                  50
for trade agreements to limit the remedy to only prospective damages (damages that would
arise after adjudication if the ruling is not obeyed)?
       To capture these alternative remedial periods, we let           2 [0; 1] parameterize the fraction of
the harm from the policy action at issue that occurs retrospectively, that is, prior to the court
ruling. We interpret       broadly: we have in mind all the costs of delay in adjudication including
lost pro...ts on export sales, losses experienced due to impairment of sunk investments, and so
on. If      = 0, there is no pre-ruling harm, as in section 3; at the other extreme, if                = 1, the
harm has all occurred and is a bygone by the time of the ruling.
       We think of lower values of       as reasonable for the case of trade disputes, where the pre-
ruling harm is attributable mostly to delay in securing market access, thus resulting in some lost
pro...ts if exports must be diverted to other markets temporarily, and so in our analysis of trade
agreements we will highlight model results with that parameter range in mind. By contrast,
we think of higher values of          as reasonable for the case of investment disputes, where the
pre-ruling harm is usually attributable to policy actions that diminish or destroy the returns
to a sunk investment with a ...nite lifespan, and so in our analysis of investment treaties we
will highlight model results with that parameter range in mind. For shorthand, throughout
this section we will refer to      as the degree of "litigation delay,"though as discussed above we
interpret     broadly.
       Building on our analysis in section 3, we assume that the trade agreement has adopted
SSDS while the investment treaty has adopted ISDS. And building on our analysis of section
4, for the retrospective damages we assume that the trade agreement relies on retaliation for
damage payments while the investment treaty employs cash, though in contrast to 4 we now
assume that the court can perfectly assess the level of damages so that we can focus on the
ine¢ ciency of retaliation relative to cash as a form of damage payments.31 And ...nally, to
keep the comparison clean we continue to assume that the prospective remedy for both trade
agreements and investment treaties is a cease and desist order, just as in the models of section
3: this means that in the case where             = 0 and there is no pre-ruling harm, the augmented
models that we develop in this section collapse to the original models of section 3, a feature
that makes our comparisons easier but is not necessary for our results.
  31
    As we note, our assumption that for the retrospective damages the trade agreement relies on retaliation
while the BIT relies on cash can be rationalized by our ...ndings in section 4, but there are also other arguments
that can provide support for this assumption (see, for example, Sykes, 2005, Limao and Saggi, 2008, and Bagwell
and Staiger, 2010, note 10).



                                                       51
5.1. Trade Agreements

We consider ...rst the case of a trade agreement, and look for conditions under which prospective
remedies would be optimal. To this end, we consider the implications of adopting retrospective
remedies in a trade agreement. Under retrospective remedies, if the DSB rules for F T , the
importer government must both cease and desist its P policy and revert to F T henceforth
(prospective damages), and it must make damage payments to the exporter government in the
amount of the harm j              G   (s)j already su¤ered (retrospective damages).32
       A key question is the form that such retrospective damage payments take. As indicated
above and consistent with GATT/WTO practice and our results from section 4, we assume
that in the context of a trade dispute these damage payments take the form of additional tari¤
adjustments in other sectors, made either by the importer government (who would reduce these
other tari¤s) or the exporter government (who would raise tari¤s and hence engage in reciprocal
retaliation), that amount to a costly transfer to the exporter government.33 We capture the cost
of such ex-post transfers in this setting with the parameter                   2 (0; 1] representing the fraction
of each dollar given up by the importer government that reaches the exporter government.
Hence, a damage payment of j                G   (s)j received by the exporter government costs the importer
                1
government          [ j   G   (s)j] in lost surplus. In the context of trade agreements we will highlight
outcomes that arise in the absence of cash transfers where                    is small.
       Adopting retrospective remedies will have important implications for the conditions describ-
ing equilibrium behavior of the two governments. Consider ...rst the foreign government'
                                                                                       s ...ling
behavior under a retrospective remedy. The foreign government ...les a complaint if and only if
  = P and its expected bene...t of ...ling exceeds its cost of ...ling, that is

                                   Pr(DSB ruling is F T j s)      j   G   (s)j > c (s):                     (5.1)

Condition (5.1) is the "...ling"condition for the foreign government to invoke the DSB in response
to a policy choice by the importer government of                = P.
       Next consider the importer government'
                                            s policy choice under a retrospective remedy. This
  32
      We do not include the litigation costs c (s) borne by the exporter government in this damage payment, but
this could be considered as well.
   33
      Our implicit assumption is that trade agreements have resulted in the importer government's tari¤s in other
sectors being set at e¢ cient levels, so that if the importer government were to make an adjustment (downward)
in these tari¤s to pay damages to the exporter government, these adjustments would have negative e¢ ciency
consequences, just as would be the case if the exporter government were to collect damage payments by raising
its tari¤s against the importer government.

                                                           52
government chooses                    = P if either (5.1) fails ­because then the importer government can set
    = P without triggering a dispute ­or if (5.1) holds and the expected bene...t to the importer
government from trade protection exceeds the cost to the importer government of a dispute:
                                                                    j   G   (s)j
 f[    G (s)       Pr(DSB ruling is F T j s)                                       g +[1          ] Pr(DSB ruling is P j s)                                  G (s)       > c(s)

or
                                                                                                                                            j    G     (s)j
    Pr(DSB ruling is P j s)                         G (s)     + Pr(DSB ruling is F T j s)                          f [      G (s)                             ]g > c(s):
                                                                                                                                                                             (5.2)
The important novel element of (5.2) is that if the Home government chooses P and the DSB
rules in favor of F T , the Home government will be responsible for compensating the foreign gov-
                                                                                                                                                                     j       (s)j
ernment for the harm done prior to the ruling (with the retroactive damage payment                                                                                       G
                                                                                                                                                                                    ),
and there is no action that the Home government can take to avoid making these damage
payments once they are assessed (i.e., while the harm to the foreign government going forward
can be removed by reverting to a policy of F T , this does nothing to address the retrospective
harm).
      We can now derive the equilibrium actions for each state s in the presence of retrospective
remedies. As above in what follows we assume that the states where the vague contract is
unambiguous are measure zero, so we can focus only on states where the court if invoked must
                                                                                                                                       j        (s)j
                                                                                                              c(s)                          G
                                                                                         FT                                 G (s)+                           FT
interpret the contract. De...ning the thresholds                                         1;Retro   (s)                            j   (s)j             ,     2;Retro     (s)
                                                                                                                  [1    ]           G
                                                                                                                          G (s)+
                                                                                                                             j   (s)j
           c (s)         P                        c (s)                 P                            c(s)          G   (s)+ G
1      j      (s)j
                   ,     1;Retro   (s)        j      (s)j
                                                          ,   and       2;Retro    (s)       (1                              j       (s)j   ), and noting that
                                                                                                         [1   ]                  G
                                                                                                                  G (s)+
           G                                      G

    FT                    FT                         P                      P
    1;Retro    (s) <      2;Retro   (s) and          1;Retro    (s) <       2;Retro      (s) if the dispute costs are low relative to the
dispute stakes for each disputant, conditions (5.1) and (5.2) immediately imply the following
result:

Lemma 6. Assuming that dispute costs are low relative to dispute stakes for all s so that
    FT                    FT                          P                      P
    1;Retro    (s) <      2;Retro   (s) and           1;Retro   (s) <        2;Retro     (s), equilibrium actions can be characterized
as follows:

                                      FT                                                                                                                   FT
     1. In states s 2                      : If DSB quality is high in the sense that qk (s) <                                                             1;Retro   (s), we
           have          = F T and no dispute; if DSB quality is intermediate in the sense that qk (s) 2
               FT                  FT
           [   1;Retro   (s) ;     2;Retro   (s)], we have              = P and a dispute; if DSB quality is low in the sense
                                    FT
           that qk (s) >            2;Retro   (s), we have               = P and no dispute.

                                                                                  53
                                  P                                                                        P
   2. In states s 2                   : If DSB quality is high in the sense that qk (s) <                  1;Retro   (s), we
         have      = P and no dispute; if DSB quality is intermediate in the sense that qk (s) 2
           P                 P
           1;Retro   (s) ;   2;Retro   (s) , we have       = P and a dispute; if DSB quality is low in the sense
                                P
         that qk (s) >          2;Retro   (s), we have     = F T and no dispute.

                                                                                                FT
       Lemma 6 reveals a key point: for any > 0 and as                   approaches zero,       1;Retro   (s) approaches
                P
one and         2;Retro   (s) approaches zero, and the importer government will always choose F T to
avoid any possibility of having to make costly transfer payments to the foreign exporter gov-
                                                                                   FT                                FT
ernment for retroactive damages (because then qk (s) < 1 =                         1;Retro   (s) for all s 2              and
                      P                              P
qk (s) > 0 =          2;Retro   (s) for all s 2          ).34 Put di¤erently, for any ...xed court quality q , the
joint surplus under a trade agreement with retrospective remedies will approach the joint sur-
plus associated with F T in all states as                    approaches zero and the cost of transfers becomes
prohibitive. We record this in:

Remark 1. If transfers in the context of a trade dispute are su¢ ciently costly (                                    small),
then for any          > 0 the joint surplus under a trade agreement with retrospective remedies will
approach the joint surplus associated with F T in all states, no matter how accurate the court
may be (for any q > 0).

       Remark 1 implies that for any                 > 0 and q > 0, if         is su¢ ciently small then a trade
agreement with retrospective remedies will be dominated by a trade agreement with prospective
remedies provided that the trade agreement with prospective remedies delivers a level of joint
surplus higher than that associated with F T in all states. But if the quality of the court q is ...xed
at a su¢ ciently high level, then for any level of                  as   approaches zero so that litigation delay
becomes su¢ ciently short, the joint surplus under a trade agreement with prospective remedies
can be brought arbitrarily close to the ...rst best level, which exceeds the joint surplus associated
with F T in all states and therefore beats a trade agreement with retrospective remedies under
these conditions.
       We may therefore state:

Proposition 6. A prospective remedy is optimal for a trade agreement provided that the
degree of litigation delay is su¢ ciently short ( small), transfers in the context of a trade
dispute are su¢ ciently costly ( small) and the quality of the court is su¢ ciently high (q low).
  34
    Notice too that as we allow to approach zero we must also have c (s) approaching zero in order to maintain
our "relatively small litigation cost" focus and ensure that F T           FT
                                                             1;Retro (s) < 2;Retro (s).


                                                               54
5.2. Investment Agreements

We now turn to the case of an investment treaty, and look for conditions under which ret-
rospective remedies would be optimal. To this end, we consider the implications of adopting
prospective remedies in an investment treaty. Relative to our earlier analysis of investment
treaties (i.e., relative to the case where          = 0), for       > 0 the conditions describing equilibrium
behavior of the Host government and the foreign investor are altered.
     Consider ...rst the foreign investor'
                                         s ...ling behavior under a prospective remedy. The investor
...les a complaint if and only if = T and the expected bene...t to the investor of ...ling exceeds
its cost of ...ling, that is

                       Pr(DSB ruling is F T j s)            [1       ]j    I    (I )j > c (I ; s):                             (5.3)

Condition (5.3) is the foreign investor "...ling" condition to invoke the DSB in response to a
policy choice by the Host government of = T .
     Next consider the Host government'
                                      s policy choice. When it has discretion to do so, this
government chooses = T if either (5.3) fails ­because then the Host government can set = T
without triggering a dispute ­or if (5.3) holds and the expected bene...t to the Host government
from a taking exceeds the cost to the Host government of a dispute:

                     G (I   ; s) + Pr(DSB ruling is T j s)           [1          ]   G (I    ; s) > c(I ; s)

or

    Pr(DSB ruling is F T j s)         G (I    ; s) + Pr(DSB ruling is T j s)                       G (I   ; s) > c(I ; s): (5.4)

The important novel element of (5.4) is that if the Host government chooses T and the DSB
rules in favor of F T , the Host government still enjoys the bene...ts of T for the pre-ruling period
(    G (I   ; s)).
     We can now derive the equilibrium actions, conditional on investment level I , for each state
s. As before, in what follows we assume that the states where the vague contract is unambiguous
are measure zero, so we can focus only on states where the court if invoked must interpret the
contract. Recall also from section 3.2 that the Host government is constrained to implement
the ...rst-best policies with probability p and can act at its own discretion with probability
                                     FT             c (s)        FT                         c   (s)     T              c   (s)
1    p. De...ning the thresholds     1;P ro   (s)    [1 ]
                                                            ,    2;P ro   (s)        1       [1 ]
                                                                                                    ,   1;P ro   (s)    [1 ]
                                                                                                                               ,   and


                                                        55
 T                      c (s)                                                    FT                FT                  T                T
 2;P ro   (s)     1      [1 ]
                                 , and noting as before that                     1;P ro   (s) <    2;P ro   (s) and    1;P ro   (s) <   2;P ro   (s)
if the dispute costs are low relative to the dispute stakes for each disputant, conditions (5.3)
and (5.4) immediately imply the following result:

Lemma 7. Assuming that dispute costs are low relative to dispute stakes for all s so that
 FT                   FT                      T                    T
 1;P ro   (s) <       2;P ro   (s) and        1;P ro   (s) <       2;P ro   (s), equilibrium actions can be characterized as
follows:

                                FT
   1. In states s 2                     :

            1. If the Host government is constrained: We have = F T and no dispute.

            2. If the Host government is unconstrained: If DSB quality is high in the sense that
                                 FT
                qk (s) <         1;P ro     (s), we have = F T and no dispute; if DSB quality is intermediate in
                                                          FT                 FT
                the sense that qk (s) 2                   1;P ro   (s) ;     2;P ro   (s) , we have          = T and a dispute; if DSB
                                                                                      FT
                quality is low in the sense that qk (s) >                             2;P ro   (s), we have = T and no dispute.

                                T
   2. In states s 2                 :

            1. If the Host government is constrained: We have                                            = T , no dispute if qk (s) <
                  T                                                          T
                  1;P ro   (s), and a dispute if qk (s) >                    1;P ro   (s).

            2. If the Host government is unconstrained: If DSB quality is high in the sense that
                                 T
                qk (s) <         1;P ro     (s), we have = T and no dispute; if DSB quality is intermediate in
                                                          T                  T
                the sense that qk (s) 2                   1;P ro   (s) ;     2;P ro   (s) , we have          = T and a dispute; if DSB
                                                                                      T
                quality is low in the sense that qk (s) >                             2;P ro   (s), we have = F T and no dispute.

       Note that if            = 0 and there is hence no litigation delay, the above characterization of
equilibrium behavior collapses to our earlier analysis of investment treaties under ISDS.35 On
the other hand, if              is su¢ ciently close to one, (5.3) and (5.4) together with our focus on the
relatively-low-dispute-cost case imply that the Host government will always choose T when it
has the discretion to do so and the foreign investor will never invoke the DSB, and hence for
in this range and conditional on any level of investment, the investment treaty with prospective
remedies would be valueless, as it would deliver the noncooperative outcome in which the Host
                                                         T                                        FT
government always expropriates in                            and expropriates in                       with probability 1 p. Formally,
  35
       This is easy to see once it is recalled that under Assumption 2= we have                             I   = 1.

                                                                            56
the critical level of       beyond which an investment treaty with prospective remedies would be
valueless, which we denote by , is de...ned by

                                            =1     min [c     (s)] > 0
                                                     s

where the inequality follows from our focus on the relatively-low-dispute-cost case. For 2 [ ; 1],
                                                                                                       FT
it follows from the above characterization of equilibrium behavior that in all states s 2                   with
probability 1    p the Host government chooses T and the foreign investor will not ...le (because
                 FT                                                T
qk (s) > 0   (   2;P ro   (s)) for all s), and in all states s 2       the Host government chooses T and
                                                                   T
the foreign investor does not ...le (because qk (s) < 1            1;P ro   (s) for all s). We record this in:

Remark 2. If litigation delay is su¢ ciently high (for                       ), the Host government cannot
improve upon a stand-alone program of up-front investment incentives to foreign investors by
introducing an investment treaty with prospective remedies, no matter how accurate the court
may be (for any q > 0).

   Remark 2 implies that for any q > 0, if           is su¢ ciently high then an investment treaty with
prospective remedies will be dominated by an investment treaty with retrospective remedies
provided that the investment treaty with retrospective remedies can improve upon a stand-
alone program of up-front investment incentives to foreign investors. But if the quality of the
court q is ...xed at a su¢ ciently high level, then for any level of             as   approaches one so that
transfers in the context of an investment treaty are su¢ ciently e¢ cient, the Host government
surplus under an investment treaty with retrospective remedies can be brought arbitrarily close
to the ...rst best level, which exceeds the Host government surplus under a stand-alone program
of up-front investment incentives and therefore beats an investment treaty with prospective
remedies under these conditions.
   We may therefore state:

Proposition 7. A retrospective remedy is optimal for an investment treaty provided that the
degree of litigation delay is su¢ ciently long ( large), transfers in the context of an investment
treaty are su¢ ciently e¢ cient ( large) and the quality of the court is su¢ ciently high (q low).

   Summarizing, Propositions 6 and 7 imply the following. If court quality is su¢ ciently
high (q is su¢ ciently low), it is optimal to adopt prospective remedies in trade agreements
such as the WTO while it is optimal to adopt retrospective remedies in investment treaties

                                                         57
because (i) the degree of pre-ruling harm is typically more severe in the context of investment
disputes as compared to trade disputes ( is relatively high for investment disputes but low
for trade disputes) so that prospective remedies become a poor option for e¤ective investment
agreements, and (ii) the available means of making international transfers are much less e¢ cient
in the context of trade disputes as compared to investment disputes (        is relatively low for
trade disputes but high for investment disputes), making retrospective remedies prohibitively
expensive in the context of trade agreements and therefore unattractive in that context.


6. Conclusion

International investment agreements employ dispute settlement procedures that di¤er markedly
from their counterparts in trade agreements along three key dimensions: standing, the nature of
the remedy, and the remedial period. In this paper we have developed parallel models of trade
agreements and investment agreements and have employed them to study these di¤erences. We
have argued that the di¤erences can be understood as arising from the fundamentally di¤erent
problems that trade and investment agreements are designed to solve.
   We have identi...ed conditions under which, at least at a broad level, the observed di¤erences
between the dispute settlement procedures of trade and investment agreements can be viewed
as an optimal response to the di¤erent environments within which these agreements operate.
We ...nd that this is the case when the quality of the court is generally high, and provided
that courts have greater di¢ culty in assessing the monetary value of the harm su¤ered by a
government from trade protection than they do in assessing the monetary value of the harm
su¤ered by investors from a taking, that the proportion of the harm incurred prior to a court
ruling tends to be large in the case of a taking relative to the case of trade protection, that
free trade is likely to be the e¢ cient trade policy outcome while the probability that a taking
is the e¢ cient policy outcome is low but non-trivial, and that the Host government is highly
ine¢ cient in orchestrating takings when takings are not socially bene...cial.
   These conditions strike us as plausible, though far from universal, features of the trade and
investment dispute settlement environments that are our focus. In this light, our results can
help interpret the observed design di¤erences across dispute settlement procedures in trade
and investment agreements and provide support for the position that these di¤erences are not
arbitrary. At the same time, our results indicate that some of the most controversial features
of these procedures, such as providing standing for foreign investors to bring claims against

                                                58
governments in investment disputes, are not optimal under all circumstances. For example,
according to our results, allowing foreign investors to have standing in an investment treaty may
not be optimal for a government that is attempting to make commitments to those investors, if
the investors'own governments bear low political costs from the initiation of disputes on their
investors'behalf. Likewise, if host governments have found other means to make commitments
to investors and investment treaties are primarily concerned with market access rather than
commitment issues, our results would point to a strong presumption against providing standing
to foreign investors. This all suggests that, at a minimum, such features deserve closer scrutiny
before drawing the conclusion that existing treaty arrangements are necessarily optimal.

References
 Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger (2010). "Backward Stealing and Forward Manipulation in the
     WTO," Journal of International Economics, September.

 Bond, Eric W. (1986). "Tax Holidays as Signals," American Economic Review 76(4), September.

 Brainard, Lael S. (1997). "An Empirical Assessment of the Proximity-Concentration Trade-o¤ Be-
     tween Multinational Sales and Trade," American Economic Review 87(4), September.

 Davey, William J. (2010). "Sanctions in the WTO: Problems and Solutions,"in Chad Bown & Joost
     Pauwelyn eds. The Law, Economics and Politics of Retaliation in WTO Dispute Settlement :
     Cambridge Press.

 Helpman, Elhanan, Melitz, Marc J. and Stephen R. Yeaple (2004). "Export Versus FDI with Het-
     erogeneous Firms," American Economic Review 94(1), March.

 Horn, Henrik (2018). "Investor-State vs. State-State Dispute Settlement," IFN WP No 1248.

 Horn, Henrik and Thomas Tangeras (2019). "Economics and Politics of International Investment
     Agreements," Research Institute of Industrial Economics, IFN WP No. 1140, revised.

 Janeba, Eckhard, (2019). "Regulatory Chill and the E¤ects of Investor State Dispute Settlements,"
     Review of International Economics 27: 1172-1198.

 Kohler, Wilhelm and Frank Stahler (2019). "The Economics of Investor Protection: ISDS versus
     National Treatment," Journal of International Economics 121.

 Konrad, Kai A. (2017). "Large investors, regulatory taking and investor-state dispute settlement,"
     European Economic Review 98.

 Limao, Nuno and Kamal Saggi (2008). "Tari¤ retaliation versus ...nancial compensation in the
     enforcement of international trade agreements," Journal of International Economics 76.

 Maggi, Giovanni and Robert W. Staiger (2011). "The Role of Dispute Settlement Procedures in
    International Trade Agreements," Quarterly Journal of Economics, February.

                                               59
Maggi, Giovanni and Robert W. Staiger (2018). "Trade Disputes and Settlement," International
   Economic Review, February.

McLaren, John (1997). "Size, Sunk Costs, and Judge Bowker'
                                                         s Objection to Free Trade," American
   Economic Review 87(3), June.

Ossa, Ralph, Staiger, Robert W. and Alan O. Sykes (in progress). "FDI, Exports and the Terms-of-
    Trade Motive for Tari¤ Intervention," April.

Park, Jee-Hyeong (2016). "Enforcement and Dispute Settlement," Chapter 1 in Kyle Bagwell and
    Robert W. Staiger (eds.) Handbook of Commercial Policy Vol 1B, Elsevier North Holland.

Schwartz, Warren F. and Alan O. Sykes (2002). "The Economic Structure of Renegotiation and
    Dispute Resolution in the World Trade Organization," Journal of Legal Studies 31.

Stahler, Frank (2018). "An optimal investor state dispute settlement mechanism," mimeo, March.

Staiger, Robert W. and Alan O. Sykes (2017). "How Important can the Non-Violation Clause be for
     the GATT/WTO," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, May.

Sykes, Alan O. (2005). "Public vs. Private Enforcement of International Economic Law: Of Standing
    and Remedy," U Chicago Law & Economics, Olin WP, No. 235.

Sykes, Alan O. (2019). "The Economic Structure of International Investment Agreements with
    Implications for Treaty Interpretation and Design," American Journal of International Law
    113: 482-534.

UNCTAD (2018). IIA Mapping Project, available at https://investmentpolicyhub.unctad.org/IIA/mappedContent.

Yarbrough, Beth V., and Robert M. Yarbrough (1992). Cooperation and Governance in International
    Trade: The Strategic Organizational Approach. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.




                                              60
7. Appendix
7.1. Derivation of equation (3.14)

Given the equilibrium actions described by Lemma 3, the expected return on a level of FDI I
from expected ex-post operating pro...ts is given by:
                                                   X
            Es    f   (I ; s)   = (1     p)                          ~ (I )
                                                               p (s) P
                                              s2   FT [ T
                                                   1    3

                                                    X                                            cf (I ; s)
                                  + (1        p)              p (s) [1                ~ (I )
                                                                              qk (s)] P
                                                        FT
                                                                                                     I
                                                   s2   2;f

                                                   X                                    cf (I ; s)
                                  + (1        p)                           ~ (I )
                                                              p (s) qk (s) P
                                                        T
                                                                                            I
                                                   s2   2;f

                                                                     X                                cf (I ; s)
                                         ~ (I ) + p
                                  +ppF T P                                                ~ (I )
                                                                             p (s) qk (s) P                      .
                                                                     T ; T
                                                                                                          I
                                                                s2   2;f 3



     Keeping in mind that the foreign investor must be o¤ered an up-front investment incentive
 r     Es    f   (I ; s)    I in order to be willing to invest I given its outside option, the Host
government'
          s expected payo¤ can be written as:
                                               X
            Es [! f (I ; s)] = (1        p)             p(s)CS (I )
                                              s2   FT
                                                   1
                                                   X
                                  + (1        p)              p(s)fCS (I ) + qk (s)[ P S (I )]          c(I ; s)g
                                                   s2   FT
                                                        2;f
                                                   X
                                  + (1        p)              p(s)[CS (I ) + P S (I )]
                                                   s2   FT
                                                        3;f
                                                   X
                                  + (1        p)              p(s)fqk (s)[CS (I )       e(I ; s)]     c(I ; s)g
                                                   s2   T
                                                        2;f
                                                   X
                                  + (1        p)            p(s)[CS (I )        e(I ; s)] + ppF T CS (I )
                                                   s2   T
                                                        3
                                            X
                                  +p                    p(s)fqk (s)[CS (I )          e(I ; s)]      c(I ; s)g
                                       s2   T ; T
                                            2;f 3;f

                                    fr        Es [ f (I ; s)]gI .

     Plugging the expression for Es            f   (I ; s) into the above expression for Es [! f (I ; s)] yields
equation (3.14) in the main text.

                                                                 61
7.2. Derivation of equation (4.7)

Given the equilibrium actions described by Lemma 5, the expected return on a level of FDI I
from expected ex-post operating pro...ts is given by:
                  C
       Es     I       (I ; s)
                         X
 = (1         p)                               ~ (I )
                                         p (s) P
                      s2   FT [ T
                           1;C  3;C

                           X                                                dI                            c (I ; s)
       + (1        p)                  p (s) [1        qk (s)] m (s)           + [1           ~ (I )
                                                                                       m (s)] P
                                FT
                                                                            I                                I
                           s2   2;C

                           X                                                               dI      c (I ; s)
       + (1        p)                  p (s) qk (s) [1                    ~ (I ) + m (s)
                                                                   m (s)] P
                                T
                                                                                           I          I
                           s2   2;C

                                              X
              ~ (I ) + p
       +ppF T P                                         p (s) qk (s) [1                   ~ (I ) + m (s) dI + m (s) dI
                                                                                  2m (s)] P
                                                                                                                                c (I ; s)
                                                                                                                                            :
                                              T [ T
                                                                                                         I          I              I
                                         s2   2;C 3;C


     Keeping in mind that the foreign investor must be o¤ered an up-front investment incentive
                  C
 r     Es     I        (I ; s)           I in order to be willing to invest I given its outside option, the Host
government'
          s expected payo¤ can be written as:

   Es ! C
        I (I ; s)
           X
 = (1 p)        p (s) CS (I )
                      s2   FT
                           1;C
                           X
       + (1        p)                  p (s) fCS (I ) + qk (s) P S (I ) + [1              qk (s)] m (s) [ P S (I )    dI ]   c (I ; s)g
                           s2   FT
                                2;C
                           X
       + (1        p)                  p (s) [CS (I ) + P S (I )]
                           s2   FT
                                3;C
                            X
         (1        p)                  p (s) fqk (s) f[1           2m (s)] P S (I ) + m (s) [e (I ; s)   CS (I ) + dI ]g + c (I ; s)g
                           s2    T
                                 2;C
                            X
         (1        p)                  p (s) [e (I ; s)       CS (I )]
                           s2    T
                                 3;C
                                                  X
       +ppF T CS (I )                    p                  p (s) qk (s) [1       2m (s)] P S (I ) + m (s) dI + m (s) dI      + c (I ; s)
                                             s2   T [ T
                                                  2;C 3;C

         fr           Es [       I     (I ; s)]g I :
                                                                   C
     Plugging the expression for Es                            I       (I ; s) into the above expression for Es ! C
                                                                                                                  I (I ; s)

yields equation (4.7) in the main text.

                                                                            62
7.3. Analysis of optimal investment incentives under cash institution

The optimal investment incentives under the cash institution can be found by maximizing
(4.7) with respect to I . The associated ...rst-order condition can be manipulated to yield the
following implicit characterization of the optimal investment level IC :

           ~ IC
           P
            r
         = FT
           p
                                 P
                                     s2   FT                  qk (s)] m (s)g + pF
                                                p (s) fqk (s) + [1                T
                                                                                3;C @P S IC
                                          2;C
             + (1 p) (1       )
                                                       pF T                            @I
                                          "                         #
                         X         p (s) @c IC ; s     @c IC ; s
             + (1 p)                  F T
                                                    +
                                    p        @I             @I
                     s2 F T     T
                        2;C [ 2;C
                     2                                            3
                        X p (s) qk (s) m (s)         X p (s) h                     i
             + (1 p) 4                           +                5 e (s) P ~ I
                                                                                C
                                        pF T                pF T
                       s2 T2;C                     s 2 T
                                                       3;C
                                  "                          #
                  X       p (s) @c IC ; s       @c IC ; s
             +p              FT
                                              +                 :
                  T   T
                           p             @I        @I
                s2   2;C [ 3;C



This expression is the analog to (3.15) in the main text. The second line is di¤erent because
                                                                                     FT
the Host government now also chooses the ine¢ cient policy = T in states s 2              if the court
rules correctly but underestimates the damages. The fourth line is di¤erent because the Host
                                                                                T
government now continues to choose the e¢ cient policy = T in states s 2            even if the court
rules incorrectly unless the court also overestimates the damages. And there is no sixth line
because the Host government now implements the e¢ cient policy regardless of the court ruling
(potentially paying the awarded damages of course).




                                                        63
   Plugging this expression into (4.7) and simplifying yields:

          Es ! C
               I  I ;s
                 2C                                                           3
                                                X
      = (1        p) 4pF T + pT
                              3;C +                        p (s) qk (s) m (s)5 CS IC
                                               s2    T
                                                     2;C
                                      8                                                               9
                                      <X                                                              =       @P~ I
                                                                                                               2    C
          + (1       p) (1        )                  p (s) fqk (s) + [1       qk (s)] m (s)g + pF T
                                                                                                3;C       IC
                                      :        FT
                                                                                                       ;         @I
                                          s2   2;C
                                                     (                                     "                       #)
                               X                                                             @c IC ; s   @c IC ; s
             (1      p)                   p (s) c IC ; s + c              IC ; s        IC             +
                               FT [ T
                                                                                               @I          @I
                          s2   2;C  2;C
                FT
          +pp        CS IC
                               (                                                   "                           #)
                     X                                                                 @c IC ; s   @c IC ; s
           p              p (s) c IC ; s + c                     IC ; s      IC                  +
                    T [ T
                                                                                         @I          @I
               s2   2;C 3;C



This expression is the analog to (3.16) in the main text. The second line is di¤erent because
                                                                                                               FT
the Host government now chooses the ine¢ cient policy                                    = T in states s 2          even when
correctly convicted as long as the court underestimates the damages. The fourth line is also
di¤erent since the Host government now implements the ...rst-best policy no matter what when
it is constrained by domestic institution. Using this expression, it is easy to verify following
a similar logic as in the baseline model that the investment treaty with cash damages only
improves upon the program of up-front investment incentives if court quality is su¢ ciently high
and domestic institutions are su¢ ciently weak.




                                                                   64
Figure 1: Timing of events (trade agreement)
Figure 2a: Illustration of Lemma 1




  Figure 2b: From SSDS to ESDS
Figure 3: Timing of events (investment agreement)
