                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  THE FED'S RESPONSE TO ECONOMIC NEWS EXPLAINS THE "FED INFORMATION
                               EFFECT"

                                       Michael D. Bauer
                                       Eric T. Swanson

                                      Working Paper 27013
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27013


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




We thank the Blue Chip forecasters who answered our survey, Sophia Friesenhahn and Benjamin
Shapiro for excellent research assistance, and David Lucca, Kurt Lunsford, Mirela Miescu, Silvia
Miranda-Agrippino, Pascal Paul, Giovanni Ricco, David Romer, and seminar participants at the
Bundesbank, the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Kansas City, and New York, the Federal
Reserve Board, LMU Munich, NBER Summer Institute, Universität Hamburg, and UNSW
Continuing Education in Macroeconometrics Conference for helpful discussions, comments, and
suggestions. Any errors or omissions are solely those of the authors. The opinions expressed in
this paper, and any errors or omissions, are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of
any individuals or groups listed above, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Michael D. Bauer and Eric T. Swanson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Fed's Response to Economic News Explains the "Fed Information Effect"
Michael D. Bauer and Eric T. Swanson
NBER Working Paper No. 27013
April 2020, Revised in September 2020
JEL No. E43,E52,E58

                                          ABSTRACT

High-frequency changes in interest rates around FOMC announcements are a standard method of
measuring monetary policy shocks. However, some recent studies have documented puzzling
effects of these shocks on private-sector forecasts of GDP, unemployment, or inflation that are
opposite in sign to what standard macroeconomic models would predict. This evidence has been
viewed as supportive of a "Fed information effect" channel of monetary policy, whereby an
FOMC tightening (easing) communicates that the economy is stronger (weaker) than the public
had expected. We show that these empirical results are also consistent with a "Fed response to
news" channel, in which incoming, publicly available economic news causes both the Fed to
change monetary policy and the private sector to revise its forecasts. We provide substantial new
evidence that distinguishes between these two channels and strongly favors the latter; for
example, (i) regressions that include the previously omitted public macroeconomic news,(ii)
high-frequency stock market responses to Fed announcements, and (iii) a new survey that we
conduct of individual Blue Chip forecasters all indicate that the Fed and private sector are simply
responding to the same public news, and that there is little if any role for a "Fed information
effect".


Michael D. Bauer
Universität Hamburg
Department of Economics
Von-Melle-Park 5
20146 Hamburg
Germany
michael.d.bauer@gmail.com

Eric T. Swanson
Department of Economics
University of California at Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
eric.swanson@uci.edu
1     Introduction
When the Federal Reserve surprises markets with a monetary policy announcement, is that
surprise an exogenous "shock", as is typically assumed in the monetary policy VAR literature
(e.g., Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans, 1996; Cochrane and Piazzesi, 2002; Faust, Swanson
and Wright, 2004b)? Or is the surprise due to other factors, such as a revision in investor beliefs
about the state of the economy, as argued by recent "Fed information effect" studies such as
Romer and Romer (2000), Campbell, Evans, Fisher and Justiniano (2012), and Nakamura and
Steinsson (2018)? The answers to these questions have important implications for empirical
work on the financial and macroeconomic effects of monetary policy. In this paper, we present
new evidence that challenges the empirical relevance of a Fed information effect and instead
supports an alternative explanation of the empirical evidence in Campbell et al. (2012) and
Nakamura and Steinsson (2018), which we call the "Fed response to news" channel.
    A simple monetary policy reaction function highlights the difference between the Fed
information effect and Fed response to news channels. Let


                                         it = f (Xt ) + t ,                                    (1)


where it denotes the monetary policy instrument at time t, Xt is a vector describing the state
of the economy, the function f describes how the Fed sets policy as a function of the state Xt ,
and t is a pure monetary policy "shock", or exogenous random deviation from the Fed's
normal policy rule f . When the Fed sets a value of it that differs from the private sector's
ex ante expectation, Et- it , where  is some small time interval, then there are three possible
sources of that surprise: 1) an exogenous monetary policy shock t ; 2) a Fed information effect,
                                                                                        ^ t|t- ,
in which the Fed's observation of Xt differs from the private sector's ex ante estimate X
conditional on information at time t -  ; or 3) a difference between the Fed's actual policy
                                                                                    ^
response function f and the the private sector's ex ante estimate of that function, f t- . It

is this last channel that causes the Fed's response to the economy and publicly available
economic news to differ from the private sector's expectation of that response, and drives the
Fed response to news channel, as we discuss in more detail below. Campbell et al. (2012) and
Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) devote much attention to distinguishing between channels 1
and 2, above, essentially assuming that the Fed's monetary policy reaction function is known,



                                                 1
       Figure 1: Blue Chip GDP Forecast Revisions and FOMC Monetary Policy Surprises

                                                                    0.4


             1-month change in Blue Chip GDP 4-qtr Forecast (pct)   0.3


                                                                    0.2                                                 11/1999
                                                                                                                                   6/2003
                                                                    0.1                                                     5/1999
                                                                                                                                 1/2004

                                                                      0


                                                                    -0.1

                                                                              9/2007
                                                                    -0.2
                                                                                                   3/2001
                                                                    -0.3
                                                                                          1/2008
                                                                                                   4/2008
                                                                    -0.4
                                                                      -0.15            -0.1          -0.05       0   0.05           0.1
             Federal Reserve Monetary Policy Announcement Surprise, 30-min. window (pct)

Change in Blue Chip consensus forecast for real GDP from one month to the next, plotted against the 30-
minute change in short-term interest rates around FOMC announcements, from January 1995 to March 2014,
excluding July 2008 to June 2009. Each circle represents an FOMC announcement; the eight solid circles
denote the most influential observations in the relationship and are labeled with the month and year in which
they occurred. Negative observations occurred when the economy was weakening and positive observations
when the economy was strengthening. See text for details.


^
f t- = f . We relax this assumption and show that the empirical evidence in Campbell et al.

(2012) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) is also consistent with channel 3, above, in which
the Fed is responding to publicly available economic news, but by more than the private sector
expected.
       Figure 1 summarizes the main evidence supporting the Fed information effect in Nakamura
and Steinsson (2018). Each circle in the figure corresponds to a Federal Reserve Federal Open
Market Committee (FOMC) announcement between January 1995 and March 2014.1 The
   1
    To match Nakamura and Steinsson (2018), we use exactly the same sample in Figure 1 that they do: we
begin the sample in 1995 and end it in March 2014, and we exclude unscheduled FOMC announcements, all
FOMC announcements from July 2008 through June 2009, and any FOMC announcement that occurred in
the first 7 days of the month (to ensure the announcement post-dates the Blue Chip forecast). We measure
the change in short-term interest rates in exactly the same way Nakamura and Seinsson do. Figure 1 thus
replicates Figure II from Nakamura and Steinsson, except that they group the data into bins while we plot
the data directly and highlight the most influential observations.




                                                                                                             2
change in short-term interest rates in a 30-minute window around each announcement is
plotted on the horizontal axis, while the change in the Blue Chip consensus GDP forecast
for the next four quarters is plotted on the vertical axis. Because the Blue Chip survey is
conducted only once per month (at the beginning of each month), the change in Blue Chip
GDP forecasts on the vertical axis includes Blue Chip forecasters' revisions over the entire
month in which the FOMC announcement was made.
     If FOMC announcements were exogenous shocks to monetary policy (channel 1, above),
then standard macroeconomic theory and VARs would predict a negative relationship in Fig-
ure 1: exogenously tighter monetary policy would imply lower GDP over the subsequent four
quarters. Instead, there is a statistically significant positive relationship in the figure (slope
0.92, t-statistic 2.85). Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) argue that this surprising empirical
result is evidence of a Fed information effect (channel 2, above): that is, the Fed observes
a value for Xt that is substantially stronger than the private sector's estimate Et- Xt and
tightens interest rates in response; the private sector sees this interest rate change and infers
from it that the economy must be stronger than they thought, leading them to revise their
GDP forecast upward.
     However, the evidence in Figure 1 is also consistent with an alternative explanation, the
"Fed response to news" channel that we propose in this paper. The solid circles in Figure 1
denote the eight most influential observations underlying the relationship in the figure. The
four observations at the bottom-left all correspond to months in which the U.S. economy was
clearly weakening: March 2001, September 2007, January 2008, and April 2008. A plausible
explanation for these observations is that the clearly deteriorating economy caused both the
Fed to lower interest rates (by more than financial markets expected) and the Blue Chip
forecasters to revise their GDP forecasts downward. Similarly, the four observations at the
top-right of the figure all correspond to months in which the U.S. economy was in an expansion:
May 1999, November 1999, June 2003, and January 2004. Again, it seems plausible that the
strengthening economy caused both the Fed to raise interest rates and Blue Chip forecasters
to revise their GDP forecasts upward.2 This is the essence of the Fed response to news channel
that we propose here.
   2
     In June 2003, the Fed lowered interest rates, but by less than the markets had expected, which resulted
in a monetary policy tightening surprise. The economy was in an expansion and the news about output had
been good, but the unemployment rate had not yet fallen, leading the Fed to cut rates slightly.



                                                     3
    To distinguish between the Fed information effect and the Fed response to news channels,
we present substantial new empirical evidence, all of which strongly favors the latter. First, in
Section 2, we show that Blue Chip survey regressions along the lines of Campbell et al. (2012)
and Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) are sensitive to the sample period and the variable being
forecast (i.e., GDP, unemployment, or inflation). If these regression results are truly due to
a Fed information effect, it suggests that the information content of FOMC announcements
would have to be changing over time, sometimes conveying information about GDP but not
unemployment or inflation, other times conveying information about unemployment but not
GDP or inflation, and so on. Instead, if these regression results are driven by the Fed's
response to publicly available economic news, then we would expect the coefficients to vary
over time in line with the news that was released.
    In Section 3, we show that economic news released in the days between the last Blue
Chip survey and the FOMC announcement is an important omitted variable in these survey
regressions. For example, the employment report in a given month is a strong predictor of both
the Blue Chip forecast revision and the FOMC monetary policy announcement surprise later
that month. Controlling for this economic news renders the statistical relationship between
policy surprises and Blue Chip forecast revisions statistically insignificant and reverses its sign
back to what would be predicted by standard macroeconomic models. Thus, we show that
the positive relationship in Figure 1 is in fact entirely driven by the omitted economic news
variable, in line with the Fed response to news channel.
    In Section 4, we analyze high-frequency, 30-minute responses of the stock market to
FOMC announcements. Several authors (e.g., Jarocinski and Karadi, 2020; Cieslak and
Schrimpf, 2019) have argued that the stock market responds positively to a monetary pol-
icy tightening surprise when a substantial information effect is present. We show that Federal
Reserve monetary policy surprises have a strong, highly statistically significant negative effect
on stock prices on average, and that this effect is even more negative for the most influential
observations in the Blue Chip regressions--for example, every one of the four highlighted ob-
servations in the upper-right corner of Figure 1 led to large decreases in the S&P 500 in the
30-minute windows surrounding those announcements. These high-frequency stock market
responses pose a significant challenge to the Fed information effect story, but we show below
that they are consistent with the Fed response to news channel.


                                                4
    In Section 5, we present new evidence on how individual Blue Chip forecasters revise their
forecasts on the day of an FOMC announcement, rather than over the one-month window sur-
rounding the announcement. For example, we have high-frequency, daily "GDP tracking"
estimates from one award-winning Blue Chip forecaster, Macroeconomic Advisers, that shows
that they have never revised their current-quarter or next-quarter GDP forecast in response
to an FOMC announcement going back to at least 2002. In contrast, Macroeconomic Advisers
revises their GDP tracking forecasts in response to many other macroeconomic announcements
over the course of each month, such as the employment report, retail sales, CPI, etc. This
suggests that the Fed information effect is very small, at least for this one award-winning Blue
Chip forecaster. We follow up this analysis with our own direct survey of all 52 individual
forecasters in the Blue Chip panel, and ask them directly if they revise their GDP, unemploy-
ment, and/or inflation forecasts in response to FOMC announcements, and if so, in which
direction. According to our survey, Blue Chip forecasters generally either do not revise those
forecasts in response to FOMC announcements, or they revise them in the traditional direc-
tion, with a hawkish monetary policy surprise causing them to revise their GDP and inflation
forecasts downward and their unemployment forecasts upward. This is direct evidence, from
the Blue Chip survey participants themselves, that there is little or no Fed information effect.
In contrast, our Fed response to news channel is consistent with all of these observations.
    In Section 6, we conduct a detailed comparison of Blue Chip and Federal Reserve internal
("Greenbook") forecasts of GDP, unemployment, and inflation. Many authors, such as Romer
and Romer (2000), argue that a Fed information effect exists because the Fed's economic
forecasts are significantly better than those of the private sector. In fact, we show that the
Fed's internal forecasts are very similar to the Blue Chip consensus forecasts, and that neither
forecast has a statistically significant advantage over the other.
    Finally, in Section 7, we present a simple model of private sector learning about the Fed's
monetary policy rule that illustrates the Fed response to news channel and is consistent with
all of our empirical findings. Using the model as a benchmark, we show that standard, high-
frequency monetary policy surprises can be used in high-frequency regressions to estimate the
effects of monetary policy on the yield curve and other asset prices in the usual way, without
any correction or adjustment. However, for high-frequency identification of a monetary policy
VAR, as in Cochrane and Piazzesi (2002), Faust et al. (2004b), and Gertler and Karadi (2015),


                                                5
correcting the high-frequency monetary policy surprises for the Fed response to news channel
may in some cases be necessary.
       Section 8 concludes. Two Appendices provide additional details of our survey of Blue
Chip forecasters and additional regression results and robustness checks.


1.1      Related Literature

Theoretical models of monetary policy have allowed for the possibility that the central bank
possesses asymmetric information about the economy since at least the 1970s (e.g., Sargent
and Wallace, 1975; Barro, 1976; Barro and Gordon, 1983), but the first paper to argue for
the empirical relevance of the Fed information effect is Romer and Romer (2000). They found
that the Fed has substantial information about future inflation that private sector forecasters
do not have, and that the Fed's interest rate changes could be used to infer that information.3
       Faust, Swanson and Wright (2004a) showed that the Fed's monetary policy announce-
ments cannot be used to improve private-sector forecasts of upcoming macroeconomic data
releases, such as GDP, retail sales, CPI, etc. They also showed that the private sector does
not seem to revise its forecasts of these releases in response to FOMC announcements, even
though it does revise those forecasts in response to other major macroeconomic data releases,
such as the employment report. They conclude that there is little or no evidence of a Fed
information effect in the data. They also show that the Romer and Romer (2000) results for
inflation are entirely due to the Volcker disinflation in the early 1980s; excluding that one
episode, the Fed's inflation forecasts are no better than those of the private sector.
       Campbell et al. (2012) study how the Fed's monetary policy announcements affect Blue
Chip forecasts of unemployment and inflation. Consistent with Faust et al. (2004a) and
contrary to Romer and Romer (2000), they find no evidence that Fed announcements contain
significant information about inflation. However, Campbell et al. find that monetary policy
tightenings are associated with a significant downward revision in Blue Chip forecasts of
unemployment, which they conclude is due to a Fed information effect. They introduce the
   3
    Romer and Romer (2000) appealed to this Fed information effect to explain why long-term U.S. Treasury
yields seemed to rise in response to federal funds rate changes. However, G¨  urkaynak, Sack and Swanson
(2005a), using a futures-based measure of federal funds rate surprises, showed that far-ahead forward U.S.
Treasury yields actually fall in response to FOMC tightenings. Thus, an information effect is not needed to
explain the response of long-term Treasury yields to FOMC announcements.




                                                    6
term "Delphic forward guidance" to refer to situations in which forward guidance by the
FOMC conveys information about the future evolution of the economy to the private sector.
       Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) study how Fed monetary policy announcements affect
Blue Chip forecasts of real GDP. They find that monetary policy tightenings are associated
with a significant upward revision in Blue Chip forecasts of real GDP, and like Campbell et al.
(2012), conclude that a Fed information effect is present. In Section 2, below, we explore both
the Campbell et al. and Nakamura-Steinsson results in more detail and show that they are
sensitive to sample period and the variable being forecast. For example, using Nakamura and
Steinsson's sample and methods, there is no significant information effect for unemployment
(contrary to Campbell et al.) or for inflation (contrary to Romer and Romer, 2000).
       Lunsford (2019) performs a detailed analysis of the Fed's forward guidance announcements
from February 2000 to May 2006, and finds evidence of a Fed information effect in the period
from February 2000 to August 2003, but not afterward. (Lunsford does not consider the period
before 2000 or after May 2006 due to changes in FOMC statements outside this window.) Like
Lunsford, we find no evidence of an information effect in the period after 2003; unlike Lunsford,
we attribute the appearance of a "Fed information effect" from 2000­2003 to the Fed's response
to the deteriorating economy in early 2001 and the improving economy in mid-2003.
       Jarocinski and Karadi (2020) decompose monetary policy surprises in the U.S. and euro
area into "pure monetary" shocks and "information" shocks, depending on whether stock
prices move in the opposite direction or same direction as interest rates, respectively.4 They
estimate that pure monetary shocks cause future GDP to decline, while pure information
shocks cause future GDP to increase. In our analysis below, we also use stock market responses
to FOMC announcements to assess whether they have a significant information component,
but we find little or no evidence of an information effect (for the U.S.).5
       Finally, Miranda-Agrippino (2017), Cieslak (2018), and Karnaukh (2019) find that FOMC
announcement surprises are predictable using macroeconomic data that are publicly available
prior to the announcement. Miranda-Agrippino (2017) interprets this predictability as a risk
premium that compensates investors for holding interest rate risk around FOMC announce-
   4
     See also Cieslak and Schrimpf (2019), who similarly classify monetary policy surprises according to the
minute-by-minute covariance of stock price changes and bond yield changes in a narrow window of time around
each announcement.
   5
     Figure 1 of Jarocinski and Karadi (2020) reports very few observations in their sample that qualify as
significant information shocks. Our results are generally consistent with this fact.



                                                     7
ments. However, Piazzesi and Swanson (2008) estimate that this risk premium is relatively
small, and Cieslak (2018) argues extensively that this predictability is not a risk premium, but
is instead due to markets having underestimated the Fed's responsiveness to the state of the
economy. Cieslak's explanation is essentially the same as our "Fed response to news" channel,
and is consistent with all of the new empirical evidence we present, below.



2         The "Fed Information Effect"
We begin by replicating and extending the empirical evidence of a "Fed information effect"
presented by Romer and Romer (2000), Campbell et al. (2012), and Nakamura and Steinsson
(2018), based on the response of Blue Chip survey forecasts to high-frequency FOMC monetary
policy surprises. We investigate the robustness of this evidence, and we present our alternative
explanation--the "Fed response to news" channel--based on the Fed's response to publicly
available macroeconomic news.


2.1         Data: Blue Chip Forecasts and Monetary Policy Surprises

The Blue Chip Economic Indicators newsletter has conducted a survey of professional fore-
casters once per month, over the first three business days of each month, since 1976.6 The
forecasting teams at approximately 50 financial institutions, major corporations, and eco-
nomic forecasting firms are surveyed about their predictions for a variety of macroeconomic
indicators for each quarter over the current and next calendar years. Thus, the maximal fore-
cast horizon ranges from four quarters (when the survey is conducted in the last quarter of a
calendar year) to seven quarters (when it is conducted in the first quarter). The survey covers
real U.S. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, the consumer price
index (CPI) inflation rate, the 3-month Treasury bill rate, 10-year Treasury yield, and a few
other macroeconomic variables such as industrial production and net exports. Empirical work
using the Blue Chip survey has typically focused on real GDP, the unemployment rate, and/or
CPI inflation, and we focus on these three variables in our analysis below.
         Blue Chip reports the "consensus" forecast for each variable in each quarter, which is the
    6
        Beginning in December 2000, the Blue Chip survey is completed by the second business day of each month.




                                                        8
arithmetic mean of the individual forecasts. In addition, the names and individual forecasts
of each professional forecasting team are reported for each calendar year as a whole. In our
regressions below, we focus on how the Blue Chip consensus forecast changed from one month
to the next, and how those changes were related to FOMC monetary policy announcements.
For simplicity, to reduce the number of reported coefficients in the tables below, we follow
Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) and consider the change in the average of the 1-quarter-ahead,
2-quarter-ahead, and 3-quarter-ahead consensus forecasts. (These are also the horizons for
which the evidence of a Fed information effect is the strongest; including the current-quarter
"nowcast" or the 4-quarter-ahead forecast in the average generally weakens the statistical
significance of the coefficient estimates in Table 1, below.) Although Romer and Romer
(2000) is the original paper finding evidence of a Fed information effect for Blue Chip inflation
forecasts, researchers using more recent samples have consistently found little or no evidence
of such an effect for inflation. Thus, we focus on replicating the results in Campbell et al.
(2012, henceforth CEFJ) for unemployment and Nakamura and Steinsson (2018, henceforth
NS) for real GDP growth, although we consider inflation as well.
       We relate these Blue Chip forecast revisions to FOMC monetary policy announcements.
Over our sample, there are eight regularly-scheduled FOMC announcements per year, occur-
ring after each scheduled FOMC meeting, spaced roughly six to eight weeks apart. In addi-
tion, the FOMC has occasionally made unscheduled monetary policy announcements that lie
in between regularly-scheduled meetings, typically when the FOMC wanted to lower interest
rates in response to a weakening economy and did not want to wait until the next sched-
uled meeting.7 We consider samples that both include and exclude these unscheduled FOMC
announcements in our analysis, below.
       Financial markets and professional forecasters are forward-looking, so we would not ex-
pect them to respond to changes in monetary policy that were widely anticipated ahead of
time. For this reason, researchers typically focus on monetary policy surprises --the unex-
pected component of FOMC announcements. We compute monetary policy announcement
   7
     For example, on January 22, 2008, the FOMC made an unscheduled announcement that it was cutting the
federal funds rate by 75 basis points "in view of a weakening of the economic outlook and increasing downside
risks to growth" (FOMC statement, Jan. 22, 2008, available on the Federal Reserve Board's website). Although
the next scheduled FOMC meeting was only nine days away, Chairman Bernanke argued that "seven trading
days is a long time in financial markets" and "I think we have to take a meaningful action" (FOMC transcript
of January 21, 2008, available on the Federal Reserve Board's website).




                                                     9
surprises in two different ways, following the approaches used by CEFJ and NS. CEFJ use the
"target factor" and "path factor" computed by G¨
                                               urkaynak, Sack and Swanson (2005b), which
correspond to the surprise change in the federal funds rate target and the surprise change
in forward guidance, respectively (where forward guidance is defined to be any additional
information about the future path of the federal funds rate over the next several months).
These surprises are computed using changes in short-maturity federal funds futures contracts
and two- to four-quarter-ahead Eurodollar futures contracts in a narrow, 30-minute window
surrounding each FOMC announcement. The scale of the target factor is normalized so that it
moves one-for-one with surprise changes in the target for the federal funds rate, while the scale
of the path factor is normalized so that a one-unit change increases the four-quarter-ahead
Eurodollar futures rate by one percentage point.8 NS use the same set of federal funds futures
and Eurodollar futures contracts over the same 30-minute window, but condense the mone-
tary policy surprise into a single dimension by taking the first principal component of those
changes, which is then scaled so that a one-unit change increases the one-year zero-coupon
Treasury yield (as measured by G¨
                                urkaynak, Sack and Wright, 2007) by one percentage point.
Our high-frequency futures data for computing these monetary policy surprises, using either
method, begins in January 1990, as discussed in G¨
                                                 urkaynak et al. (2005b).


2.2       Fed Information Effect Regressions

Table 1 reports results from our replication and extension of the basic information effect
regressions in CEFJ and NS. The first set of columns in Table 1, labeled "Campbell et al.",
considers Blue Chip forecast revision regressions of the form


                               BCrevt =  +  targett +  patht + t ,                           (2)


where t indexes FOMC announcements, targett denotes the surprise change in the federal
funds rate target in a 30-minute window bracketing the FOMC announcement, patht de-
notes the surprise change in forward guidance in the same 30-minute window, computed as
described above, and BCrevt denotes the one-month revision in the Blue Chip consensus
forecast of a given variable averaged over the 1-, 2-, and 3-quarter-ahead horizons. Note
  8
      For details see G¨
                       urkaynak et al. (2005b) and Campbell et al. (2012).



                                                      10
                            Table 1: Blue Chip Forecast Regression Results
                                               (1) Campbell et al.               (2) Nakamura-Steinsson
                                        fed funds rate      fwd. guidance             first princip. comp.
       Blue Chip forecast               "target factor"     "path factor"                "MP surprise"
(A) Replication sample: 1/1990­6/2007 for Campbell et al., 1/1995­3/2014 for NS (N = 129, 120)
       Unemployment rate                     -0.11              -0.23                        -0.17
                                             (.100)             (.136)                       (.292)
       Real GDP growth                        0.10               0.27                         0.92
                                             (.181)             (.273)                       (.376)
       CPI inflation                          0.15               0.10                         0.06
                                             (.112)             (.152)                       (.246)
(B) Full sample: 1/1990­6/2019, including unscheduled announcements (N = 217)
       Unemployment rate                     -0.16              -0.24                        -0.39
                                             (.109)             (.142)                       (.188)
       Real GDP growth                        0.16               0.14                         0.33
                                             (.171)             (.223)                       (.296)
       CPI inflation                          0.16               0.08                         0.29
                                             (.094)             (.123)                       (.163)
(C) Full sample: 1/1990­6/2019, excluding unscheduled announcements (N = 206)
       Unemployment rate                      0.07              -0.32                        -0.30
                                             (.179)             (.151)                       (.246)
       Real GDP growth                        0.13               0.37                         0.54
                                             (.242)             (.203)                       (.328)
       CPI inflation                          0.12               0.13                         0.27
                                             (.150)             (.126)                       (.204)
(D) Full sample: 1/1990­6/2019, excl. unsched. announcements and 7/2008­6/2009 (N = 198)
       Unemployment rate                     -0.02              -0.20                        -0.25
                                             (.151)             (.129)                       (.208)
       Real GDP growth                        0.29               0.32                         0.64
                                             (.209)             (.176)                       (.287)
       CPI inflation                          0.15               0.06                         0.20
                                             (.142)             (.119)                       (.190)
Replication and extension of Campbell et al. (2012) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) Blue Chip forecast re-
gression results. Campbell et al. coefficients are  and  from regression BCrevt =  +  targett +  patht + t ,
where t indexes FOMC announcements, targett denotes the surprise change in the federal funds rate in a 30-minute
window bracketing the FOMC announcement, patht denotes the surprise change in forward guidance in the same
30-minute window, and BCrevt denotes the one-month change in the Blue Chip consensus forecast for the next 3
quarters, over the month bracketing the FOMC announcement. Nakamura-Steinsson coefficient is  from regression
BCrevt =  +  mpst + t , where mpst denotes the policy surprise, calculated as the first principal component of
the 30-minute changes in five short-term interest rate futures rates around the FOMC announcement. Bootstrapped
standard errors in parentheses;  ,  , and  denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respec-
tively. Replication sample for Campbell et al. includes unscheduled announcements; that for Nakamura-Steinsson
excludes unscheduled announcements, 7/2008­6/2009, and announcements in the first 7 days of the month. See
text for details.


                                                      11
that targett and patht are high-frequency changes in the 30-minute window surrounding the
FOMC announcement at date t, while BCrevt is a lower-frequency, one-month change over
the calendar month containing the FOMC announcement. The last column of Table 1, labeled
"Nakamura-Steinsson", considers analogous regressions of the form


                                      BCrevt =  +  mpst + t ,                                               (3)


where mpst denotes the monetary policy surprise calculated as the the first principal compo-
nent of the 30-minute changes in five short-term interest rate futures rates around the FOMC
announcement, as described above.9 The Blue Chip survey is conducted during the first three
business days of each month (first two days after Dec. 2000), and we ensure that the Blue
Chip forecast revisions bracket the FOMC announcements by dropping from our analysis
any FOMC announcements that occur before the beginning-of-month Blue Chip survey is
completed.
       In each panel of Table 1, (A) through (D), we consider the Blue Chip forecast of three
different variables: the unemployment rate, real GDP growth, and the CPI inflation rate, as
discussed above. In each row, coefficients reported in the "Campbell et al." column report
the coefficients  and  estimated using regression specification (2), while the "Nakamura-
Steinsson" column reports the coefficient  estimated using regression specification (3). Stan-
dard errors are reported in parentheses below each coefficient estimate. Because the right-hand
side variables in equations (2) and (3) are generated regressors, we compute these standard
errors using 10,000 bootstrap replications in order to take into account the extra sampling
variability associated with the computation of the target factor, path factor, and NS first
principal component.10
       In the top panel (A), we consider exactly the same sample used by CEFJ for each regres-
   9
     Note that regularly-scheduled FOMC announcements are spaced far enough apart that adjacent announce-
ments never occur in the same month. In cases where we consider unscheduled as well as scheduled FOMC
announcements, if an unscheduled announcement occurs in the same month as a scheduled announcement,
then we follow Campbell et al. (2012) and add those two announcement surprises together to get one "total
monetary policy announcement surprise" for that month.
  10
     The CEFJ and NS regressors are computed using principal components that do not fit the data perfectly,
hence there is some extra sampling variability associated with the factor computation itself that our bootstrap-
ping takes into account. Both CEFJ and NS treat their regressors as fixed in repeated samples, which ignores
this additional source of uncertainty. However, our bootstrapped standard errors are only slightly larger than
the asymptotic ones in general (cf. Table B.1) because the factor models used to compute the GSS/CEFJ/NS
factors are robust and fit the data well, a result that was also found by G¨urkaynak et al. (2005b).



                                                      12
sion in the first set of columns, and exactly the same sample used by NS for each regression in
the last column (129 and 120 observations, respectively).11 We are able to replicate the main
features of their results in each case. For the CEFJ specification, we find that a surprise tight-
ening in forward guidance is associated with a downward revision in the Blue Chip consensus
unemployment forecast, by about 0.2 percentage points for every percentage point surprise in
forward guidance. This relationship is borderline statistically significant, at the 10% level. As
CEFJ pointed out, this response is puzzling if one thought the change in forward guidance
was a pure monetary policy shock: in that case, standard macroeconomic models and VARs
predict that unemployment should increase following a monetary policy tightening. NS did
not report results for unemployment and instead focused on Blue Chip forecasts of real GDP.
Using their specification in panel (A), we find that a surprise tightening of interest rates is
associated with a significant upward revision in the Blue Chip consensus forecast for real GDP
growth, by about 0.9 percentage points for each percentage point surprise in the NS monetary
policy measure. Again, this estimate contradicts the pure monetary policy shock view of an
FOMC announcement, according to which a monetary policy tightening should cause future
GDP to decrease. Both CEFJ and NS interpret their results as evidence of a Fed information
effect channel of monetary policy, as discussed in the Introduction, above.
     However, even within panel (A) of Table 1, there are potential concerns with this in-
terpretation. First, there is little or no evidence that FOMC announcements communicate
any information about inflation, despite the fact that this was the original Fed information
effect channel found by Romer and Romer (2000). Apparently, updating the sample to either
the one used by CEFJ or NS invalidates that earlier empirical finding, an observation that
was also made by Faust et al. (2004a). Second, the CEFJ finding of an information effect
for unemployment applies only to unemployment--there is no evidence in their sample that
Blue Chip forecasters revise their projections for real GDP, in contrast to the findings in NS.
Similarly, the NS finding of an information effect for real GDP in their sample applies only to
  11
     CEFJ use January 1990 to June 2007 as their baseline sample and include unscheduled as well as scheduled
FOMC announcements. NS use January 1995 to March 2014 as their baseline sample, but exclude unscheduled
FOMC announcements and all FOMC announcements from July 2008 to June 2009. In addition, NS exclude
any FOMC announcement that occurred in the first seven calendar days of a given month, while CEFJ exclude
announcements that occurred in the first three business days of a month, so we do that in each case in panel (A)
as well, although in all other panels we exclude FOMC announcements only for the first three business days of
each month (and first two days after Dec. 2000), which is sufficient to ensure that the FOMC announcement
post-dates the Blue Chip survey.



                                                      13
GDP and not to unemployment, in contrast to the findings in CEFJ. This is concerning, both
because it implies these results are not robust and because a true Fed information effect ought
to imply that Blue Chip forecasts of both unemployment and real GDP should be affected.
       In panels (B) through (D) of Table 1, we extend the CEFJ and NS analyses to the full
sample for which we have data, January 1990 to June 2019.12 In panel (B), we include unsched-
uled as well as scheduled FOMC announcements during this period (217 observations).13 In
panel (C), we exclude the eleven unscheduled FOMC announcements during this period, and
in panel (D), we exclude both the unscheduled FOMC announcements and annnouncements
from July 2008 to June 2009 (leaving 198 observations).
       In panels (B) through (D), there is some evidence of a systematic relationship in these
regressions: several of the estimated coefficients are statistically significant and in the same
direction as observed by CEFJ and NS over their original samples. However, the evidence is
not as consistent as a true Fed information effect ought to imply: for example, looking down
the last column of Table 1, the results for real GDP are only significant when unscheduled
announcements and especially July 2008 to June 2009 are excluded (panels A and D), while
the results for unemployment are significant only in panel (B), when the unscheduled an-
nouncements and 2008­09 are included. If the Fed information effect is true, this would imply
that in some samples there is information about real GDP but not unemployment, while in
other samples there is information about unemployment but not real GDP. The CEFJ results
have similar problems: in panels (A)­(B), the results for unemployment are marginally sig-
nificant, but those for GDP are not, while in panel (D), the opposite is true. For inflation,
there is some marginal evidence of an information effect in panel (B), but not in any of the
other panels. Overall, the signs of the coefficients in the different panels are robust, but the
statistical significance is sensitive to sample period and to the variable being forecast.
  12
     The FOMC did not explicitly announce its monetary policy decisions in official press releases until February
1994; however, it still conveyed its decisions to financial markets through changes in the discount rate or through
the size and type of open market operation conducted the following morning, as discussed in G¨      urkaynak et al.
(2005b). As a robustness check, we also consider starting our sample in February 1994 and the results are
similar--see Table B.2 in the Appendix.
  13
     Consistent with the rest of the literature, we exclude the unscheduled FOMC announcement on September
17, 2001, as it occurred before the markets opened and after they had been closed for several days following
the September 11 terrorist atttacks, so it's not possible to get a good high-frequency measure of the surprise
component of the announcement on that date.




                                                        14
                 Figure 2: Illustration of the "Fed Response to News" Channel


                                    FOMC
                                 announcement
                 Blue Chip                                  Blue Chip
                  survey                                     survey

                         economic news




                                     month t                               month t+1
The Blue Chip survey of forecasters is conducted in the first 2­3 business days of each month, while FOMC
announcements can occur at any point within the month. In between the time of the Blue Chip survey and
the FOMC announcement, significant economic news, such as the employment report, is often released. See
text for details.


2.3     The "Fed Response to News" Channel

In this paper, we propose an alternative explanation of the puzzling Blue Chip survey regres-
sion results in Table 1 and Figure 1: the "Fed response to news" channel, which is illustrated
in Figure 2. The Blue Chip survey of forecasters is conducted at the beginning of each month,
while the FOMC announcement can occur at any point within the month. In between the
beginning-of-month Blue Chip survey and the day of the FOMC announcement, significant
economic news can be released. An important example is the Bureau of Labor Statistics'
employment report, which is typically released on the first Friday of each month and includes
detailed information about nonfarm payroll employment, the unemployment rate, average
weekly hours, and average hourly earnings. Data on retail sales, international trade, in-
dustrial production, capacity utilization, and many other indicators are released around the
second week of each month and, of course, new financial market data on stock prices, bond
yields, and exchange rates arrives every day throughout the month.
      If the Federal Reserve and Blue Chip forecasters were both responding to the same eco-
nomic news (and the Fed responded by more than financial markets expected, as argued by
Cieslak (2018) and discussed in Section 3, below), that could explain all of the results in Ta-
ble 1 and Figure 1. Positive economic news, for example, would lead to additional tightening
by the Fed and would also cause professional forecasters to revise their GDP and inflation



                                                   15
forecasts upward, and their unemployment forecasts downward. Thus, we would estimate
positive coefficients for GDP growth and inflation and negative coefficients for unemployment
in the Blue Chip survey regressions, even in the absence of a Fed information effect.
       In fact, the Fed response to news channel can explain the results in Table 1 more con-
sistently than the Fed information effect. First, the observation that in some samples the
coefficients are significant only for real GDP, while in others the coefficients are significant
only for unemployment, is consistent with the Fed and Blue Chip both responding to incom-
ing news about GDP in the first case and unemployment in the second. In contrast, the Fed
information effect offers no explanation why there would be different information in FOMC
announcements in different subsamples. Second, the significant coefficients for Blue Chip
inflation forecasts in panel (B) of Table 1 can be explained by both the Fed and Blue Chip re-
ceiving significant news about inflation during in this sample; in contrast, the Fed information
effect has difficulty explaining why FOMC announcements would contain information about
inflation in this period and not others. Third, the Fed response to news channel is consistent
with the finding in Figure 1 that all the influential observations in the upper-right corner of the
figure occurred when the economy was in an expansion, while all the influential observations
in the lower-left corner occurred when the economy was clearly weakening: according to this
channel, both the Fed and Blue Chip forecasters were responding to incoming news about the
economy. In contrast, the Fed information effect does not explain why negative information
about the economy is only revealed by FOMC announcements in recessions, while positive
information about the economy is only revealed in expansions.



3       Evidence Economic News Is an Omitted Variable
According to the Fed response to news channel illustrated in Figure 2, publicly available eco-
nomic news released before an FOMC announcement is an omitted variable in regressions (2)
and (3).14 If the pre-FOMC economic news (i) affects Blue Chip forecast revisions and (ii) is
correlated with the right-hand side variables in regressions (2)­(3), then the estimated coeffi-
  14
    We focus on economic news released before the FOMC announcement because that news is clearly publicly
available before the FOMC announcement itself, and thus cannot represent a Fed information effect about
future data releases. However, in principle any economic news released after the FOMC announcement is an
omitted variable in regressions (2)­(3) as well.




                                                   16
cients in those regressions will be biased. Although one might hope that the high-frequency
monetary policy surprises in (2)­(3) control for the effects of all publicly available information
prior to each FOMC announcement, the scatter plot in Figure 1 raises serious concerns that
there is still significant correlation remaining: the largest monetary policy tightening surprises
all occurred during periods of economic expansion, while the largest monetary policy easing
surprises happened during economic downturns.
       In this section, we document three important empirical findings: First, economic news
released during the month is extremely informative about Blue Chip forecast revisions that
month (which is not surprising). Second, economic news released prior to the FOMC an-
nouncement is correlated with the high-frequency monetary policy surprises in regressions (2)­
(3), suggesting that there is an omitted variables bias in those regressions. Third, including
pre-FOMC economic news as an additional explanatory variable in regressions (2)­(3) drives
out the empirical evidence of a Fed information effect. Taken together, this evidence strongly
supports the Fed response to news channel.


3.1      Economic News Predicts Blue Chip Forecast Revisions

We first show that economic news is a strong predictor of Blue Chip forecast revisions. This
is not surprising: economic data is released every month, and the professional forecasters in
the Blue Chip survey typically revise their forecasts for GDP, unemployment, and inflation in
response to those data.
       We focus on three different measures of economic news spanning a variety of announce-
ment types. First, we consider the nonfarm payrolls release from the employment report,
which is typically announced on the first Friday of each month. This has the advantage of be-
ing a very simple yet informative measure of economic news, since nonfarm payrolls is widely
regarded as the most informative of all the macroeconomic data releases (e.g., Andersen and
Bollerslev, 1998).15 Second, we consider a more comprehensive measure of economic news,
  15
    We have data on the employment report release date and the nonfarm payrolls release itself from Haver
Analytics/Money Market Services. If the employment report is released in the first two business days of the
month (three days prior to Dec. 2000), then we treat the news for that observation as zero since it may not
post-date the Blue Chip forecast, although this has little effect on our estimates below. Similarly, if the FOMC
announcement occurs before the employment report that month, we treat the news for that observation as zero,
although this again has very little effect on our estimates. The nonfarm payrolls release reports the change in
nonfarm payroll employees from the previous month, in thousands of workers; we divide this number by 1000
to make the scaling of the coefficients in Table 2 comparable to the other two news measures. Note that the


                                                      17
the "big data" business cycle indicator of Brave, Butters and Kelley (2019, henceforth BBK).
This index incorporates the information from all the standard macroeconomic data releases
each month to come up with a single measure of economic activity, with higher numbers in-
dicating a stronger economy. It is thus much broader than nonfarm payrolls alone, but has
the disadvantage of including data that are released after the FOMC announcement as well as
before.16 Third, we use the percent change in the S&P 500 index from one quarter (thirteen
weeks) prior to the FOMC announcement to the day before the announcement. Although the
S&P 500 is noisy, it provides a summary of the market's interpretation of all of the economic
news released over that period; we consider the 13-week change because it's a more powerful
predictor of the Blue Chip forecast revision than the change from the beginning of the month,
which covers only a few days and can be very volatile.
     We measure the effects of these news measures on Blue Chip forecast revisions using
regressions of the form
                                      BCrevt =  +  newst + t ,                                               (4)

where t indexes months containing an FOMC announcement, as in Section 2, and BCrevt
denotes the revision in the Blue Chip consensus forecast of a given variable over month t.
While one can also perform regression (4) on a sample including all months, we focus on
revisions around FOMC announcements in order to investigate the potential omitted variables
problem in regressions (2)­(3).
     The results of these regressions are reported in Table 2. The table is divided into four
panels that cover the same samples as in Table 1. The first column reports results using
nonfarm payrolls as the measure of economic news, the second column uses the BBK index as
the news measure, and the third column uses the percent change in the S&P 500.17 Within each
sample, we perform regression (4) on the Blue Chip forecast revision for the unemployment
rate and for real GDP growth. We do not report results for Blue Chip inflation forecasts in
the interest of space and because there was no evidence of a Fed information effect for inflation
employment data refers to month t - 1, because it is data for month t - 1 that is released in month t.
  16
     Note that the BBK index for month t - 1 is computed using data released in month t and is reported by
the Chicago Fed at the beginning of month t + 1. In regression (4), we use the BBK index for month t - 1 as
our measure of newst , since it is computed using the economic data that was released in month t.
  17
     Thus, each coefficient in Table 2 corresponds to its own regression. One can also include all three measures
of news in regression (4) simultaneously, but for simplicity we just report the univariate regression results in
the table.



                                                       18
                 Table 2: Economic News Predicts Blue Chip Forecast Revisions

                                                    Economic news measure:
     Blue Chip Forecast            (1) Nonfarm payrolls (2) BBK index      (3)  logS&P500

(A1) Campbell et al. replication sample: 1/1990­6/2007 (N = 129)
     Unemployment rate                     -.211                    -.060                  -0.37
                                           (.047)                   (.009)                 (.116)
     Real GDP growth                        .016                     .047                   0.95
                                           (.093)                   (.019)                 (.193)
(A2) NS replication sample: 1/1995­3/2014, excluding 7/2008­6/2009 (N = 120)
     Unemployment rate                     -.162                    -.061                  -0.60
                                           (.062)                   (.016)                 (.133)
     Real GDP growth                        .028                     .092                   1.01
                                           (.084)                   (.020)                 (.158)

(B) Full sample: 1/1990­6/2019, including unscheduled announcements (N = 217)
     Unemployment rate                     -.298                    -.078                  -0.69
                                           (.042)                   (.007)                 (.102)
     Real GDP growth                        .127                     .069                   1.09
                                           (.071)                   (.013)                 (.150)

(C) Full sample: 1/1990­6/2019, excluding unscheduled announcements (N = 206)
     Unemployment rate                     -.292                    -.081                  -0.74
                                           (.043)                   (.007)                 (.106)
     Real GDP growth                        .128                     .071                   1.14
                                           (.064)                   (.011)                 (.135)

(D) Full sample: 1/1990­6/2019, excl. unsched. announcements and 7/2008­6/2009 (N = 198)
     Unemployment rate                     -.182                    -.067                  -0.54
                                           (.046)                   (.010)                 (.109)
     Real GDP growth                        .051                     .065                   1.05
                                           (.065)                   (.015)                 (.135)
Estimated coefficients  from regressions BCrevt =  +  newst + t , where t indexes months of FOMC
announcements, BCrevt denotes the one-month change in the Blue Chip consensus forecast for the next 3
quarters for the variable listed in each row, and newst denotes the measure of economic news listed in each
column. BBK index is from Brave et al. (2019). Bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses;  ,  , and 
denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. Replication sample for Campbell
et al. (2012) includes unscheduled announcements; that for Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) excludes unscheduled
announcements and 7/2008­6/2009. See text for details.




                                                     19
in Table 1; moreover, the three economic news measures in Table 2 primarily measure news
about economic activity rather than inflation, so they have little predictive power for Blue
Chip inflation forecast revisions.
      Not surprisingly, economic news is a very strong predictor of Blue Chip forecast revisions.
The coefficients in Table 2 have the expected sign in every case and are almost all highly
statistically significant. There is no question that these economic news measures are associated
with subsequent Blue Chip forecast revisions.


3.2     Economic News Predicts Monetary Policy Surprises

We next show that the three economic news measures above are correlated with the high-
frequency monetary policy surprises in regressions (2)­(3), using regressions of the form


                                       mpst =  +  newst + t ,                                                (5)


where t indexes FOMC announcements, mpst is a high-frequency measure of the monetary
policy surprise in a narrow window of time around the FOMC announcement (either the
"target" factor, the "path" factor, or the Nakamura-Steinsson first principal component), and
newst denotes one of the three measures of economic news described above.
      The results from this regression are reported in Table 3. There are four panels in the
table, corresponding to the same samples as in Tables 1 and 2. Each row considers a sin-
gle high-frequency measure of the monetary policy surprise, either the "target factor" from
Campbell et al. (2012) and G¨
                            urkaynak et al. (2005b), the "path factor" from those papers,
or the monetary policy surprise measure from Nakamura and Steinsson (2018). Each column
considers one of the three economic news measures described above, and each element of the
table reports the coefficient estimate  from regression (5).18
      It is clear from Table 3 that there is significant predictability in these high-frequency
monetary policy surprises. The predictability is robust across samples and across different
measures of economic news, and is often highly statistically significant. Moreover, the signs
of the coefficients are positive in every case, consistent with the Fed response to news channel
(and Figure 1): when the economic news is positive, the FOMC is more likely to surprise
  18
     Thus, each coefficient in Table 3 corresponds to its own regression. One can also include all three measures
of news in regression (5) simultaneously, but for simplicity we include each news measure by itself in Table 3.


                                                       20
          Table 3: Economic News Predicts High-Frequency Monetary Policy Surprises


  Monetary policy                                    Economic news measure:
  surprise measure                  (1) Nonfarm payrolls (2) BBK index      (3)  logS&P500

(A) Replication sample: 1/1990­6/2007 for Campbell et al., 1/1995­3/2014 for NS (N = 129, 120)
  fed funds target factor                     .158                     .033                   .179
                                             (.050)                   (.011)                 (.128)
  fwd guidance path factor                    .032                     .017                   .235
                                             (.038)                  (.0085)                 (.088)
  NS MP surprise                              .041                     .013                   .096
                                             (.022)                  (.0059)                 (.051)

(B) Full sample: 1/1990­6/2019, including unscheduled announcements (N = 217)
  fed funds target factor                     .095                     .017                   .217
                                             (.035)                  (.0067)                 (.084)
  fwd guidance path factor                    .024                     .013                   .187
                                             (.024)                  (.0046)                 (.058)
  NS MP surprise                              .058                     .014                   .188
                                             (.020)                  (.0039)                 (.048)

(C) Full sample: 1/1990­6/2019, excluding unscheduled announcements (N = 206)
  fed funds target factor                     .045                     .007                   .065
                                             (.020)                  (.0039)                 (.051)
  fwd guidance path factor                    .027                     .017                   .254
                                             (.024)                  (.0045)                 (.057)
  NS MP surprise                              .035                     .011                   .148
                                             (.015)                  (.0029)                 (.037)

(D) Full sample: 1/1990­6/2019, excl. unsched. announcements and 7/2008­6/2009 (N = 198)
  fed funds target factor                     .048                     .012                   .018
                                             (.024)                  (.0058)                 (.059)
  fwd guidance path factor                    .008                     .023                   .187
                                             (.028)                  (.0067)                 (.068)
  NS MP surprise                              .028                     .017                   .098
                                             (.018)                  (.0044)                 (.044)
Estimated coefficients  from regressions mpst =  +  newst + t , where t indexes FOMC announcements,
mpst denotes the 30-minute window measure of the monetary policy surprise listed in each row, and newst
denotes the measure of economic news listed at the top of each column. BBK index is from Brave et al. (2019).
Bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses;  ,  , and  denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels, respectively. Replication sample for Campbell et al. (2012) includes unscheduled announcements; that for
Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) excludes unscheduled announcements and 7/2008­6/2009. See text for details.




                                                      21
markets with a subsequent tightening, and when the economic news is negative, the FOMC
is more likely to surprise markets with a subsequent easing.
    This predictability is perhaps surprising. Under the standard assumption of Full Infor-
mation Rational Expectations (FIRE) in financial markets, interest rates and interest rate
futures should incorporate all publicly available information up to the time they are traded.
Thus, the high-frequency monetary policy surprises (i.e., interest rate changes) on the left-
hand side of regression (5) should be unpredictable based on all publicly available information
that predates the surprise. Instead, the economic news in Table 3 is significantly correlated
with the upcoming monetary policy surprises. Previous studies by Miranda-Agrippino (2017),
Cieslak (2018), and Karnaukh (2019) also find similar predictability results, although they do
not consider the omitted variables problem that we are studying in this section.
    There are two possible explanations for the predictability in Table 3: either (i) financial
market participants violated the FIRE assumption, or (ii) those market participants satisfied
FIRE, but required a risk premium to compensate them for interest rate risk around FOMC
announcements. Miranda-Agrippino (2017) argues in favor of the second explanation, that the
predictability in Table 3 represents a risk premium. However, Piazzesi and Swanson (2008)
estimate that this risk premium is small and Cieslak (2018) argues that the risk premium
would have to be implausibly large to explain the estimated degree of predictability in the
table and that a risk premium interpretation is inconsistent with a variety of other financial
market evidence.
    Instead, Cieslak (2018) presents evidence that financial markets did not have full informa-
tion about the Fed's monetary policy reaction function--thus violating the FIRE assumption--
and in particular, underestimated ex ante how responsive the Fed would be to the economy.
This would lead to ex post predictability of monetary policy surprises of the type seen in
Table 3, even if those surprises were unpredictable ex ante (see Section 7, below, for a simple
model). We do not take a stand on why market participants might have underestimated the
Fed's responsiveness to news, but one possibility is that the Fed has gradually become more
responsive to news about output over time--that is, the Fed under Volcker was less responsive
to news about output than the Fed under Greenspan, which was less responsive than the Fed
under Bernanke, etc. (see Section 7 for additional discussion). Regardless of the reason, the
crucial point for our analysis is that the high-frequency monetary policy surprises in the Fed


                                              22
information effect regressions (2)­(3) are correlated with the omitted economic news variables,
which leads to an omitted variables bias in those regressions.


3.3      Economic News Drives Out the "Fed Information Effect"

The results in Tables 2­3 imply that economic news is an omitted variable in regressions (2)­
(3) and that this omitted variable is correlated with the monetary policy surprises in those
regressions. As a result, the coefficients in regressions (2)­(3) will be biased.
       To correct for this bias, we re-estimate regressions (2)­(3) with explicit controls for eco-
nomic news:
                       BCrevt =  +  targett +  patht +  newst + t ,                                      (6)

and
                              BCrevt =  +  mpst +  newst + t ,                                           (7)

where t indexes months with FOMC announcements, and the variables in (6)­(7) are as defined
previously, although here we let newst be a vector that contains all three measures of economic
news simultaneously.19
       The results are reported in Table 4, which has essentially the same structure as Table 1.
The table is divided into four panels covering the same samples as in Tables 1­3. In each row,
the "Campbell et al." column reports the coefficients  and  from regression (6), while the
"Nakamura-Steinsson" column reports the coefficient  from (7). Each row corresponds to the
Blue Chip forecast revision for a different variable (the unemployment rate or real GDP), and
as in Table 2 we exclude the Blue Chip inflation forecasts.
       The results in Table 4 are strikingly different from Table 1. First, the vast majority of
coefficients in Table 4 have the conventional (i.e., non-information-effect) sign--positive for
the unemployment rate and negative for real GDP. Thus, controlling for economic news, the
effect of Federal Reserve monetary policy announcements on Blue Chip forecast revisions looks
very standard. These coefficients are generally not statistically significant, but that should
not be too surprising, given that the high-frequency monetary policy surprises are typically
  19
    Because the information in the BBK index is not completely known by the time of the FOMC announce-
ment, we also consider a version of Table 4 that excludes that index from the newst variable, and the results
are very similar. See Appendix Table B.3.



                                                     23
                Table 4: Economic News Drives Out the "Fed Information Effect"

                                             (1) Campbell et al.               (2) Nakamura-Steinsson
                                       fed funds rate     fwd. guidance            first princip. comp.
      Blue Chip forecast                target factor      path factor                 MP surprise
(A) Replication sample: 1/1990­6/2007 for Campbell et al., 1/1995­3/2014 for NS (N = 129, 120)
      Unemployment rate                    .088              -.036                          .191
                                          (.093)             (.127)                        (.266)
      Real GDP growth                     -.045              -.083                          .502
                                          (.181)             (.267)                        (.307)
(B) Full sample: 1/1990­6/2019, including unscheduled announcements (N = 217)
      Unemployment rate                    .104               .091                         .210
                                          (.089)             (.116)                       (.157)
      Real GDP growth                     -.110              -.328                        -.375
                                          (.148)             (.195)                       (.261)
(C) Full sample: 1/1990­6/2019, excluding unscheduled announcements (N = 206)
      Unemployment rate                    .335               .157                         .502
                                          (.137)             (.124)                       (.195)
      Real GDP growth                     -.082              -.280                        -.385
                                          (.193)             (.176)                       (.278)
(D) Full sample: 1/1990­6/2019, excl. unsched. announcements and 7/2008­6/2009 (N = 198)
      Unemployment rate                     .129              .054                          .179
                                           (.132)            (.117)                        (.183)
      Real GDP growth                       .204             -.059                          .119
                                           (.175)            (.153)                        (.245)
 Coefficients in Campbell et al. columns are  and  from regressions BCrevt =  +  targett +  patht +
  newst + t , where t indexes FOMC announcements, targett , patht , and BCrevt are as defined in Table 1,
 and newst is a vector that contains the three measures of economic news described above. Coefficients in
 Nakamura-Steinsson column are  from regressions BCrevt =  +  mpst +  newst + t , where mpst is as
 defined in Table 1. Bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses;  ,  , and  denote statistical significance
 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. See notes to Table 1 and text for details.


 small (standard deviation of a few basis points) and are only a small part of the information
 about the economy released during each month. Three coefficients in the table are statistically
 significant at the 10 percent level or better in the standard (non-information-effect) direction,
 while no coefficient is significant in the information effect direction.
      We conclude that economic news is an omitted variable in the standard Fed information
 effect regressions (2)­(3), that economic news is correlated with the right-hand-side variables
 in those regressions, and that the resulting omitted variables bias is substantial. Once we



                                                     24
control for this omitted variable, as in regressions (6)­(7), the sign of the coefficients on the
monetary policy announcement surprises reverses sign and looks conventional.



4      High-Frequency Stock Market Evidence
We next provide high-frequency evidence from the stock market that also suggests that the
Fed information effect is small or nonexistent. Standard economic theory predicts that a pure
monetary policy tightening should cause stock prices to fall, as discussed, for example, by
Bernanke and Kuttner (2005). First, higher interst rates imply that future corporate profits
should be discounted more heavily, implying a lower present value, and second, higher interest
rates imply that future GDP and future corporate profits should be lower on average, reducing
the present value of those profits further.
      If higher interest rates have a significant Fed information component, however, then the
effect on the stock market is ambiguous. Higher interest rates imply that future corporate
profits should be discounted more heavily, as above, but now the higher interest rates signal
that GDP and corporate profits will be higher in the future, rather than lower. The net effect
of these two forces on the stock market is ambiguous.
      Recent papers on the Fed information effect, however, have argued that the net effect is
typically positive--that is, higher interest rates cause stock prices to rise when a strong infor-
mation effect is present (Jarocinski and Karadi, 2020; Cieslak and Schrimpf, 2019; Lunsford,
2019). In fact, Jarocinski and Karadi (2020) and Cieslak and Schrimpf (2019) identify infor-
mation shocks (as opposed to pure monetary policy shocks) based on how the stock market
responds to higher interest rates, with a positive stock market response indicating an infor-
mation shock and a negative stock market response a pure monetary policy shock. In this
section, we likewise use the high-frequency stock market respone to FOMC announcements to
help discern whether a significant information effect is present.


4.1     Stock Market Responses to FOMC Announcements

We first estimate the typical response of stock prices to FOMC monetary policy announce-
ments. We run regressions analogous to (2)­(3), but now with the dependent variable being



                                               25
          Table 5: High-Frequency Stock Market Response to FOMC Announcements

                          (1) Campbell et al.                           (2) Nakamura-Steinsson
              fed funds rate    fwd. guidance                          first princip. comp.
               target factor     path factor          R2                   MP surprise          R2
(A) Replication sample: 1/1990­6/2007 for Campbell et al., 1/1995­3/2014 for NS (N = 158, 146)
                 -4.24             -2.05             0.39                    -5.95             0.19
                  (0.46)            (0.65)                                    (1.03)

(B) Full sample: 1/1990­6/2019, including unscheduled announcements (N = 259)
                 -4.37             -2.52             0.32                    -7.82             0.31
                  (0.45)            (0.54)                                    (0.72)

(C) Full sample: 1/1990­6/2019, excluding unscheduled announcements (N = 236)
                 -3.11             -3.14             0.21                    -6.53             0.21
                  (0.64)            (0.51)                                    (0.82)

(D) Full sample: 1/1990­6/2019, excl. unscheduled announcements and 7/2008­6/2009 (N = 228)
                 -2.81             -3.02             0.21                    -6.03             0.21
                  (0.64)            (0.51)                                    (0.78)

 Regression results for stock market response to FOMC announcements. Campbell et al. coefficients are  and
  from regression  log S&P500t =  +  targett +  patht + t , where t indexes FOMC announcements, targett
 and patht denote the surprise change in the federal funds rate and forward guidance in a 30-minute window
 bracketing the FOMC announcement, and  log S&P500t denotes the percent change in the S&P 500 over the
 same 30-minute window. Nakamura-Steinsson coefficient is  from regression  log S&P500t =  +  mpst + t ,
 where mpst denotes the NS monetary policy surprise measure in a 30-minute window bracketing the FOMC
 announcement. Bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses;  denotes statistical significance at the 1%
 level. See notes to Table 1 and text for details.


 the percent change in the S&P 500 stock price index in a 30-minute window surrounding each
 FOMC announcement:


                            log S&P500t =  +  targett +  patht + t                                    (8)


 and
                                  log S&P500t =  +  mpst + t .                                        (9)

       The results are reported in Table 5. The first set of columns in each row reports the
 estimated coefficients  and  and the R2 from regression (8), while the last two columns
 report the coefficient  and the R2 from regression (9). As in previous tables, bootstrapped



                                                    26
standard errors from 10,000 bootstrap replications are reported in parentheses beneath each
coefficient, to account for the generated regressors in (8)­(9). The four panels (A) through (D)
report results for each of the four samples considered in Table 1.20
       The results are very much in line with Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), although the mea-
sures of monetary policy surprises in Table 5 are somewhat different. A one percentage point
surprise increase in the federal funds rate target (in the first column) causes stock prices to fall
about 3­4 percent, consistent with the estimates in Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), G¨
                                                                                  urkaynak
et al. (2005b), and others.21 A surprise increase in forward guidance (that raises the one-
year-ahead expected federal funds rate by one percentage point) causes stock prices to fall
about 2­3 percent, consistent with G¨
                                    urkaynak et al. (2005b), D'Amico and Farka (2011), and
Swanson (2019).22 An increase in the NS monetary policy surprise that raises the one-year
Treasury yield by one percentage point has an even larger, 6­8 percent negative effect on
stock prices, roughly equal to the combined target and path factor effects from the first set
of columns. All of the estimated coefficients in Table 5 are highly statistically significant over
all of the sample periods considered.
       The high statistical significance in Table 5 and the robustness of the coefficients across
samples contrast sharply with the Blue Chip survey regressions in Table 1. In Table 5, there is
no question that the U.S. stock market responds negatively, on average, to a monetary policy
tightening surprise. By itself, this result is not surprising--it corresponds to the conventional
wisdom described in Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) and others. But compared to Table 1, it
poses a challenge for the Fed information effect story: if the Fed information effect is true,
and information shocks have a positive effect on stock prices, as described by Jarocinski and
Karadi (2020) and Cieslak and Schrimpf (2019), then why are the results in Table 5 so strongly
and consistently negative? Those results suggest that, if there is a Fed information effect, then
it must not be very large on average.
  20
     The number of observations in each panel of Table 5 is somewhat larger than in Table 1 because we do
not need to drop announcements that occur in the first 2­3 business days of each month (or 7 days for the NS
replication sample), as we did for the Blue Chip survey regressions. The results are very similar if we do drop
those observations.
  21
     See also D'Amico and Farka (2011) and Swanson (2019).
  22
     Note that the estimates in G¨ urkaynak et al. (2005b) for the path factor were negative but statistically
insignificant, while our extended sample produces a strongly significant coefficient, in line with D'Amico and
Farka (2011) and Swanson (2019).




                                                      27
Table 6: Ten Most Influential Observations in Nakamura-Steinsson GDP Forecast Regression

                             Effect on     MP surprise      BCrevt ,       log        bus. cycle
                Date         t-statistic     mpst            GDP         S&P500t      indicator
              9/2007           0.554         -0.138          -0.2          1.33         -0.29
              1/2008           0.351         -0.076          -0.3          0.76         -0.81
              6/2003           0.312          0.099          0.133        -0.27         -0.38
              3/2001           0.291         -0.059          -0.3         -0.68         -1.45
              4/2008           0.278         -0.055          -0.3          0.31         -1.52
              11/1999          0.240          0.068          0.167        -0.42          0.86
              1/2004           0.224          0.088           0.1         -0.97          0.38
              5/1999           0.224          0.073          0.133        -1.44          0.19
              12/1995          0.207         -0.036          -0.3          0.26         -0.08
              3/1997           0.155          0.051          0.133        -0.67          0.80
Ten most influential observations in Nakamura-Steinsson regression (3), as measured by the change in the
t-statistic due to inclusion vs. exclusion of the observation. Also shown is the NS measure of the monetary
policy surprise mpst , the change in the Blue Chip consensus forecast of real GDP (BCrevt ), the 30-minute-
window response of the S&P 500 to the FOMC announcement, and the monthly business cycle indicator from
Brave et al. (2019). See text for details.


4.2      Market Responses to Influential FOMC Announcements

Perhaps the Fed information effect is small on average, but is very important on a few special
dates. To investigate this possibility, Table 6 reports the ten most influential observations in
the Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) GDP regression from Table 1 and Figure 1, over their
original sample. These are the ten observations that provide by far the most evidence for a
Fed information effect in their regressions and in Figure 1.
       The ten observations in Table 6 are ordered by their contribution to the t-statistic in
regression (3), reported in the second column.23 The first column of the table reports the
month and year of each observation (the first eight of these are also labeled in Figure 1). The
Nakamura-Steinsson (NS) measure of the monetary policy surprise for each announcement
is reported in the third column, followed by the change in the Blue Chip forecast for GDP
that month, the percent change in the S&P 500 stock price index in the 30-minute window
bracketing the announcement, and the BBK index for that month in the last column. For
simplicity, we focus on the Blue Chip GDP forecast revisions in Table 6, but for every obser-
vation in the table, the inflation forecast revision has the same sign as the GDP revision, and
  23
    This "Effect on t-statistic" is computed as the difference between the t-statistic for the coefficient  in
regression (3) including vs. excluding that one observation from the sample.




                                                     28
Table 7: Stock Market Response to Ten Most "Information-Laden" FOMC Announcements

               first princip. comp.
                   MP surprise            R2
       (A) Ten most information-laden observations in NS sample, from Table 6 (N = 10)
                    -8.04           0.64
                      (2.13)

       (B) NS sample, excluding the ten observations from Table 6 (N = 136)
                    -4.96           0.11
                      (1.24)

Coefficient  from regressions  log S&P500t =  +  mpst + t , where t indexes the FOMC announcements
described in each panel, mpst denotes the NS monetary policy surprise in a 30-minute window bracketing
the FOMC announcement, and  log S&P500t denotes the percent change in the S&P 500 over the same
30-minute window. Standard errors in parentheses;  denotes statistical significance at the 1% level. See
notes to Table 5 and text for details.


the unemployment forecast revision has the opposite sign.
       By construction, the ten observations in Table 6 display a positive relationship between
the NS monetary policy surprises and Blue Chip GDP forecast revisions, because these are the
ten observations that are the most important for the Fed information effect result in Figure 1
and panel (A) of Table 1. But even for these ten supposedly very information-laden FOMC
announcements, the relationship between the monetary policy surprise and the stock market
response is strongly negative in nine out of the ten cases.24
       Table 7 reports the results from applying regression (9) to these ten information-laden
observations and to the rest of the NS sample excluding those ten observations. If a Fed
information effect were present, then the stock market should respond positively--or, at least,
less negatively--to these ten announcements compared to the rest of the NS sample. In fact,
the opposite is true: the stock market responded even more negatively on these ten dates
than it did for the NS sample as a whole. Apparently, the stock market did not view these
ten FOMC announcements as being very informative about the state of the economy.
       In contrast to the Fed information effect, the Fed response to news channel is consistent
  24
    The exception is the FOMC announcement on March 20, 2001, which is also emphasized by Jarocinski and
Karadi (2020). On this date, the FOMC cut interest rates by 50bp, but many market participants had hoped
for a 75bp cut and were disappointed (e.g., Wall Street Journal, 2001b), leading to a surprise change in the
federal funds rate of +7bp. The stock market fell strongly in response to this hawkish surprise, but fed funds
futures contracts for May through August fell by 6­10bp as market participants increased the probability of
future easings, which led to a perverse negative value for mpst on that date.



                                                     29
with all of the evidence in Tables 5­7. The last column of Table 6 reports the Brave et al.
(2019) index of the state of the business cycle. Note that all five observations in Table 6 with
negative policy surprises and downward GDP forecast revisions occurred when the economy
was weak. In all five of these cases, the FOMC cut the federal funds rate in response to the
weak economy, but the market was partly surprised by these decisions, as measured by the
monetary policy surprise. In response to the monetary policy easings, the stock market rallied
strongly in four out of the five cases, consistent with standard predictions of the effects of
monetary policy on stocks (e.g., Bernanke and Kuttner, 2005). For the five positive monetary
policy surprises in Table 6, the same observations hold, but in the opposite direction.25



5       High-Frequency Private Sector Forecast Evidence
One of the main advantages of financial market data, such as stock prices, is that it is available
at high frequency, which allows us to focus on how a given asset price responds to a single
important event in isolation, such as an FOMC announcement. By contrast, the Blue Chip
survey of forecasters is conducted only once per month, so it's impossible to isolate the effects
of an FOMC announcement on Blue Chip forecasts using those data.
       In this section, we present new data from private sector forecasters that does allow us to
isolate the effects of FOMC announcements on their forecasts. First, we obtained daily "GDP
tracking" forecasts of real GDP from Macroeconomic Advisers, a multiple-award-winning par-
ticipant in the Blue Chip survey of forecasters.26 These daily forecasts allow us to see how
Macroeconomic Advisers revised its real GDP forecast on the days of FOMC announcements,
and compare those revisions to other days on which other economic data was released.
       Second, we contacted the Chief Economist of every participating firm in the Blue Chip
survey of forecasters, and asked them directly how they revise their real GDP, unemployment,
and inflation forecasts in response to FOMC announcements.
  25
      In June 2003, the unemployment rate was high despite the improving economy and the Fed cut the federal
funds rate in response, but by less than the markets had expected, resulting in a surprise monetary policy
tightening on the day of the FOMC announcement. The intuition is otherwise the same.
   26
      Macroeconomic Advisers won Blue Chip's Lawrence Klein award for forecast accuracy in two different
years, and was named by The Wall Street Journal as the most accurate macroeconomic forecaster of 2017.




                                                    30
   Figure 3: Macroeconomic Advisers 2011Q1 Real GDP Tracking Estimate, April 2011




Source:   Macroeconomic Advisers public blog,   http://macroadvisers.blogspot.com/2011/04/
q1-gdp-advance-estimate-is-18-02-pp.html.



                                           31
5.1      Macroeconomic Advisers GDP Tracking Estimates

Macroeconomic Advisers (MA) is a private firm that has specialized in macroeconomic fore-
casting and analysis since 1982. In 2017 they were purchased by IHS Markit and are now
known as Macroeconomic Advisers by IHS Markit. One of the many products they offer is
a daily "GDP Tracking" estimate of current-quarter and next-quarter real GDP. Figure 3
provides an example of their current-quarter GDP Tracking estimate for 2011Q1 from the
company's public blog in April 2011.27 Each month, the GDP Tracking report begins with
a base Macroeconomic Advisers forecast for current-quarter real GDP growth. (Note that
because real GDP for 2011Q1 is not released by the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis until
the end of April 2011, it is still referred to as "current-quarter" GDP tracking by MA in April
2011.) That base forecast is then updated after every major macroeconomic data release that
month. For example, when the monthly retail sales report from the U.S. Census Bureau for
March 2011 came in substantially stronger than expected on April 13, 2011, MA revised up
its forecast for 2011Q1 Personal Consumption Expenditures from 1.8 percent to 2.3 percent
growth, implying an upward revision to their 2011Q1 real GDP growth forecast from 1.5 per-
cent to 1.8 percent. They make analogous revisions for each of the other statistical releases
listed in the figure. A quick glance over the statistics in Figure 3 reveals, however, that the
FOMC announcement on April 27, 2011, is not listed. Apparently, the FOMC announcement
on that date was not informative for MA's current-quarter real GDP forecast at that time.
       Of course, one might worry that April 2011 was special, or that the FOMC announcement
did affect MA's forecast of real GDP in future quarters, just not in the current quarter. To
resolve these questions, we obtained copies of MA's current-quarter and next-quarter GDP
Tracking forecasts for every month from January 2002 to December 2019. Over that 18-year
period, we found that MA never revised its current-quarter or next-quarter GDP forecast in
response to an FOMC announcement. This suggests that the Fed information effect is very
small, at least for this one multiple-award-winning Blue Chip forecaster.
 27
      See http://macroadvisers.blogspot.com/2011/04/q1-gdp-advance-estimate-is-18-02-pp.html.




                                               32
5.2      New Survey of Individual Blue Chip Forecasters

One might still worry that Macroeconomic Advisers only reports daily GDP Tracking forecasts
for the current and next quarters, or that MA is only one firm that is not representative of the
Blue Chip panel of forecasters more generally. To address these concerns, we conducted our
own survey of all 52 individual forecasting firms in the Blue Chip panel to ask them directly
how they revise their forecasts in response to FOMC announcements.
       We began by collecting the contact information for the Chief Economist for each of the
52 forecasting firms in the Blue Chip panel as of July 2019. The vast majority of these Chief
Economists hold a Ph.D. from a highly ranked economics department, and several of them
have previous experience as economists working within the Federal Reserve System.28 Each
Chief Economist typically oversees a team of several economists who assist with the forecast
and other economic analysis provided to clients.
       We sent each Chief Economist a brief email with our survey questions, provided in Ap-
pendix A. The goal of the survey was to find out whether Blue Chip forecasters revise their
forecasts for real GDP, unemployment, and/or inflation in response to FOMC announcements
and, if so, in which direction they revise those forecasts. Note that FOMC announcements
consist of several components, including the federal funds rate decision itself, the FOMC state-
ment, and sometimes a "dot plot" forecast of the FOMC's views regarding the appropriate
path for the federal funds rate over the next two years, and an "SEP" Summary of the FOMC's
own Economic Projections for GDP, unemployment, and inflation for the next two years. It's
possible that the Blue Chip forecasters respond differently to different components of these
FOMC announcements: for example, the change in the federal funds rate might be viewed as
a "pure monetary policy" shock, while the FOMC statement might have a significant informa-
tional component, and the SEP might even be viewed as a "pure information" shock, since it
explicitly communicates the FOMC's own forecast of macroeconomic variables. To allow for
this kind of heterogeneity, we broke our survey question into four components, asking how the
forecaster responds to each of: 1) changes in the federal funds rate, 2) the FOMC statement,
3) the "dot plot", and 4) the FOMC's SEP forecasts.
       The results of our survey are summarized in Table 8. Overall, we received 36 responses out
  28
    For example, Lewis Alexander of Nomura, Seth Carpenter of UBS, Julia Coronado of MacroPolicy Per-
spectives, and Dean Maki of Point72 Asset Management each worked at the Federal Reserve Board for many
years, while Carl Tannenbaum of Northern Trust worked at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.


                                                 33
Table 8: Blue Chip Forecaster Responses to FOMC Announcements: Results from Our Survey

                                                             Response to hawkish surprise in:
                                                     fed funds rate FOMC statement "dot plot"
 Do not revise GDP forecast                                13                   16                 14
 Revise GDP forecast downward                              18                   15                 18
 Revise GDP forecast, but direction
                                                            5                   5                   4
  depends on other factors
 Revise GDP forecast upward                                 0                   0                   0

                                                             Response to FOMC's Summary of
                                                               Economic Projections (SEP)

 Do not revise GDP forecast                                                     24
 Revise GDP forecast towards SEP forecast
                                                                                4
   of GDP if substantially different
 Use SEP to help forecast fed funds rate,                                       3
   effect on GDP standard
 Use SEP to help forecast fed funds rate,
                                                                                1
   effect on GDP depends on other factors
 Revise GDP, but revision depends on
                                                                                2
   multiple factors

Number of private-sector forecasting firms (out of 36 total) reporting how they revise their GDP forecast
in response to four main components of FOMC announcements: the federal funds rate, FOMC statement,
FOMC "dot plot" projection of future federal funds rates, and FOMC "SEP" forecast of future real GDP,
unemployment, and inflation. Two survey respondents did not provide answers for how they respond to the
SEP forecasts. See text for details.


of 52 possible, a response rate of about 70 percent. Many forecasters noted that they rarely
revised their forecast in response to FOMC announcements because the FOMC typically
communicated the outcome of each meeting well in advance through speeches by FOMC
members. Table 8 nevertheless reports in which direction they revise their GDP forecasts
in those rare instances when the FOMC announcement is a surprise. Note that we focus
on revisions to GDP forecasts in Table 8 for simplicity, but in every case survey respondents
noted that they would revise inflation in the same direction and unemployment in the opposite
direction to GDP, consistent with standard macroeconomic models; similarly, Table 8 reports
results for hawkish surprises, but in every case respondents noted that they would revise in
the opposite direction for dovish surprises. The top panel of Table 8 reports how respondents


                                                   34
revised their GDP forecasts in response to a hawkish surprise in the federal funds rate, the
FOMC statement, and the "dot plot" of federal funds rate projections. The bottom panel
reports how respondents revised their GDP forecasts in response to the FOMC's SEP forecasts
of GDP, unemployment, and inflation.
     There are several important points to take away from Table 8. First, a large majority of
the survey respondents, 24 out of 34, do not revise their forecasts in response to the SEP.29
This observation directly contradicts the existence of a Fed information effect--after all, the
FOMC is explicitly communicating its GDP, unemployment, and inflation forecasts to the
public through the SEP and a large majority of the Blue Chip forecasters simply do not find
that information useful.30
     Second, Macroeconomic Advisers is not an outlier: many survey respondents do not revise
their GDP (or unemployment or inflation) forecasts in response to any component of FOMC
announcements. Of the 36 respondents, 13 do not revise their forecasts in response to changes
in the funds rate, 16 do not revise in response to the FOMC statement, 14 do not revise in
response to the dot plot, and 24 do not revise in response to the SEP (as mentioned above).
The overlap across these groups is substantial, so there are 13 respondents who do not revise
their forecasts in response to any component of FOMC announcements. This is surprising,
given that standard macroeconomic models and VARs imply that tighter monetary policy
should cause GDP to fall slightly over the next several quarters. Our survey respondents
gave several different reasons for their unresponsiveness to FOMC announcements: Some
forecasters said that the announcements have not been a surprise for many, many years and
are just not informative about monetary policy, relative to FOMC member speeches and press
conferences.31 Other forecasters said that if they were surprised by an FOMC announcement,
  29
     Two of our survey respondents did not report how they revise their forecasts in response to the SEP,
leaving us with 34 observations instead of 36 for this question.
  30
     For example, one forecaster commented that "I trust my outlook more than the Fed's. . . Their forecasting
ability is pretty poor." Another noted, "My view is that the Fed does not have superior information. . . The
FOMC forecast tends to be off by a lot." Other forecasters said, "We tend to find that the Fed has no better
information advantage over economists like myself. . . In fact, what we have found many times is Fed forecasts
(per the SEP) tend to be somewhat stale," and "I would be responding to the change in the policy outlook,
not to the possibility that the Fed `knew' something that I did not." Even one of the respondents who does
revise their GDP forecast in response to the SEP noted that "We would not be updating our forecasts because
we think the SEP forecasts are good. But if we think they signal something about future policy and portend
a market shock then we might change some forecasts in anticipation of that."
  31
     For example, one forecaster said, "I have not been surprised by an FOMC announcement since well before
2008 (including January 2008 [a 75bp intermeeting interest rate cut])." A second noted, "In the end, we
are likely to get more information from speeches and press conferences than we are from the statement, the



                                                     35
then they viewed that surprise as an FOMC "mistake" that the FOMC would later have to
unwind, resulting in no net change to the GDP forecast.32 A few forecasters said that they
could find only very small effects of changes in interest rates on GDP, so that changes in the
federal funds rate or dot plot just didn't have any significant effect on their forecast.33
     The third main point to take away from Table 8 is that, of our survey respondents who do
revise their forecasts in response to FOMC announcements, the vast majority (18 out of 23)
revise those forecasts in the standard way--that is, a hawkish monetary policy surprise causes
them to revise their GDP forecast downward. In contrast, none of our survey respondents said
that they would revise their GDP forecast upward, directly contradicting the predictions in
Campbell et al. (2012) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2018). However, five forecasters did say
that their GDP forecast revision would depend on other factors.34 Although this last group of
5 forecasters does allow for the existence of an information effect, and one of those respondents
even explicitly raised that possibility, those forecasters are vastly outnumbered (by about 18­5
or 31­5) by respondents who say they simply do not revise their forecasts in the way that
the Fed information effect would require. In fact, several of these latter forecasters explicitly
commented on the Fed's SEP forecasts as being "somewhat stale", "pretty poor", "off by a
lot", or "not. . . good" (see footnote 30). Given this huge imbalance, it's essentially impossible
for the Blue Chip consensus forecast to contain a significant Fed information effect.
decision, or the dots. So by the time we get those things, it tends to be relatively `old news', if you will." A
third stated, "I make my forecasts based on the data, not Fed assumptions. I haven't been surprised by them
in a very long time."
   32
      One forecaster explained, "My view is that the Fed does not have superior information. As a result, over
time, if my forecast is right and the Fed's action at some meeting is wrong, they will come to see the forecast
as `true' and adjust policy in response." A second stated, "If we think the Fed is about to make a decision
that is inconsistent with our expected outlook, we often think that will lead to a change in financial conditions
that will in turn push the Fed back to where we think is appropriate for the economy."
   33
      For example, "I could never find an effect of interest rates on any component of investment except resi-
dential [which was too small to have a significant effect on the GDP forecast]."
   34
      For example, one forecaster said "There is no simple answer to that question, it depends on what else
is happening." Another stated that they would ask themselves, "Does the Fed know something?" A third
forecaster said, "If the Fed was particularly concerned with maintaining price stability or. . . curbing rising
inflation expectations then we might lower our GDP forecast. . . [but] If such a policy stance reduced the
volatility in inflation or inflation expectations [as measured by TIPS vs. nominal Treasuries] then we might
raise our GDP forecast as a result."




                                                       36
6       Forecast Accuracy: Fed vs. Blue Chip
To motivate the existence of a Fed information effect, many authors have argued that the
Fed produces better forecasts than the private sector. For example, Romer and Romer (2000)
note that "the Federal Reserve commits far more resources to forecasting than even the largest
commercial forecasters. As a result, it is able to produce superior forecasts from publicly avail-
able information," (p. 437). However, Faust et al. (2004a) point out that markets aggregate
information, as discussed in detail by Hayek (1945) and Grossman (1981, 1989), and there
are very large, very liquid markets that are closely tied to interest rate and inflation forecasts,
such as the markets for nominal and real Treasury bonds, inflation swaps, and interest rate
futures, options, and swaps. Private-sector forecasters follow these markets closely, so it would
be very surprising if the Fed's forecasts of these variables was substantially better than the
private sector's. Although the market for GDP forecasts is not as large or liquid as those for
interest rate and inflation forecasts, GDP forecasts are nevertheless closely tied to the future
paths of interest rates, stock prices, and credit spreads, so again it would be surprising if the
Fed's forecast for GDP was substantially better than the private sector's. In other words, the
information aggregation taking place in the markets should be substantial, and the private
sector as a whole devotes vastly more resources to forecasting than does the Federal Reserve.
       In this section, we conduct a detailed comparison of Blue Chip (BC) vs. Federal Reserve
forecasts of unemployment, GDP, and inflation. The Fed's internal forecasts are produced
as part of the "Greenbook" a few days prior to each scheduled FOMC meeting, and those
Greenbook (GB) forecasts are made available to the public with a five-year lag.35 We have
data for the GB and BC forecasts from January 1980 to December 2013, for a total of 274
forecast dates.
       To compare the BC forecasts to the GB forecasts, we need to deal with the fact that the
frequency and publication dates of these two forecast series differ: the BC survey is conducted
monthly at the beginning of each month, while the GB forecasts are made eight times per year
before each scheduled FOMC meeting, which can occur at any point within a month. For our
baseline results, below, we match each GB forecast with whichever BC forecast is the closest;
  35
    Beginning in June 2010, the Fed's separate "Greenbook" and "Bluebook" documents were combined into a
single "Tealbook". For simplicity, we use the term "Greenbook forecast" to refer to the Fed's internal forecast
throughout our sample, even though the Greenbook was replaced by the Tealbook from June 2010 onward.




                                                      37
this BC forecast could have been made either before or after the corresponding GB forecast,
depending on whether that particular GB forecast was made closer to the beginning or the
end of the month. As a result, the BC forecasts have a slight informational advantage over
the GB for 124 of the GB forecast dates, whereas the GB forecasts have a slight informational
advantage over BC for the other 150 forecast dates. In the Appendix, we report results for the
alternative schemes of always comparing the GB forecast to the previous BC forecast (giving
the GB an informational advantage), or always comparing the GB forecast to the next BC
forecast (giving BC an informational advantage).
       We obtain the corresponding macroeconomic data releases from the St. Louis Fed's FRED
database. For real GDP growth and CPI inflation, forecasts are made for quarterly growth
rates at an annualized rate, whereas the unemployment rate forecasts are made for the quar-
terly average value. We consider forecast horizons of zero (i.e., nowcasts) to three quarters
ahead, as well as forecasts of the average realized values over these four quarters.
       We estimate "encompassing regressions" similar to those of Romer and Romer (2000),

                                          ^ tGB
                               Xt+h =  +  X          ^ BC
                                             +h|t +  Xt+h|t + t+h ,                                        (10)


where the realized value of a macroeconomic variable X in quarter t + h is regressed on
                                                        ^ BC , at time t to see which
                                               ^ GB and X
both the GB and BC forecasts of that variable, X t+h|t    t+h|t

forecast receives more weight, where h denotes the forecast horizon in quarters.36 However,
Sims (2002) cautions against the use of encompassing regressions in this context, because
the forecasts are serially correlated and have very similar information content; instead, Sims
recommends focusing on accuracy measures for each forecast considered separately. Thus,
we also calculate root-mean-squared errors (RMSEs) for each of the BC and GB forecasts
separately, and perform a Diebold and Mariano (1995) test for equal predictive accuracy.
       The results are reported in Table 9. For comparability to previous tables, we focus on
the period since 1990 in Table 9, but results for the longer, 1980­2013 sample are reported in
  36
    To conduct statistical inference we need to account for serial correlation in the forecast errors due to the
overlap in the observations, which depends on the forecast horizon. Like Romer and Romer (2000), we use
the Hansen-Hodrick long-run covariance estimator and, because of our sample frequency, we use 2(h + 1) lags,
where h is the forecast horizon in quarters (and we set h = 3 when we forecast the average over 0-3 quarters).
In quarterly data, the overlap would induce serial correlation in the residuals up to order h + 1; our sample
of GB forecast dates has eight observations per year (the number of FOMC meetings), which implies serial
correlation up to order 2(q + 1).




                                                      38
                    Table 9: Comparison of Greenbook and Blue Chip Forecasts

     Horizon                     RMSEs                               Encompassing Regressions
    (quarters)         GB        BC H0: GB = BC                 GB          BC          R2 H0: GB = BC
   (A) Unemployment rate
         0             0.18      0.17        .412               0.41        0.58        .99        .478
                                                               (.124)      (.124)
         1             0.34      0.34        .831               0.60        0.39        .96        .667
                                                               (.247)      (.254)
         2             0.54      0.53        .842               0.45        0.53        .90        .906
                                                               (.336)      (.345)
         3             0.73      0.73        .952               0.47        0.49        .80        .979
                                                               (.401)      (.402)
     0-3 avg.          0.42      0.42        .923               0.50        0.48        .93        .974
                                                               (.315)      (.318)
   (B) Real GDP growth
         0             1.96      1.97        .741              0.55        0.51         .45        .967
                                                              (.304)      (.467)
         1             2.44      2.32        .030             -0.24        1.45         .22        .079
                                                              (.348)      (.637)
         2             2.46      2.49        .739              0.76       -0.13         .09        .322
                                                              (.377)      (.617)
         3             2.55      2.52        .710              0.76       -0.98         .03        .138
                                                              (.476)      (.807)
     0-3 avg.          1.64      1.60        .447              0.20        0.77         .23        .485
                                                              (.375)      (.499)
   (C) CPI inflation
         0             0.89      1.15        .012              0.92   0.09              .81        .000
                                                              (.107) (.118)
         1             2.01      2.07        .554              0.85 -0.33               .14        .077
                                                              (.315) (.387)
         2             1.92      1.80        .092             -0.12   0.57              .03        .318
                                                              (.322) (.402)
         3             1.96      1.87        .191             -0.20   0.52              .01        .503
                                                              (.499) (.586)
     0-3 avg.          1.13      1.05        .242              0.24   0.34              .19        .899
                                                              (.343) (.405)
Comparison of forecast accuracy for Federal Reserve Greenbook ("GB") and Blue Chip ("BC") forecasts from
1990­2013 (192 observations). Root-mean-squared errors (RMSEs) are reported for each forecast, with a Diebold-
Mariano p-value for the null hypothesis that the forecasts are equally accurate. For encompassing regressions,
the realized value for each macro series is regressed on a constant and both the GB and BC forecasts, and the
table reports the coefficients, the regression R2 , and p-value for the null hypothesis that the coefficients are
equal. Hansen-Hodrick standard errors with 2(h + 1) lags for forecast horizon h are reported in parentheses;  ,

  , and  denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. See text for details.



                                                       39
Appendix Table B.4 and are very similar. The top panel compares the GB and BC forecasts
for the unemployment rate, the middle panel for real GDP growth, and the bottom panel for
CPI inflation.37 The first set of columns compares the RMSEs for the two forecasts, including
a test of the null hypothesis that the two RMSEs are equal. The second set of columns
reports the encompassing regression results, including a test of the null hypothesis that the
two coefficients are equal.
       The main conclusion from Table 9 is that neither the Fed nor the Blue Chip had signif-
icantly better forecasts over this sample. For the unemployment rate, in the top panel, the
two sets of forecasts are essentially identical in terms of their RMSEs, and the encompassing
regressions put essentially equal weight on both forecasts. For real GDP, in the middle panel,
the BC forecast has lower RMSE than GB at horizons of 1 and 3 quarters and for the 0­3
quarter average (and this difference is statistically significant at the 1-quarter-ahead horizon).
At other horizons, the BC and GB forecasts are essentially the same. The encompassing re-
gression results tell a similar story. For CPI inflation, in the bottom panel, the GB has lower
RMSE than BC for the current and 1-quarter-ahead horizons (and the difference is statisti-
cally significant for the current quarter), but the BC forecast has lower RMSE than GB at
the 2- and 3-quarter-ahead horizons and for the 0­3 quarter average (and the difference is
marginally significant at the 10% level for the 2-quarter-ahead horizon). Overall, the BC and
GB forecasts are very similar and perform very comparably. Results in Appendix Table B.4
going back to 1980 lead to very similar conclusions.
       These results suggest that the Fed does not have a systematic forecasting advantage over
the private sector. Although Romer and Romer (2000) found that the Fed's inflation forecasts
outperformed those of the private sector, their sample covered only 12 years, from 1980­1991,
a large part of which was dominated by the Volcker disinflation in the early 1980s. Our sample
in Table 9 is twice as long, is more recent, and excludes the Volcker disinflation, which Faust
et al. (2004a) showed was crucial for the Romers' results.38 Other recent studies also find
that, if the Fed ever had a forecasting advantage, it has eroded over time (Gamber and Smith,
2009; Paul, 2019; Hoesch et al., 2020).
  37
      The R2 for the unemployment rate are naturally much higher (and RMSEs much lower) than for the other
series, because this data series is highly persistent and therefore easier to forecast over the next few quarters.
   38
      Sims (2002) also finds that the Fed predicted future inflation more accurately than the Survey of Pro-
fessional Forecasters, but his sample is only slightly longer than the Romers' and also includes the Volcker
disinflation.



                                                       40
      Our finding that the GB and BC forecasts have very similar accuracy casts doubt on one
of the main arguments for the Fed information effect, that the Fed's macroeconomic forecasts
are materially better than those of the private sector.



7      Learning about the Monetary Policy Rule
Many recent studies have used high-frequency changes in interest rates around FOMC an-
nouncements to estimate the effects of monetary policy on financial markets or the real econ-
omy(e.g., Kuttner, 2001; Cochrane and Piazzesi, 2002; Faust et al., 2004b; G¨
                                                                            urkaynak et al.,
2005a,b; Bernanke and Kuttner, 2005; Campbell et al., 2012; Gertler and Karadi, 2015; Naka-
mura and Steinsson, 2018). The typical assumption in these studies is that a high-frequency
surprise in interest rates represents an exogenous monetary policy shock t , in the notation of
equation (1). In contrast, our empirical results above showed that these high-frequency sur-
prises are predictable ex post with information available prior to the FOMC announcement.
In this section, we present a simple model that illustrates how learning about the monetary
policy rule can lead to precisely this type of predictability. In addition, we use the model
to discuss the practical implications of the Fed response to news channel for measuring the
effects of monetary policy on financial markets and the economy.


7.1     A Simple Model with Imperfect Information

There are two agents in the economy: the private sector and the central bank. The output
gap xt is observed by all agents at each time t, and follows the exogenous AR(1) process


                                        xt = x xt-1 + t ,                                    (11)

                                                                 2
where x  [0, 1) and t is an exogenous shock with t  i.i.d. N (0,   ). Note that, for
simplicity, we assume that the output gap xt evolves exogenously and doesn't depend on the
interest rate or any other factors.
      In each period t, after xt is observed, the central bank sets the interest rate it according
to a linear monetary policy rule,
                                          it = axt + t ,                                     (12)


                                                41
where a > 0 denotes the central bank's responsiveness to the output gap, and t is an exogenous
                           2
shock with t  i.i.d. N (0,   ).
      The parameter a is known by the central bank but is unknown and unobserved by the
private sector; thus, the private sector does not have full information. All other parameters
of the model are known by all agents. The variables xt and it are observed by all agents in
each period t, but t is never observed by the private sector (or else a could be backed out
exactly). Let Ht = {it , xt , it-1 , xt-1 , . . . } denote the history of economic data up until time t.
                                                                              2
      In each period, the private sector starts with prior beliefs a  N (^
                                                                         at , at
                                                                                 ), with moments
                     2
^t = E [a|Ht-1 ] and a
a                     t
                        = Var[a|Ht-1 ]. Once xt is realized, but before the central bank
announces it , the private sector's expectations for current and future interest rates, it+j ,
j = 0, 1, 2, . . . , are


                                                                      ^ t j
                             E it+j |xt , Ht-1 = E axt+j |xt , Ht-1 = a   x xt .                   (13)


After the central bank announces it , the private sector is surprised by the amount


                              mpst  it - E it |xt , Ht-1 = (a - a
                                                                ^t )xt + t .                       (14)


In response to the monetary policy surprise mpst , the private sector optimally updates its be-
liefs about a. Bayesian updating implies that, after observing it , the private sector's posterior
beliefs are
                                                             1
                                        E a|Ht = a
                                                 ^t +           mpst ,                             (15)
                                                             xt
                 x2  2
                  t at
where          x2  2 + 2 .   Similarly, the private sector updates its forecast for the future path of
                t at   

interest rates it+j , j = 1, 2, . . . , with revisions


                 E it+j |Ht - E it+j |xt , Ht-1 = E axt+j |Ht - E axt+j |xt , Ht-1

                                                   =              ^ t j
                                                         E a|Ht - a   x xt                         (16)

                                                   = j
                                                     x  mpst .                                     (17)


Thus, in response to a monetary policy surprise at time t, the private sector passes a fraction 
of this surprise through to expected future interest rates, and revises its interest rate forecasts



                                                       42
by an amount that diminishes at the rate x .
       Obviously, in this simple environment with a fixed value of a, the private sector's beliefs
would converge to the true value of a asymptotically, but at time t, the private sector has only
the estimate a
             ^t . We don't take a stand on why a is unknown, but there are several possible
motivations: First, it takes time to learn the true value of a, so private sector uncertainty may
simply reflect that the true value has not yet been learned. Second, a may change over time
(due to changes in the Fed chair or Fed policy), which would prevent the private sector from
ever learning a to a high degree of accuracy. Third, in the case of a nonlinear monetary policy
rule, as in equation (1), any nonlinearities may be especially difficult to learn and may prevent
the private sector from knowing how the Fed will respond to extreme values of xt (because
extreme values occur so rarely). Regardless of the source of uncertainty about a, our simple
model gives insights into the effects of monetary policy surprises, which we turn to next.


7.2      Implications for High-Frequency Regressions

The simple model described above helps to highlight several important points. First, the
monetary policy surprise in (14) could be due either to a traditional, exogenous monetary
policy shock t , or to the private sector not knowing the central bank's monetary policy
rule--a difference between a and a
                                 ^t . If a is known (so that a
                                                             ^t = a always holds, and  = 0),
then mpst = t every period and the monetary policy surprise is completely unpredictable.
However, if the private sector does not know the true policy rule (^
                                                                   at = a), then the monetary
policy surprise mpst can be correlated with xt ex post, even though it is unpredictable ex
ante.39 For example, if a
                        ^t < a for several periods, then the monetary policy surprise mpst
will be positively correlated with xt ex post over that sample, as was the case in our empirical
analysis above.40 Thus, our model illustrates that, due to learning by the private sector about
the policy rule, monetary policy surprises can be predictable ex post, even if forecasts about
it are rational and optimal ex ante and there are no risk premia.
  39
      To see that the policy surprise is unpredictable ex ante, note that E [mpst |xt , Ht-1 ] = 0, meaning that the
private sector's forecast of mpst cannot be improved using any variable observed before it is determined.
   40
      For example, the Fed under Greenspan may have responded to output by more than it did under Volcker;
the Fed under Bernanke may have responded by more than under Greenspan; and the Fed under Yellen may
have responded by more than under Bernanke. (For example, Chairman Greenspan noted in 2001 that "The
Federal Reserve has seen the need to respond more aggressively than had been our wont in earlier decades"
(Wall Street Journal, 2001a).) In this case, the private sector's estimate of at is likely to have been persistently
less than a throughout our sample.


                                                        43
       A second key takeaway from the model is that an exogenous shock t has exactly the same
effects on current and future interest rates as a monetary policy surprise mpst more generally.
This can be seen in equation (17), in which interest rate expectations respond to mpst (and
not to t separately), and in equation (14), in which the effects of an exogenous shock t
manifest themselves entirely through mpst , because the private sector never observes t by
itself. Thus, if an econometrician uses high-frequency data on monetary policy surprises mpst
to estimate the effects of those surprises on the yield curve (or other asset prices), then those
effects are also representative of the effects of an exogenous monetary policy shock t on the
yield curve (or other asset prices).
       In other words, even though the high-frequency monetary policy surprises mpst may be
correlated with macroeconomic data xt ex post, they still can be used, without adjustment,
to estimate the effects of an exogenous change in monetary policy t on asset prices in a
narrow window of time around an FOMC announcement. This implies that the high-frequency
empirical estimates in Kuttner (2001), G¨
                                        urkaynak et al. (2005a,b), Bernanke and Kuttner
(2005), and others reliably answer the question: What are the effects of an exogenous change
in monetary policy (t ) on the yield curve, the stock market, and other asset prices?41


7.3      Implications for High-Frequency Identification of VARs

In addition to the high-frequency financial market regressions discussed above, a second im-
portant application of high-frequency monetary policy surprises is to the identification of the
effects of monetary policy shocks in monthly VARs (e.g., Cochrane and Piazzesi, 2002; Faust
et al., 2004b; Gertler and Karadi, 2015; Nakamura and Steinsson, 2018). In order to be a valid
external instrument for the monthly monetary policy shock in a VAR, the high-frequency sur-
prise mpst must satisfy two conditions: an instrument relevance condition and an instrument
exogeneity condition (e.g., Stock and Watson, 2012). The first condition is clearly satisfied,
because the high-frequency monetary policy surprise mpst includes the exogenous FOMC
  41
     Of course, one can also orthogonalize the monetary policy surprises mpst by regressing them on xt and
taking the residuals, thus projecting out the ex post correlation of mpst with xt . This provides a more accurate
estimate of the exogenous component t of the monetary policy surprises mpst , but it actually reduces the
efficiency of the high-frequency regressions (17), because yield changes are related to the full monetary policy
surprise mpst and not just the exogenous component t .




                                                       44
announcement day shock t .42
       The more difficult question is whether the high-frequency monetary policy surprise mpst
is orthogonal to the other, non-monetary structural shocks in the monthly VAR, such as an
exogenous shock to output. According to our simple model above, mpst is correlated with
the output gap xt ex post, as in equation (14). Thus, under the timing assumptions of the
simple model--where the central bank sets it as a function of the output gap xt --a structural
output shock is correlated with mpst and the instrument exogeneity condition is violated.
In this case, researchers would need to "project out" the (ex post) correlation by regressing
mpst on macroeconomic data (here, xt ) and using the residuals as the external instrument for
identification, exactly as suggested by Miranda-Agrippino and Ricco (2020).
       However, there are cases where no adjustment of the high-frequency monetary policy
surprise mpst is necessary. For example, if the central bank observes the state of the economy
with a one-month lag, then it sets the interest rate in month t as a function of the output gap
in month t - 1:
                                              it = axt-1 + t .                                             (18)

As a result, the monetary policy surprise is given by


                                        mpst = (a - a
                                                    ^t )xt-1 + t                                           (19)


rather than (14). Under this timing assumption, the monetary policy surprise mpst is still
relevant (as it contains t ), but now also satisfies the exogeneity condition, because mpst is
orthogonal to all non-monetary structural shocks in month t. In this case, there is no need to
project out any correlation of mpst with the macroeconomic data; the unadjusted monetary
policy surprises mpst can be used as an external instrument for identification in the VAR.43
       Either of the timing assumptions above could be operative in practice. The Fed responds
to publicly available information about the state of the economy, but some of that information
  42
     The high-frequency FOMC announcement day shock t should be an important component of the news
about monetary policy in month t, even though it is not necessarily equal to the monthly monetary policy
shock in the VAR. Equality may fail if there is other news about monetary policy that arrives over the course of
the month, such as through speeches by the Fed chair or other FOMC members, which may convey information
about monetary policy to the markets on days other than FOMC announcement dates.
  43
     Although note that there is nothing wrong with orthogonalizing the monetary policy surprises by projecting
out correlations with current and lagged macroeconomic data, as suggested by Miranda-Agrippino and Ricco
(2020); it is just not necessary to do so.



                                                      45
(such as nonfarm payrolls) is observed with a one-month lag, while other information (such as
the stock market) is observed within the month (up to the day before the FOMC announce-
ment). Our empirical estimates in Section 3, above, suggest that the Fed responds to both
types of information. In order for the high-frequency monetary policy surprise mpst to be a
valid external instrument, the correlation with the time-t information in the VAR (such as the
stock market) would have to be projected out.
    Our simple learning model above provides a useful framework for thinking about the Fed
response to news channel and its implications for applied work using high-frequency monetary
policy surprises. Although the model makes several simplifying assumptions--such as a single
state variable, linear monetary policy rule, and exogeneity of the state variable--these should
have only minor effects on the conclusions. Finally, although we assumed a complete absence
of a Fed information effect in the model, in line with our empirical results, one could extend
it along the lines of Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) to incorporate such an effect. However,
the Fed response to news channel is sufficient by itself to explain all of our empirical findings.



8    Conclusions
We review and investigate the "Fed information effect" and find little or no support for it
in the data. First, we show that standard Blue Chip forecast regressions along the lines of
Campbell et al. (2012) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) are sensitive to sample period and
to the variable being forecast (unemployment, GDP, or inflation). If the Fed information effect
were true, this would suggest that the information content of FOMC announcements changes
over time, sometimes being informative about GDP but not unemployment or inflation, other
times being informative about unemployment but not GDP or inflation, etc. Instead of a Fed
information effect, we show that these results are consistent with a "Fed response to news"
channel, in which both the Fed and private sector forecasters are responding to publicly
available economic news that is released in the runup to FOMC announcements.
    We then present substantial new evidence that distinguishes between the Fed information
effect and the Fed response to news channels. First, we show that economic news released in the
days between the Blue Chip survey and the FOMC announcement is an omitted variable in the
Blue Chip forecast regressions, and that this omitted variable is correlated with the monetary


                                               46
policy surprise. Controlling for this economic news renders the statistical relationship between
policy surprises and Blue Chip forecast revisions statistically insignificant and reverses its sign
back to what would be predicted by standard macroeconomic models.
    Second, we show that FOMC monetary policy surprises have a strong, highly statistically
significant negative effect on stock prices in the 30-minute window surrounding FOMC an-
nouncements; moreover, this effect is even more negative for the most influential dates in the
Blue Chip forecast regressions. These findings suggest that the stock market does not view
FOMC announcements as having a significant information component, but they are consistent
with the Fed response to news channel.
    Third, we conducted our own survey of all 52 forecasters in the Blue Chip panel, and asked
them directly how they revise their GDP, unemployment, and inflation forecasts in response
to FOMC announcements. According to our survey, the vast majority of Blue Chip forecasters
either do not revise their GDP, unemployment, and inflation forecasts in response to FOMC
announcements, or revise them in the standard (i.e., non-information-effect) direction. This
is direct evidence, from the Blue Chip forecasters themselves, that there is little or no Fed
information effect. In contrast, our Fed response to news channel is consistent with their
responses.
    We conclude that the Fed and private sector forecasters are both simply responding to
the same public news released in the days and weeks leading up to each FOMC announcement,
and that there is little if any role for a Fed information effect.
    As a check on our results, we also conducted a detailed comparison of Blue Chip and
Federal Reserve internal ("Greenbook") forecasts and verified that those forecasts are very
similar, with neither forecast outperforming the other.
    Finally, we present a simple model of the Fed response to news channel that demon-
strates that high-frequency monetary policy surprises can be used in standard high-frequency
regressions, without correction or adjustment, to estimate the effects of monetary policy on
the yield curve and other asset prices. For high-frequency identification of the effects of mon-
etary policy in a VAR, correcting the high-frequency monetary policy surprises for the Fed
response to news channel may be necessary in some cases, depending on the variables and
timing assumptions in the VAR.




                                                47
References
Andersen, Torben and Tim Bollerslev (1998) "Deutsche Mark-Dollar Volatility: Intraday Ac-
 tivity Patterns, Macroeconomic Announcements, and Longer Run Dependencies," Journal
 of Finance, Vol. 53, pp. 219­265.

Barro, Robert J. (1976) "Rational Expectations and the Role of Monetary Policy," Journal
  of Monetary Economics, Vol. 2, pp. 1­32.

Barro, Robert J. and David B. Gordon (1983) "Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Model
  of Monetary Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 12, pp. 101­121.

Bernanke, Ben S. and Kenneth N. Kuttner (2005) "What Explains the Stock Market's Reac-
  tion to Federal Reserve Policy?" Journal of Finance, Vol. 60, pp. 1221­1257.

Brave, Scott A., R. Andrew Butters, and David Kelley (2019) "A new "big data" index of
  U.S. economic activity," Economic Perspectives, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

Campbell, Jeffrey R., Charles L. Evans, Jonas D. M. Fisher, and Alejandro Justiniano (2012)
  "Macroeconomic Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance," Brookings Papers on Eco-
  nomic Activity, pp. 1­54.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans (1996) "The Effects of
 Monetary Policy Shocks: Evidence From the Flow of Funds," The Review of Economics
 and Statistics, Vol. 78, pp. 16­34.

Cieslak, Anna (2018) "Short-rate expectations and unexpected returns in treasury bonds,"
  Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 31, pp. 3265­3306.

Cieslak, Anna and Andreas Schrimpf (2019) "Non-Monetary News in Central Bank Commu-
  nication," Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.

Cochrane, John H. and Monika Piazzesi (2002) "The Fed and Interest Rates--A High-
  Frequency Identification," American Economic Review, Vol. 92, pp. 90­95.

D'Amico, Stefania and Mira Farka (2011) "The Fed and the Stock Market: An Identification
  Based on Intraday Futures Data," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, Vol. 29,
  pp. 126­137.

Diebold, Francis X. and Robert S. Mariano (1995) "Comparing Predictive Accuracy," Journal
  of Business & Economic Statistics, Vol. 13, pp. 253­263.

Faust, Jon, Eric T. Swanson, and Jonathan H. Wright (2004a) "Do Federal Reserve Policy
  Surprises Reveal Superior Information about the Economy?" Contributions to Macroeco-
  nomics, Vol. 4.

Faust, Jon, Eric T. Swanson, and Jonathan H. Wright (2004b) "Identifying VARs Based on
  High Frequency Futures Data," Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 51, pp. 1107­1131.

Gamber, Edward N and Julie K Smith (2009) "Are the Feds inflation forecasts still superior
 to the private sectors?" Journal of Macroeconomics, Vol. 31, pp. 240­251.


                                            48
Gertler, Mark and Peter Karadi (2015) "Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and Eco-
 nomic Activity," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Vol. 7, pp. 44­76.

Grossman, Sanford (1981) "An Introduction to the Theory of Rational Expectations under
  Asymmetric Information," Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 48, pp. 541­559.

Grossman, Sanford (1989) The Informational Role of Prices, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1st
  edition.

G¨
 urkaynak, Refet S., Brian P. Sack, and Eric T. Swanson (2005a) "The Sensitivity of Long-
 Term Interest Rates to Economic News: Evidence and Implications for Macroeconomic
 Models," American Economic Review, Vol. 95, pp. 425­436.

G¨
 urkaynak, Refet S., Brian P. Sack, and Eric T. Swanson (2005b) "Do Actions Speak Louder
 Than Words? The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements,"
 International Journal of Central Banking, Vol. 1, pp. 55­93.

G¨
 urkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright (2007) "The U.S. Treasury Yield
 Curve: 1961 to the Present," Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 54, pp. 2291­2304.

Hayek, Friedrich (1945) "The Use of Knowledge in Society," American Economic Review, Vol.
  35, pp. 519­530.

Hoesch, Lukas, Barabara Rossi, and Tatevik Sekhposyan (2020) "Has the Information Channel
 of Monetary Policy Disappeared? Revisiting the Empirical Evidence," CEPR Discussion
 Paper, Vol. 14456.

Jarocinski, Marek and Peter Karadi (2020) "Deconstructing Monetary Policy Surprises--The
  Role of Information Shocks," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Vol. 12, pp.
  1­43.

Karnaukh, Nina (2019) "Growth Forecasts and News about Future Monetary Policy."

Kuttner, Kenneth N. (2001) "Monetary Policy Surprises and Interest Rates: Evidence from
 the Fed Funds Futures Market," Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 47, pp. 523­544.

Lunsford, Kurt (2019) "Policy Language and Information Effects in the Early Days of Federal
  Reserve Forward Guidance," working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.

Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia (2017) "Unsurprising Shocks: Information, Premia, and the Mon-
 etary Transmission," Staff Working Paper 626, Bank of England.

Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia and Giovanni Ricco (2020) "The Transmission of Monetary Policy
 Shocks," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.

Nakamura, Emi and J´  on Steinsson (2018) "High-Frequency Identification of Monetary Non-
  Neutrality: The Information Effect," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 133, pp. 1283­
  1330.

Paul, Pascal (2019) "The Time-Varying Effect of Monetary Policy on Asset Prices," Review
  of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.


                                            49
Piazzesi, Monika and Eric Swanson (2008) "Futures Prices as Risk-Adjusted Forecasts of
  Monetary Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 55, pp. 677­691.

Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer (2000) "Federal Reserve Information and the Be-
  havior of Interest Rates," American Economic Review, Vol. 90, pp. 429­457.

Sargent, Thomas J. and Neil Wallace (1975) ""Rational" Expectations, the Optimal Monetary
  Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 83,
  pp. 241­254.

Sims, Christopher A (2002) "The Role of Models and Probabilities in the Monetary Policy
  Process," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 2002, pp. 1­40.

Stock, James and Mark Watson (2012) "Disentangling the Channels of the 2007­09 Recession,"
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. Spring, pp. 81­130.

Swanson, Eric T. (2019) "Measuring the Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance and
  Asset Purchases on Financial Markets," NBER Working Paper #23311.

Wall Street Journal, The (2001a) "Fed Cuts Interest Rates by Half a Point in Attempt to
 Spur Second-Half Revival," WSJ.com, Vol. March 20.

Wall Street Journal, The (2001b) "Stocks Retreat Amid Fed Fallout, Gloomy Outlook,"
 WSJ.com, Vol. March 21, David Runk.




                                           50
Appendix
A     Design of Our Survey of Blue Chip Economists
We sent the following email with our survey questions to the Chief Economists of all 52
professional forecasting firms in the Blue Chip survey panel:

     Subject: quick question about how FOMC announcements affect your forecast
     Dear [Recipient]:
     An important question in Macroeconomics is whether and how FOMC announcements
     affect private sector economic forecasts. We (Michael Bauer and Eric Swanson) are
     working on a new research paper that looks at this important question and would be
     extremely interested to learn how FOMC announcements affect your own group's
     forecasts of GDP, unemployment, and inflation . We'd be very grateful if you
     would take a minute to answer the following, very brief one-time survey on this topic:

       1. Do you revise any of your macroeconomic forecasts (GDP, unemployment, or in-
          flation) in response to the FOMCs federal funds rate decision ? If yes, please
          briefly explain which forecasts you revise and which direction you revise those fore-
          casts (i.e., do you revise them up or down if the decision is more hawkish/dovish
          than expected).
       2. Do you revise any of your macroeconomic forecasts in response to the FOMC
          statement ? If yes, please briefly explain which forecasts you revise, and which
          direction you revise those forecasts (i.e., do you revise them up or down if the
          statement is more hawkish/dovish than expected).
       3. Do you revise any of your macroeconomic forecasts in response to the dot plot
          released by the FOMC in the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP)? If yes,
          please briefly explain which forecasts you revise and which direction you revise those
          forecasts (i.e., do you revise them up or down if the dot plot is more hawkish/dovish
          than expected)
       4. Do you revise any of your macroeconomic forecasts in response to SEP forecasts
          of GDP, unemployment, and inflation in the Summary of Economic Projec-
          tions? If yes, please briefly explain which FOMC forecasts matter for you, which
          forecasts you revise, and which direction you revise those forecasts.

     Individual responses will be kept confidential, and we will only publish aggregated results.
     We'd like to emphasize that there are no right or wrong answers to these questions--
     there are theoretical reasons why the answers could go in any direction, or no direction.
     The point of our research is to find out what professional forecasters like yourself do in
     practice. If you are interested, we'd be happy to send you our overall results and analysis
     of this topic once we have a draft of our paper. Thank you very much for your time and
     help on this.

     We conducted our survey throughout July and August 2019. If we did not receive an
initial response, we followed up with two brief reminder emails, with about 1.5 weeks between
each email. In the end, we received 36 responses, for a response rate of about 70%.


                                                 51
     When the initial response was vague regarding the direction in which they revise their
forecasts (e.g., just replying "yes" to the questions) we followed up with a brief email asking for
clarification on the direction of those revisions, which cleared up the ambiguity. Sometimes,
the initial response was a brief "no" to each of the four questions; in these cases, we followed
up with a brief email asking for clarification regarding whether they viewed surprise FOMC
announcements as having no significant effect on GDP, unemployment, or inflation vs. whether
they viewed surprise FOMC announcements as having a significant effect but were just rarely
surprised in practice over the past several years. Again, our followup email always resolved
the ambiguity.


B     Additional Empirical Results
Tables B.1 and B.2 contain additional results for the information effect regressions in Section 2.
Table B.3 shows results for additional regression specifications controlling for economic news,
discussed in Section 3. Tables B.4, B.5, and B.6 show additional comparisons of the accuracy
of Greenbook and Blue Chip forecasts, discussed in Section 6.




                                                52
        Table B.1: "Fed Information Effect" Regression Results (White standard errors)

                                             (1) Campbell et al.               (2) Nakamura-Steinsson
                                      fed funds rate      fwd. guidance            first princip. comp.
       Blue Chip forecast             "target factor"     "path factor"               of futures rates
(A) Replication sample: 1/1990­6/2007 for Campbell et al., 1/1995­3/2014 for NS (N = 129, 120)
       unemployment rate                   -0.11              -0.23                       -0.17
                                           (.097)             (.113)                      (.267)
       real GDP growth                      0.10               0.27                        0.92
                                           (.118)             (.136)                      (.323)
       CPI inflation                        0.15               0.10                        0.06
                                           (.096)             (.176)                      (.253)
(B) Full sample: 1/1990­6/2019, including unscheduled announcements (N = 217)
       unemployment rate                   -0.16              -0.24                       -0.39
                                           (.137)             (.115)                      (.196)
       real GDP growth                      0.16               0.14                        0.33
                                           (.184)             (.126)                      (.257)
       CPI inflation                        0.16               0.08                        0.29
                                           (.096)             (.120)                      (.143)
(C) Full sample: 1/1990­6/2019, excluding unscheduled announcements (N = 206)
       unemployment rate                     0.07             -0.32                       -0.30
                                            (.268)            (.125)                      (.313)
       real GDP growth                       0.13              0.37                        0.54
                                            (.301)            (.144)                      (.356)
       CPI inflation                         0.12              0.13                        0.27
                                            (.156)            (.128)                      (.198)
(D) Full sample: 1/1990­6/2019, excl. unsched. announcements and 7/2008­6/2009 (N = 198)
       unemployment rate                   -0.02              -0.20                       -0.25
                                           (.159)             (.096)                      (.176)
       real GDP growth                      0.29               0.32                        0.64
                                           (.178)             (.124)                      (.219)
       CPI inflation                        0.15               0.06                        0.20
                                           (.130)             (.141)                      (.184)

 Same as Table 1, except that asymptotic heteroskedasticity-consistent (White) standard errors are reported
 rather than bootstrapped standard errors. See notes to Table 1 for details.




                                                     53
               Table B.2: "Fed Information Effect" Regression Results (1994-2019)

                                             (1) Campbell et al.               (2) Nakamura-Steinsson
                                      fed funds rate      fwd. guidance            first princip. comp.
       Blue Chip forecast             "target factor"     "path factor"               of futures rates
(A) Replication sample: 1/1994­6/2007 for Campbell et al., 1/1995­3/2014 for NS (N = 95, 120)
       unemployment rate                     0.02             -0.24                       -0.17
                                            (.109)            (.135)                      (.288)
       real GDP growth                       0.32              0.37                        0.92
                                            (.138)            (.169)                      (.368)
       CPI inflation                         0.11              0.12                        0.06
                                            (.115)            (.142)                      (.253)
(B) Full sample: 1/1994­6/2019, including unscheduled announcements (N = 182)
       unemployment rate                   -0.07              -0.26                       -0.32
                                           (.133)             (.159)                      (.231)
       real GDP growth                      0.29               0.24                        0.62
                                           (.182)             (.220)                      (.330)
       CPI inflation                        0.11               0.12                        0.26
                                           (.106)             (.125)                      (.227)
(C) Full sample: 1/1994­6/2019, excluding unscheduled announcements (N = 179)
       unemployment rate                     0.14             -0.35                       -0.28
                                            (.198)            (.159)                      (.264)
       real GDP growth                       0.14              0.40                        0.60
                                            (.246)            (.199)                      (.353)
       CPI inflation                         0.11              0.15                        0.27
                                            (.153)            (.123)                      (.286)
(D) Full sample: 1/1994­6/2019, excl. unsched. announcements and 7/2008­6/2009 (N = 171)
       unemployment rate                     0.05             -0.23                       -0.23
                                            (.162)            (.132)                      (.213)
       real GDP growth                       0.33              0.36                        0.71
                                            (.200)            (.179)                      (.258)
       CPI inflation                         0.14              0.07                        0.20
                                            (.138)            (.112)                      (.186)

 Same as Table 1 except that samples begin in February 1994 rather than January 1990. Bootstrapped standard
 errors in parentheses. See notes to Table 1 for details.




                                                     54
 Table B.3: Economic News Drives Out the "Fed Information Effect" (excluding Brave et al.
 index from news)

                                             (1) Campbell et al.               (2) Nakamura-Steinsson
                                       fed funds rate     fwd. guidance            first princip. comp.
      Blue Chip forecast               "target factor"    "path factor"               "MP surprise"
(A) Replication sample: 1/1990­6/2007 for Campbell et al., 1/1995­3/2014 for NS (N = 129, 120)
      Unemployment rate                      .028             -.115                         .147
                                            (.098)            (.137)                       (.268)
      Real GDP growth                        .019              .003                         .618
                                            (.179)            (.365)                       (.321)
(B) Full sample: 1/1990­6/2019, including unscheduled announcements (N = 217)
      Unemployment rate                     .087              -.010                        .117
                                           (.097)             (.127)                      (.170)
      Real GDP growth                      -.089              -.211                       -.270
                                           (.155)             (.202)                      (.269)
(C) Full sample: 1/1990­6/2019, excluding unscheduled announcements (N = 206)
      Unemployment rate                     .312               .002                        .306
                                           (.152)             (.134)                      (.215)
      Real GDP growth                      -.058              -.114                       -.182
                                           (.209)             (.182)                      (.292)
(D) Full sample: 1/1990­6/2019, excl. unsched. announcements and 7/2008­6/2009 (N = 198)
      Unemployment rate                      .076            -0.076                       -.021
                                            (.139)            (.118)                      (.188)
      Real GDP growth                        .261              .081                        .326
                                            (.179)            (.154)                      (.248)
 Same as Table 4 except that the variable newst excludes the Brave et al. (2019) index. See notes to Table 4
 for details.




                                                     55
             Table B.4: Comparison of Greenbook and Blue Chip Forecasts, 1980­2013

     Horizon                    RMSEs                              Encompassing regressions
    (quarters)         GB       BC H0: GB = BC                GB          BC         R2 H0: GB = BC
   (A) Unemployment rate
         0            0.20     0.22         .280             0.65        0.34        .99        .194
                                                            (.117)      (.117)
         1            0.39     0.41         .322             0.77        0.21        .95        .190
                                                            (.209)      (.213)
         2            0.59     0.61         .660             0.74        0.23        .88        .417
                                                            (.320)      (.312)
         3            0.76     0.79         .644             0.81        0.13        .79        .404
                                                            (.414)      (.404)
     0-3 avg.         0.46     0.47         .539             0.79        0.18        .93        .276
                                                            (.282)      (.276)
   (B) Real GDP growth
         0            2.17     2.32         .032             1.07 -0.10              .50        .047
                                                            (.249) (.348)
         1            2.94     2.80         .247            -0.09   1.09             .19        .284
                                                            (.515) (.619)
         2            2.87     2.89         .931             0.64  -0.20             .07        .508
                                                            (.495) (.854)
         3            2.98     2.89         .681             0.18  -0.19             .00        .769
                                                            (.514) (.882)
     0-3 avg.         1.83     1.78         .675             0.38   0.55             .27        .892
                                                            (.531) (.724)
   (C) CPI inflation
         0            1.10     1.40         .102             0.98 -0.11              .86        .000
                                                            (.106) (.098)
                                                                  
         1            2.21     2.15         .580             0.73  -0.06             .46        .160
                                                            (.250) (.314)
         2            2.07     1.94         .123             0.16   0.58             .37        .468
                                                            (.236) (.352)
         3            2.02     2.04         .841             0.64   0.12             .36        .517
                                                            (.345) (.463)
     0-3 avg.         1.21     1.20         .884             0.89 -0.16              .73        .038
                                                            (.245) (.270)
Same as Table 9 except sample runs from 1980­2013 (274 observations). See notes to Table 9 for details.




                                                     56
Table B.5: Comparison of Greenbook and Blue Chip Forecasts, Blue Chip always after Greenbook

    Horizon                   RMSEs                                Encompassing regressions
   (quarters)         GB      BC H0: GB = BC               GB           BC        R2 H0: GB = BC
  (A) Unemployment rate
        0            0.25     0.23       .097              0.26        0.73       .98       .166
                                                          (.169)      (.172)
        1            0.44     0.42       .235              0.15        0.84       .94       .318
                                                          (.338)      (.345)
        2            0.63     0.61       .535              0.30        0.68       .87       .685
                                                          (.469)      (.467)
        3            0.81     0.80       .919              0.53        0.41       .77       .915
                                                          (.559)      (.548)
    0-3 avg.         0.50     0.48       .490              0.30        0.67       .91       .688
                                                          (.462)      (.459)
  (B) Real GDP growth
        0            2.50     2.44       .405             0.20         0.85       .39       .369
                                                         (.333)       (.408)
        1            2.81     2.69       .174            -0.04         0.95       .16       .235
                                                         (.397)       (.475)
        2            2.99     2.93       .736             0.37        -0.04       .02       .749
                                                         (.517)       (.845)
        3            3.00     2.96       .871             0.30        -0.26       .01       .667
                                                         (.551)       (.879)
    0-3 avg.         1.88     1.80       .512             0.24         0.65       .23       .743
                                                         (.555)       (.752)
  (C) CPI inflation
        0            1.43     1.54       .478              0.77        0.11       .77       .030
                                                          (.159)      (.152)
        1            2.23     2.03       .038              0.31        0.42       .41       .872
                                                          (.302)      (.422)
        2            2.10     2.00       .140              0.00        0.81       .37       .292
                                                          (.321)      (.456)
        3            2.06     2.09       .719              0.64        0.12       .34       .555
                                                          (.389)      (.504)
    0-3 avg.         1.25     1.19       .520              0.60        0.18       .70       .535
                                                          (.336)      (.353)
Same as Table B.4, except that BC forecasts are always after the GB forecast, giving BC an informational
advantage over GB. Sample runs from 1980­2013 (274 observations). See notes to Table 9 for details.




                                                  57
 Table B.6: Comparison of Greenbook and Blue Chip Forecasts, Blue Chip always before Greenbook

    Horizon                    RMSEs                             Encompassing regressions
   (quarters)         GB      BC H0: GB = BC                GB         BC          R2 H0: GB = BC
  (A) Unemployment rate
        0            0.17     0.21        .002             0.82       0.16         .99       .002
                                                          (.105)     (.105)
        1            0.35     0.41        .005             1.07      -0.11         .96       .000
                                                          (.158)     (.162)
        2            0.55     0.60        .153             1.02      -0.07         .90       .009
                                                          (.212)     (.207)
        3            0.73     0.80        .266             1.06      -0.14         .81       .034
                                                          (.291)     (.277)
    0-3 avg.         0.42     0.47        .064             1.09      -0.14         .94       .000
                                                          (.175)     (.173)
  (B) Real GDP growth
        0            2.10     2.35        .004             1.23 -0.33              .55       .000
                                                          (.158) (.221)
        1            2.82     2.75        .578             0.33   0.62             .19       .715
                                                          (.387) (.466)
        2            2.88     2.89        .941             0.63  -0.19             .07       .479
                                                          (.430) (.795)
        3            3.00     2.91        .694             0.21  -0.10             .01       .783
                                                          (.471) (.805)
    0-3 avg.         1.77     1.74        .792             0.50   0.41             .29       .918
                                                          (.387) (.550)
  (C) CPI inflation
        0            0.95     1.30        .022             1.01 -0.13              .89       .000
                                                          (.134) (.136)
                                                                
        1            1.97     1.95        .897             0.77  -0.11             .51       .107
                                                          (.254) (.298)
        2            2.18     2.03        .070             0.01   0.78             .36       .264
                                                          (.306) (.395)
        3            2.08     2.07        .926             0.35   0.40             .33       .958
                                                          (.445) (.588)
    0-3 avg.         1.16     1.12        .617             0.70   0.06             .74       .171
                                                          (.210) (.268)
Same as Table B.4, except that BC forecasts are always before the GB forecast, giving GB an informational
advantage over BC. Sample runs from 1980­2013 (274 observations). See notes to Table 9 for details.




                                                   58
