                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    SPENDING LESS AFTER (SEEMINGLY) BAD NEWS

                                         Mark Garmaise
                                          Yaron Levi
                                         Hanno Lustig

                                       Working Paper 27010
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27010


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




The authors would like to thank seminar participants at Stanford, UCLA and USC for their
comments. We also especially want to acknowledge comments received from Laura Blattner,
Peter DeMarzo, Darrell Duffie, Ben Hebert, Bob Hodrick, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Amit Seru,
Ken Singleton, Lulu Wang, and Jeff Zwiebel. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Mark Garmaise, Yaron Levi, and Hanno Lustig. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Spending Less After (Seemingly) Bad News
Mark Garmaise, Yaron Levi, and Hanno Lustig
NBER Working Paper No. 27010
April 2020, Revised July 2020
JEL No. D12,G4,G51

                                         ABSTRACT

Using high-frequency spending data, we show that household consumption displays excess
sensitivity to salient macro-economic news, even when the news is not real. When the announced
local unemployment rate reaches a 12-month maximum, local news coverage of unemployment
increases and local consumers reduce their discretionary spending by 2% relative to consumers in
areas with the same macro-economic fundamentals. The consumption of low-income households
displays greater excess sensitivity to salience. The decrease in spending is not reversed in
subsequent months; instead, negative news persistently reduces future spending for two to four
months. Households in treated areas act as if they are more financially constrained than those in
untreated areas with the same fundamentals.

Mark Garmaise                                   Hanno Lustig
Anderson Graduate School of Management          Stanford Graduate School of Business
C416 Entrepreneurs Hall                         655 Knight Way
110 Westwood Plaza                              Stanford, CA 94305
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481                      and NBER
mark.garmaise@anderson.ucla.edu                 hlustig@stanford.edu

Yaron Levi
University of Southern California
3670 Trousdale Parkway, Suite 308
Bridge Hall 308, MC-0804
Los Angeles, CA 90089
ylevi@marshall.usc.edu
I       Introduction

        During the Great Recession of 2008-2009, the growth rate of U.S. consumption experienced

the steepest and most persistent decline since World War II. The consumption drop was especially

pronounced for non-durables and services (see De Nardi, French, and Benson, 2012). The year-over-

year growth rate of non-durable consumption declined from 6.6% in the second quarter of 2008 to

-6.1% in the first quarter of 2009. The decline in consumption growth was preceded by a dramatic

drop in the Michigan consumer confidence index. A consumption growth crash of this size presents

a quantitative challenge to standard intertemporal models in which the stand-in household has a

strong motive to smooth consumption.

        Among the leading candidate explanations for this consumption drop are binding financial

constraints (Mian, Rao, and Sufi, 2013), wealth effects and downward revisions of expected future

income growth (De Nardi, French, and Benson, 2012), and increased uncertainty (Pistaferri, 2016).

We find that consumers respond to the salience of adverse macro announcements about their

region by cutting back on discretionary spending even when the news is uninformative about local

macro-economic fundamentals. Consumers whose areas are treated with negative economic news,

especially the poorer ones with lower educational attainment, act as if they are more financially

constrained than those in untreated areas, even though underlying economic conditions do not differ

across these regions. Seemingly bad news contributes significantly to sharp consumption drops.1

        The steady release of salient bad news may have played a causal role in the precipitous

decline of U.S. aggregate consumption at the onset of the Great Recession as well as during the

slow subsequent recovery. The U.S. counties which experienced the largest build-up in household

debt before the Great Recession also experienced the largest declines in house prices during the
    1
    On March 18, 2020, during the onset of the COVID-19 crisis, the U.S. Department of Labor sent guidance to state
labor agencies asking for a delay in the release of unemployment claims data (Wall Street Journal, March 19, 2020,
"Trump Administration Asks States to Keep Quiet About Jobless Figures"). While the large drop in U.S. household
spending at the onset of the pandemic is largely due to the lockdown itself (see, e.g. Cox, Ganong, Noel, Vavra,
Wong, Farrell, and Greig, 2020, for recent evidence), salient news effects may have contributed to the unprecedented
decline in spending.



                                                         1
                                Figure 1. U.S. Aggregate Consumption Growth During the Great Recession



                                                   Consumer Sentiment      Consumption         Non-durables     Services

                              10.0                                                                                           100.0



                                                                                                                             90.0
                               5.0
    Growth rate (YoY, in %)




                                                                                                                             80.0




                                                                                                                                     Cons. Sentiment
                               0.0

                                                                                                                             70.0


                               -5.0
                                                                                                                             60.0



                              -10.0                                                                                          50.0
                                      2008-01-01      2010-01-01    2012-01-01    2014-01-01       2016-01-01   2018-01-01



University of Michigan: Consumer Sentiment, Index 1966:Q1=100, Quarterly, Not Seasonally Adjusted. Personal Consumption
Expenditures; Personal Consumption Expenditures: Nondurable Goods; Personal Consumption Expenditures: Services. All
consumption measures in Percent Change from Year Ago, Quarterly, Seasonally Adjusted Annual Rate.




                                                                             2
crisis. These counties were also more likely to witness large declines in consumer spending and

non-tradeable employment (Mian, Rao, and Sufi, 2013; Mian and Sufi, 2014). This evidence

has been cited in support of the financial constraints explanation, but these counties were also

exposed to a steady stream of salient, bad economic news during the crisis that had a causal

effect on consumption. Our estimates imply that a salience-induced decline in consumer sentiment

contributed significantly to the cross-sectional correlation between declines in regional consumption,

employment, and house price declines during the Great Recession.

       The empirically observed behavior of household consumption is at odds with the predictions

of standard neo-classical models of intertemporal optimization. Consumption growth responds

to predictable income shocks, in violation of the permanent income hypothesis (Flavin, 1981;

Blinder, Deaton, Hall, and Hubbard, 1985; Parker, 1999; Parker, Souleles, Johnson, and McClelland,

2013; Ganong and Noel, 2019); consumption growth also responds to idiosyncratic, insurable

income shocks, in contrast to the predictions of the workhorse complete markets model (Cochrane,

1991; Attanasio, 1999).2        We document a new form of deviation from standard models: the

excess sensitivity of consumption to salient macro news. A rational household with standard,

expected utility that is optimizing intertemporally would not change its consumption in response

to salient news unrelated to actual fundamentals. Our findings cannot be attributed to binding

household liquidity or solvency constraints, because the actual household income and balance sheet

is unaffected by the salience of the announcements.

       We use local unemployment announcements at the CBSA (Core Based Statistical Area) level

as a natural experiment to measure the response of consumption to salient news in high-frequency

household spending data. We begin by showing that U.S. newspapers devote attention to local

unemployment announcements; there is substantially more coverage of unemployment on dates close

to local unemployment releases. The announcement of a 12-month local unemployment maximum,
   2
    There is a large literature which measures the response of household consumption growth to idiosyncratic income
shocks to gauge how far from the complete markets benchmark the economy operates (Kaplan and Violante, 2010).




                                                        3
in particular, is a salient event for local media that leads to especially heightened coverage. In fact,

we find that local news interest in unemployment peaks specifically at 12-month maximums and

not at maximums of other durations.

      We study the impact of 12-month maximums and the accompanying local media spotlight on

unemployment by comparing the spending of households in areas that reach a new local maximum

to the spending of similar households living in areas with the same macro fundamentals that do

not reach a new maximum. We show that an announcement of a 12-month maximum in the

local unemployment rate leads to a 2% drop in discretionary spending in the two weeks after

the announcement. Announcement of near maximums have no effect on spending, while false

maximums (announced maximums that are later revised to be non-maximums) have the same

impact on consumers as actual maximums. Spending drops after 12-month maximums but not

after maximums at other horizons. Together these results provide evidence of a behavioral response

by consumers to salient economic news.

      An increase in the unemployment rate represents an increase in the uncertainty faced by

households. Households face a higher probability of job loss. An unemployment spell can be thought

of as the realization of household-specific income disaster with potentially long-lasting effects on

earnings (see Guvenen, Karahan, Ozkan, and Song, 2017). Standard consumer theory predicts that

consumers respond to an increase in uncertainty by immediately reducing spending and saving

more instead (Kimball, 1990; Ganong and Noel, 2019). As a result of precautionary savings, a

perceived increase in uncertainty in a CBSA would lead to a local reduction in consumption. In

addition, households may rationally revise their expectations of future earnings downwards and

reduce consumption accordingly, in line with the permanent income hypothesis, when a higher

unemployment rate is announced. Our empirical design allows us to rule out these alternative,

rational explanations of our findings: Consumers are not responding to the actual unemployment

rate, but to the announced rate, and then only when the announcement is salient. Even when we




                                                   4
control for the announced unemployment rate or for whether the rate is strictly increasing, we find

that 12-month maximums have an additional effect in reducing spending.

      The announcement also affects financing behavior. We find that a 12-month maximum

announcement leads to a 3.6% decrease in credit card repayments. While consumers appear to

be drawing down their existing credit lines, we find that they are also less likely to initiate new

loans. Salient negative unemployment announcements lead consumers to behave as if the financing

environment has quickly become more challenging. Consumers also reduce their cash withdrawals,

which is another mechanism for maintaining higher balances in their bank accounts. The consumers

in the treated areas act as if they are more financially constrained than those in the control areas.3

      Our findings shed new light on previous studies which have found that the marginal propensity

to consume out of wealth was larger for poorer households/areas, using regional consumption data

(see Mian, Rao, and Sufi, 2013, for a recent example). Using household-level spending data we

find that the consumption response to the salience of macro news varies across households. The

resulting decline in household consumption is significantly larger for households with lower income

and education. The heterogeneity in excess sensitivity that we describe, however, is a behavioral

response that cannot be attributed to binding liquidity or solvency constraints or to news about

fundamentals.

      Households in the areas that are subject to unemployment maximum announcements reduce

their spending significantly and persistently. We find no evidence that the consumption drop is

subsequently reversed. On the contrary, we show that a single 12-month maximum unemployment

announcement lowers future household discretionary spending at a horizon of two to four months.

For areas that achieve a 12-month maximum every month over a five month period, the drop in

current spending is close to 5%. Between 2007 and 2018, 119 of the 373 CBSAs experienced such
   3
     Using high-frequency consumption data, Baugh, Ben-David, Park, and Parker (2018) also document that
households act as if they are financially constrained by increasing consumption when they get an expected tax
refund but smoothing consumption when they face payments.




                                                     5
a sequence of 5 consecutive 12-month maximum unemployment announcements, mostly in 2009

during the Great Recession.

       Our findings are most convincingly explained by theories of consumer inattention.                                   If

consumers were always attentive, salience would not have any effect on their actual spending. There

is a wealth of empirical evidence to suggest that investors and consumers do not pay attention to

all information relevant to their optimization problem (see DellaVigna, 2009, for an overview). For

example, investors do not constantly monitor their portfolios (Brunnermeier and Nagel, 2008).

       There are two inattention-related interpretations of our findings. In the first interpretation,

inattentive households respond to salient macro announcements because they learn about the

macro-economic conditions from local media coverage, which in turn responds to salience.

Households can rationally choose to be inattentive to some information when they are subject to

constraints on information processing (Sims, 2003; Reis, 2006; Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp,

2009; Gabaix and Laibson, 2001). Consistent with this supply-side hypothesis, we find that the

local news coverage of salient announcements is more intense, presumably because consumers have

a taste for salient news.4 Newspapers cater to the tastes of their readers (Gentzkow and Shapiro,

2010).5 Our work shows that this slant in the news supply may generate a media-driven effect on

household spending.

       In the second, more behavioral interpretation, consumers are hardwired to respond more to

salient news. Selectively inattentive households choose when they pay attention; their reactions are

not driven by the volume of news but rather by its salience. The large response to salient adverse

news, especially by low-income households, is consistent with reference-dependent utility models

(Koszegi and Rabin, 2006, 2007, 2009; Pagel, 2017).6 As shown by Pagel (2017), consumers with
   4
     Social networks may play a role in propagating salient news (see Bailey, Cao, Kuchler, and Stroebel, 2018; Bailey,
Cao, Kuchler, Stroebel, and Wong, 2018, for evidence on social networks and household spending) Shiller (2019) uses
historical examples to show how economic stories can propagate like a virus. He refers to this as narrative economics.
   5
     Recent work by Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2012, 2013) attributes a central role to salience in their approach
to consumer choice. Our evidence lends support to this novel approach.
   6
     In this class of models, utility is directly affected by the revision of expectations relative to a benchmark. Receiving




                                                             6
reference-dependent utility are less attentive in response to fundamental negative aggregate shocks.

Furthermore, low-income households are generally less attentive than high-income households,

because of the concavity of utility. Consistent with this demand-side hypothesis, we find much

stronger evidence of salience sensitivity for low-income households, and households who are less

financially sophisticated.

       Our paper is one of the first to provide causal evidence of a quantitatively important sentiment

effect of non-fundamental news on consumption growth. In the time series, measures of consumer

confidence and consumption growth are strongly correlated contemporaneously. Further, there

is some empirical evidence that measures of consumer confidence predict future consumption

growth (Carroll, Fuhrer, and Wilcox, 1994; Ludvigson, 2004). One explanation is that consumer

confidence simply reflects the households' expectations of future fundamentals; another explanation

is that changes in consumer confidence lead to changes in consumption growth. Ludvigson (2004)

concludes that these measure have little incremental forecasting power for consumer spending

beyond traditional macro and financial indicators, but Carroll, Fuhrer, and Wilcox (1994) argue

that there is a pure sentiment effect in consumption, i.e., that declines in sentiment causally lead to

declines in consumption growth. Our work shows a causal effect from sentiment to consumption.

       Our results have important implications for inference in studies with aggregated data. MPCs

estimated using aggregate data may partly measure the consumption response to salient, adverse

economic news, rather than the response to the household's own wealth or income shocks. The

heterogeneity that we uncover in the response to salient news is consistent with the heterogeneity

in the MPC documented in these other studies (see Hurst and Stafford, 2004; Campbell and Cocco,

2007; Attanasio, Leicester, and Wakefield, 2011; Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante, 2016; Guren,

McKay, Nakamura, and Steinsson, 2018; DeFusco, Johnson, and Mondragon, 2020, for recent

evidence on the MPC out of housing wealth).
news causes disutility in expectation, and this effect is larger for low-income households.




                                                           7
                    Figure 2. Population of Sample Consumers Across CBSAs




                                   >10,000           500 - 1,000   150 - 200
                                   3,000 - 10,000    250 - 500     100 - 150
                                   1,000 - 3,000     200 - 250     <100




II    Data

      We study data on the spending of U.S. consumers drawn from information on credit card and

bank account transactions compiled by an online account aggregator.7 The data cover 9,664,860

unique consumers drawn from all 50 U.S. states and the District of Columbia over the period Jan.

1, 2012- Dec. 18, 2018. Figure 2 depicts the number of consumers in the sample across CBSAs.

      We observe transaction data from 24,827,483 bank accounts and 13,720,261 credit card

accounts; consumers hold a mean of 3.99 bank and credit card accounts. The aggregator classifies

transactions into different spending categories. Our main interest is in studying discretionary

spending. Table I lists the spending categories that we include in discretionary spending.

      As we discuss in more detail below, we analyze the impact of unemployment announcements

on consumer spending, and we treat the three days around the announcement as the announcement
  7
    We build on recent work using high frequency consumption data by Gelman, Kariv, Shapiro, Silverman, and
Tadelis (2014); Olafsson and Pagel (2017, 2018); Baugh, Ben-David, Park, and Parker (2018).




                                                    8
interval. We measure spending in two week periods before and after announcement intervals. In

Table II, Panel A we present summary statistics for different spending categories. The data is

aggregated per consumer at the two-week-period level. The mean discretionary spending per period

is $329.1, of which roughly one-third is restaurant expenses. Transactions for jewelry and travel

(which are likely luxury items for many consumers) are observed in a given period with frequencies

of 0.3% and 3.3%, respectively. Average credit card repayments are $1,129.1. We observe that a

new loan is initiated by a consumer with a frequency of 0.5%. We also observe cash withdrawals:

the average cash withdrawal per period is $405.3, and the average number of cash withdrawals is

2.4.

       Table II, Panel B provides some demographic information about the consumers in the data.

The median monthly salary per consumer that we observe is $2,857, which is similar to the $2,809

median monthly personal income in the 2018 data from the Current Population Survey, though our

data do not cover all forms of personal income. Consumers in our data reside in zip codes with a

2010 median home value of $231,300 and a median educational attainment between some college

and an associate's degree. Data from the 2010 American Community Survey display a median

home value of $179,900 and the median educational attainment in the 2010 Census is some college.

The consumers in our data may be wealthier to a moderate degree than the typical U.S. consumer,

but they are broadly similar.

       In order to analyze the dissemination of information about local unemployment

announcements, we consider data on news articles archived on NewsBank (newsbank.com).

NewsBank includes articles from a wide variety of 3,506 national and local newspapers in the

U.S.




                                                9
III     Empirical Specification

      Our aim is to analyze the impact of local unemployment announcements on consumer

spending. Our focus is on announcements that are 12-month maximums, as these announcements

are likely to be particularly salient for consumers.8 The local unemployment announcements we

study are the Metropolitan Area Employment and Unemployment monthly news releases published

by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). These are distinct from the national-level monthly

Employment Situation summaries that are also published by the BLS. The Employment Situation

summaries for a given month tend to be released within roughly a week of the close of that

month, while the Metropolitan Area Employment and Unemployment releases are usually published

about 1 month after the month-end. The release dates for the national and local unemployment

announcements therefore do not generally coincide.

      We assess the news interest in local unemployment announcements by measuring in the

NewsBank database each day the number of articles published in the U.S. press that mention

"unemployment." We define National News Interest to be a day's rank within the calendar year of

that day's U.S.-wide mentions of "unemployment", where the rank is scaled to have a maximum

of one. We consider whether the U.S. press provides greater coverage of unemployment on dates

close to local unemployment announcements by estimating for each day T




               National News InterestT =  (Day near release dateT ) + T + T + T ,                           (1)


where (Day near release dateT ) is an indicator for a day near the release date of a local

unemployment announcement (such as the release date itself or a day within 3 days of the release

date), T are month-year fixed effects, T are day-of-the-week fixed effects and T is an error term.
  8
    Exploiting state-level variation in Germany, Garz (2018) finds that economic news releases that hit salient
milestones have a large effect on the local index of economic perceptions, a measure of consumer confidence, but
Garz does not examine the impact of salient news on consumer spending.




                                                      10
The main coefficient of interest is  which describes the extent to which national news interest in

unemployment is higher on days that are close to the release of local unemployment announcements.

      Local unemployment announcements that are very high, that are new maximums relative

to announcements in previous periods, may attract particular attention from the local media due

to their salience. For each day and CBSA, we define Local News Interest to be the day's rank

within a calendar year (scaled to a maximum of one) of "unemployment" mentions in newspapers

based in the CBSA. We study the impact of a 12-month maximum on News Interest in a CBSA

by estimating the following regression for each CBSA c on day T :




              Local News Interestc,T =  (12-Month Maximumc,T ) + T + c + c,T ,                  (2)


where (12-Month Maximumc,T ) is an indicator for whether the latest unemployment announcement

in CBSA c before (or on) date T was a 12-month maximum, T are fixed effects at the day-month-

year level, c are CBSA fixed effects and c,T are errors. In this regression the main coefficient of

interest is  which describes the degree to which 12-month unemployment maximums elicit unusual

local news interest.

      In order to study the impact of local unemployment announcements on consumer spending,

we make three changes to the news regression specification. First, we treat the announcement date

and subsequent two days as the announcement interval, and we omit it from our spending analysis.

This allows consumers three days to absorb the unemployment announcements and to initiate

any possible shifts in spending. Second, we measure spending decisions over two-week periods,

as consumers do not make spending decisions over a daily horizon (and spending is not typically

posted to bank and credit card accounts immediately, in any case). Third, our consumption data

is at the individual consumer level, not simply at the CBSA level, and we therefore compare the

spending of each consumer before and after the announcement. The two-week spending period



                                                11
length avoids any overlap between the measured post-announcement spending of one month and

the pre-announcement spending of the subsequent month.

        We label a two-week period t that follows an announcement interval as having P ostt = 1 and

a two-week period s that precedes an announcement interval as having P osts = 0. We measure each

consumer's spending separately in the periods preceding and following each announcement interval.

For convenience, we refer to a period immediately preceding an announcement, the announcement

interval and the period immediately following the announcement as all belonging to the same event

window w. Event windows are thus roughly one month in duration. Figure 3 outlines the time

periods just described.

        We study the impact of a 12-month maximum on consumer spending by estimating the

following regression for consumer i who lives in CBSA c(i) in period t within window w(t):




            spendingi,t =  12-Month Maximumc(i),w(t)  P ostt + P ostt + i,w(t) +      i,t ,         (3)



where     12-Month Maximumc(i),w(t)     is an indicator for whether a 12-Month maximum

unemployment rate was announced in CBSA c(i) during the announcement interval that falls

within event window w(t), i,w(t) are fixed effects at the consumer-event window level and     i,t   are

errors. The main coefficient of interest is  ; it describes the impact of an 12-month maximum on

the change in a consumer's spending in the post-announcement period relative to her spending

in the pre-announcement period. We are essentially conducting event studies around the local

unemployment announcement date for each consumer during every event window, and we contrast

the change in spending for consumers who experience an 12-month maximum with the change

exhibited by those who do not. Spending is typically measured in logs of dollar expenditures. We

note that the level of the 12-month maximum is subsumed in the fixed effects. We double cluster



                                                 12
                                             Figure 3. Time Line



                                                                            Local unemployment
                                                                            announcement
           Month over which                                                                      Two-week post
           unemployment is measured                              Two-week prior
                                                                                                 period of spending
                                                                 period of spending
                                                                                                 (Post=1)
                                                                 (Post=0)




 Month                                   Month                                        Month
  0                                       1                                            2




                                      Three-day announcement interval         Event window
                                      (excluded from spending analysis)




all standard errors at the CBSA and time period levels.

     We also consider whether unemployment announcement effects may differ across

heterogeneous groups of consumers with varying characteristics. To analyze this question, we

estimate




                                                         13
              spendingi,t =  12-Month Maximumc(i),w(t)  P ostt  Characteristic



               + 12-Month Maximumc(i),w(t)  P ostt +  P ostt  Characteristic



           +  12-Month Maximumc(i),w(t)  Characteristic +  P ostt + i,w(t) +           i,t .     (4)




      In specification (4) the coefficient of interest is  , which measures the impact of a consumer-

level Characteristic on the spending response to a 12-month maximum. The i,w(t) are fixed effects

at the consumer-event window level.

      We assess the persistence of the effect of local unemployment announcements by regressing the

current level of spending on historical announcements. For these tests we make use only of spending

in the pre-period (P ostt = 0) for a given month and consider how it is affected by announcements

in the previous months. Using the pre-period consumption allows us to avoid any confounding

effects of contemporaneous announcements and provides roughly a two-week lapse from the most

recent announcement, which enables us to study medium-term effects. For lags of up to S months,

we estimate




                          S
          spendingi,t =         s 12-Month Maximumc(i),w(t-s) + i + t + controls + ui,t ,        (5)
                          s=1



where i and t are fixed effects at the consumer and year-month levels, respectively, and ui,t is an

error term; in these tests we are not contrasting spending before and after a specific announcement,

so we employ consumer and year-month effects separately.




                                                   14
IV     Results


A    News Interest and Local Unemployment Announcements


      The empirical specification we propose in Section III considers the impact of a local

unemployment announcement on news interest and consumer spending. We begin by providing

evidence that news outlets offer additional coverage of unemployment in the days following an

announcement. The local news supply responds to the salience of the macro announcements.

      Specifically, as described in equation (1) we regress National News Interest on an indicator

for whether a day is a local unemployment release date along with fixed effects for the month-

year and day of the week.      We find, as shown in the first column of Panel A of Table III,

that release dates are associated with higher National News Interest (coefficient=0.156 and t-

statistic=5.29).   The t-statistic is clustered at the month-year.      This result indicates that

national news interest in unemployment is approximately 15.6 percentage points higher on local

unemployment announcement release dates (the National News Interest lies on the range (0, 1]).

The result in the second column of Panel A shows that interest is also higher, by approximately 8.4

percentage points (t-statistic=5.89), in the period consisting of the release date and the subsequent

three days. As shown in the third column of Panel A, interest is still elevated in the week of the

release date (coefficient=0.067 and t-statistic=5.42), though the level of news interest declines as

time passes after the announcement.

      The results in Panel A of Table III establish that local unemployment release dates are

associated in general with higher news interest in unemployment. The mechanism in Section

III, however, focuses on the behavioral impact of 12-month maximum unemployment rate

announcements. We study the effect of these maximums on consumers by measuring Local News

Interest in "unemployment" and relating it to local unemployment announcements. This analysis

requires information on the local unemployment rate released at the time (not the revised rate),



                                                 15
and these vintage data are provided for the period beginning May 2007 on the St. Louis ALFRED

website.9 We regress Local News Interest on an indicator for whether the last released local

unemployment rate was a 12-month maximum along with fixed effects for the day-month-year

and CBSA, as described in equation (2).

         We find that Local News Interest in unemployment is significantly higher in CBSAs for

which the last local unemployment rate announced was a 12-month maximum (coefficient=0.0148,

t-statistic=3.55), as displayed in the first column of Panel B of Table III. The t-statistic is double

clustered at the CBSA and month-year levels. The coefficient indicates the consumer interest

in unemployment is approximately 1.5 percentage points higher in these CBSAs. The inclusion

of day-month-year fixed effects removes the influence of any national changes in unemployment

rates; we are describing an increase in local news interest in unemployment after a local 12-month

maximum. For a point of contrast, we define near 12-month-maximums to be rates that are within

0.2 percentage points of a maximum but that are not maximums. We show in the second column

of Panel B that near 12-month maximums do not have a significant effect on Local News Interest

(coefficient=0.0029, t-statistic=0.90). The behavioral impact of a maximum is marked.

         It is achieving a maximum that garners news interest, rather than simply the fact that

a maximum is typically a high unemployment rate. We show this by including unemployment

rate fixed effects in our previous specification and present the results in the third column of

Panel B. We find that the 12-month-maximum continues to have a strong effect on Local News

Interest even in this specification (coefficient=0.0091, t-statistic=2.12), while the near 12-month-

maximum again does not (coefficient=0.0009, t-statistic=0.26). That is, when comparing two

identical unemployment rates, one of which is a 12-month maximum and one of which is not, the

former leads to higher Local News Interest.

         Is there something singular about 12-month maximums as opposed to maximums measured
  9
      The data source is https://alfred.stlouisfed.org.




                                                          16
at different horizons? Every maximum at a horizon longer than twelve months is, of course, a

12-month maximum as well. In order to identify the incremental effect of a 12-month maximum

announcement in particular, we consider announcements that are 12-month maximums but that

are not 13-month maximums. This enables us to distinguish 12-month announcement effects from

effects associated with longer horizon maximum announcements. In the first column of Panel

C of Table III we show that Local News Interest is significantly higher (coefficient=0.0155, t-

statistic=3.04) after 12-month maximum announcements that are not 13-month maximums. In

fact, this coefficient roughly matches the 1.5 percentage point effect generated by all 12-month

maximums (as displayed in Panel B), suggesting that the impact of 12-month maximums arises

from their achieving a maximum specifically at a 12-month horizon rather than at a longer horizon.

      We provide further evidence on this point by regressing Local News Interest on 10-month

maximums that are not 11-month maximums and analogously defined variables through to 14-

month maximums that are not 15-month maximums. As shown in the second column of Panel C,

12-month maximums that are not 13-month maximums have a significant effect (coefficient=0.0157,

t-statistic=3.07) while all the other variables have insignificant (and much smaller) coefficients.

Twelve-month maximums appear to capture the imagination of the news media and lead to

increased coverage in ways that maximums at other horizons do not. As we turn to the consumer

spending analysis, we will therefore focus our attention on 12-month maximums.

      These results show that the supply of news is sensitive to the salience of the macro

announcement. This is sensible, given that newspapers are known to cater to the tastes of their

readership (Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2010). Presumably, consumers have a taste for salient news.

As we are about to show, this slant in news coverage impacts household spending decisions.




                                                17
B      Discretionary Spending and Local Unemployment Announcements


       Local unemployment announcements attract the attention of the news. Do they have an

impact on actual spending? We consider this question by measuring discretionary spending for

each consumer in the two-week periods before and following local unemployment announcement

periods and assessing the impact of maximum announcements on the observed change in spending.

We estimate equation (3): in this specification we regress the log of discretionary spending on an

indicator for a 12-month maximum announcement interacted with a post-announcement indicator,

and we include fixed effects at the consumer-event window level. The inclusion of these fixed effects

allows us to isolate the change in spending for a given consumer around a specific announcement.

We measure unemployment rate announcements using the vintage data that specifies the actual

rate announced at the time.

       We find, as displayed in the first column of Table IV, that a 12-month maximum

announcement leads to a 2.0% drop in discretionary spending (the t-statistic, which is double

clustered at the CBSA and time-period levels, is -4.00). This is a quick, sizable response to a

maximum announcement. Within the space of two weeks, consumers undertake a meaningful

reduction in their discretionary spending.10

       Consumers are not simply responding to high unemployment rate announcements. The

interaction of a near 12-month maximum rate announcement with the post-period indicator is

insignificant (coefficient=0.002 and t-statistic=0.40), and its inclusion has little impact on the

estimated change associated with actual announced 12-month maximums (coefficient=-0.020 and

t-statistic=-4.00), as shown in the second column of Table IV. Twelve-month maximums apparently

have a salience for consumers that clearly distinguishes them from near maximums.
  10
    The coefficient on the post-announcement-period indicator of 0.029 (t-statistic=6.98) reflects the fact that the
announcements are often released near the beginning of the subsequent month and consumers spend about 2.9% more
at the beginning of the month than they do at the end of the prior month. Our central coefficient of interest, the
interaction of the post-period indicator with the 12-month maximum indicator, captures the differential discretionary
spending shift of consumers who experience a local unemployment maximum.




                                                         18
         It may be argued that perhaps consumers' responses to local unemployment rate 12-month

maximum announcements are a reaction to underlying economic changes and not to the releases

themselves. It may be, for example, that local economic conditions materially deteriorate in advance

of a 12-month maximum announcement. Consumers who notice this negative economic trend may

engage in an immediate shift in their current spending patterns that is unrelated to any BLS news

release.

         To evaluate this argument, we analyze false 12-month maximums.            These are local

unemployment announcements that are 12-month maximums at the time of announcement but

that are subsequently revised and that, after revision, are revealed to have actually not been a

maximum. We find, as presented in the third column of Table IV, that false 12-month maximums

reduce discretionary spending (coefficient=-0.022 and t-statistic=-3.23) in the same manner as

actual 12-month maximums. This is true despite the fact that we have shown that there is no

response to announced near maximums, and these false maximums typically are, in reality, near

maximums. Consumers appear quite clearly to be responding to the announced unemployment

rates.



C    Maximums at Specific Horizons


         We showed in Table III that news interest is heightened after 12-month maximums that

are not 13-month maximums and that this effect was not observed for similar maximums at

other horizons. We assess whether consumers also respond differently to 12-month maximums

by regressing discretionary spending on an indicator for 12-month maximums that are 13-month

maximums, an indicator for post-announcement periods, the interaction between these two variables

and consumer-event window fixed effects. We find, as shown in the first column of Panel A of Table

V, that consumers spend significantly less (coefficient=-0.023 and t-statistic=-7.83) after 12-month

maximums that are not 13-month maximums. As for news interest, we find that the impact on



                                                19
consumer spending of a 12-month maximum is quite similar in magnitude to the impact of a 12-

month but not 13-month maximum. In column two of Panel A of Table V we show that near

12-month maximums have an insignificant effect on spending and have almost no impact on the

estimated effect of 12-month but not 13-month maximums. The results displayed in the third

column of Panel A show that 10-month but not 11-month maximums through to 14-month but not

15-month maximums all have insignificant effects on consumer spending with the exception that

the impact of 12-month but not 13-month maximums is large and distinctive (coefficient=-0.023

and t-statistic=-7.77).

      We find similar results for false maximums. In Panel B of Table V we show that 12-month

maximums but not 13-month maximums at announcement that were later revised and revealed

not to have been 12-month maximums have a negative impact on consumer spending (coefficient=-

0.030 and t-statistic=-3.93). The other false maximums of this form have insignificant effects at

horizons ranging from ten to fourteen months. The news media highlight twelve-month maximums

in particular and consumer spending drops for maximums precisely at a twelve-month horizon.



D    Discretionary        Spending     and    Local     Unemployment          Announcements:

     Robustness


      It may be argued that perhaps consumer spending drops after 12-month maximums because

the announced rate is high, not because of any news or consumer behavioral response specific to

these maximums. Counter to this claim is the evidence in Table IV that near 12-month maximums

(which are also high) do not elicit a significant consumption response. Moreover, our central claim

is that consumers exhibit excess sensitivity to salient news, and part of the salience of 12-month

maximums may be their high announced rates. Nonetheless, we isolate the impact of 12-month

maximums from that of high announced rates by including in equation (3) fixed effects for the most

recent announced unemployment rate. For periods with P ost = 1 this is the unemployment rate



                                                20
announced in the present announcement interval, while for periods with P ost = 0 it is the rate

announced in the previous announcement interval. We find, as displayed in the first column of Table

VI, that in this specification as well the impact of a 12-month maximum is significant (coefficient=-

0.013 and t-statistic=-2.44). We show in the second and third columns of Table VI, respectively,

that near 12-month maximums have an insignificant effect (coefficient=0.005 and t-statistic=0.95),

while false maximums have a significant impact (coefficient=-0.016 and t-statistic=-2.27). Twelve-

month maximums have a salience for consumer spending beyond the fact that the announced rate

is high.

      Ganong and Noel (2019) find that households dramatically cut spending when they lose their

jobs. Our results are not driven by an increase in the local unemployment rate, leading to consumers

in our panel actually losing their jobs, because the job loss would have occurred in the previous

month, as we explained in the timeline in Figure 3.

      A related argument is that it may be that increasing unemployment rates attract consumers'

attentions and that maximums have an effect because they are higher than previous months. As

for the previous claim, we do not insist that the salience of a 12-month maximum has nothing

to do with its representing an increased rate, but we isolate the impact of the maximum itself by

including an indicator in equation (3) for an announced rate that is strictly higher than the previous

announced rate. It is the case that announced unemployment increases are associated with lower

spending (coefficient=-0.013 and t-statistic=-2.62) but controlling for this factor we continue to

find a negative and significant effect of a 12-month maximum (coefficient=-0.011 and t-statistic=-

2.21), as detailed in the fourth column of Table VI. Including near 12-month maximums as an

additional control little alters these conclusions (as shown in the fifth column), and false 12-months

are significant (coefficient=-0.014 and t-statistic=-1.85) even with the introduction of the strictly

increasing rate indicator. While a high announced rate and the fact that it represents an increase

may contribute to the salience of 12-month maximums, the results in Table VI demonstrate that




                                                 21
these maximums have a negative effect on consumption even when controlling for these factors.



E   Spending Categories


      The analysis in Table IV describes the impact of local unemployment announcements on

discretionary spending as a whole. In this section, we consider the effects of these announcements

on some of the specific categories of discretionary spending in order to provide a richer illustration

of the phenomenon. De Nardi, French, and Benson (2012) emphasize that non-durables and

services declined most dramatically during the Great Recession. We therefore begin by considering

restaurant spending, a largely service expense that may be regarded by some consumers as a

luxury. Specifically, we estimate equation (3) with the log of restaurant spending serving as the

dependent variable. As displayed in the first column of Panel A of Table VII, we find a coefficient

of -0.015 (t-statistic=-2.41) on the interaction between the 12-month maximum indicator and the

post-announcement period indicator. Consumers who experience a local unemployment maximum

spend approximately 1.5% less in restaurants in the subsequent two weeks.

      This reduction in restaurant spending follows 12-month maximums, but not near 12-month

maximums, as is detailed in the second column of Panel A of Table VII. In the third column of

Panel A we show that false 12-month maximums lead to a 1.7% (t-statistic=-3.31) reduction in

restaurant spending.

      In Panel B of Table VII we present analogous results for the impact of local unemployment

maximums on whether or not a consumer purchases jewelry. (Given the infrequency of jewelry

purchases, we consider a binary dependent variable measuring whether the consumer spent

anything on jewelry in the period.) Consumers are less likely to purchase jewelry after 12-month

unemployment maximum announcements, and near-maximum announcements have no impact.

Even false 12-month maximums lead to a reduced probability of jewelry purchases. Although

jewelry is a durable good, it is clearly a luxury item, and local unemployment announcements lead


                                                 22
to a rapid decrease in the likelihood of jewelry spending.

      As a third category we consider whether a consumer spends on travel. Travel is a service and

is often a luxury. We show in the first and fourth columns of Panel C of Table VII that consumers

are less likely to spend on travel after local 12-month maximum unemployment announcements.

There is, however, evidence of a reduction in the likelihood of travel spending after a near 12-

month maximum (as shown in the second column of Panel C). False 12-month maximums lead to

a reduction the probability of travel spending (third column of Panel C).

      The results in Table VII establish that local unemployment maximum announcements lead

to a decrease in spending for restaurants, jewelry and travel, none of which is a necessity, and all

of which likely have a flavor of luxury spending for many consumers.



F   Financing


      We have shown in Tables IV and VII that unemployment maximums reduce spending. We

now consider the impact of these releases on consumers' financing strategies.

      Consumers whose future expectations have been dimmed by the announcement of a local

unemployment maximum may choose to preserve some financial slack to enable themselves to

respond to worsening conditions. This can be regarded as a form of precautionary saving (Kimball,

1990). One strategy for creating this slack is to reduce debt repayments and therefore effectively

to preserve more cash on hand. We investigate whether consumers react in this way by regressing

the log of credit card repayments on the interaction between an indicator for a 12-month maximum

announcement and a post-announcement period indicator and the standard controls, as described

in equation (3). We find that consumers reduce their credit card repayments by 3.6% (t-statistic=-

2.41); this result is detailed in the first column of Panel A of Table VIII.

      Credit card repayments are typically made at a lag to the actual purchases as it is standard



                                                  23
for issuers to offer a "grace period" of three weeks or longer during which interest does not accrue

if the balance is eventually fully paid (Ausubel 1991). Our finding that consumers reduce their

credit card repayments therefore likely does not reflect decreased spending (like that documented in

Tables IV and IV), as the balance due on a credit card typically reflects expenditures from an earlier

period. In other words, consumers face a credit card balance that was largely accumulated before

the local unemployment announcement. Their reduced repayments therefore describe a financing

response to the unemployment release rather than a consumption response. It is noteworthy that

the financing response of 3.6% is large compared to the roughly 2% consumption response described

in the previous tables.

      A rational precautionary savings strategy should likely respond similarly to high

unemployment announcements whether they are 12-month maximums or near maximums but,

as we demonstrate in the second column of Panel A of Table VIII, we find no impact of near

maximums on credit card repayments (coefficient=0.005 and t-statistic=0.48). Further, we show

in the third column of Panel A that false 12-month maximums have a comparable negative effect

(coefficient=-0.032 and t-statistic=-1.96) on repayments to that of actual maximums.

      Taken together, these results clearly demonstrate that maximum announcements have a

salience for consumers that leads to a substantial change in financing behavior that may be

difficult to completely rationalize. Beyond the striking differences in the consumer responses to

(false) maximums and near maximums, it is the case that credit card interest rates are very high.

Consumers who react to a 12-month maximum by repaying less and therefore borrowing more on

their credit cards are acquiring financial slack at a rather high cost.

      Do consumers also respond to unemployment maximums by seeking new financing? In the

first column of Panel B of Table VIII we show that this is not the case: in fact, a 12-month

maximum announcement leads to a reduced probability of initiating a loan (coefficient=-0.001

and t-statistic=-1.94). Near maximums have no impact on the likelihood of starting a new loan



                                                  24
(coefficient=0.000 and t-statistic=0.01), while false maximums do reduce the probability of loan

initiation (coefficient=-0.001 and t-statistic=-2.34), as shown in columns two and three, respectively,

of Panel B.

      The results in Table VIII show that unemployment maximum announcements lead consumers

to draw down more of their current lines of credit by repaying less of their credit card debt but

also reduce the probability that they obtain new financing, perhaps because they are less likely

to seek a new loan. It may be that consumers view unemployment maximums as harbingers of

worsening economic conditions in which it is prudent to maintain cash by borrowing against existing

credit commitments but in which one is unlikely to be granted additional debt. An announced

unemployment maximum (whether actual or false) leads consumers to act as if they are more

financially constrained, while near maximums have no such effect.



G    Cash Withdrawals


      Consumers also respond to unemployment 12-month maximums by withdrawing 1.6% less

(t-statistic=-4.33) cash from their bank accounts; we show this in the first column of Panel B of

Table IX. Smaller cash withdrawals may reflect lower current spending (as in Table IV) or a plan

to spend less in the future. The reduction in the cash withdrawn is driven by maximums and not

near maximums (second column of Panel B), and false maximums have a similar impact to that

of maximums (third column of Panel B). In Panel C of Table IX we present regressions in which

the dependent variable is the log of the number of cash withdrawals and describe results that are

similar though somewhat weaker than those for the amount of withdrawals.

      The findings in Tables VIII and IX show that consumers respond to local unemployment

maximum announcements by maintaining higher balances in their bank accounts. They do so

by both reducing credit card repayments and by withdrawing less cash. Both of these policies

increase a consumer's short-term financial flexibility, though the credit card repayment strategy


                                                  25
comes potentially at a considerable price.



H     Consumer Heterogeneity


      We demonstrated in Table IV that consumers reduce their discretionary spending in response

to announcements of local unemployment maximums. In this section we analyze the heterogeneous

responses of different groups of consumers.



H.1    Income Effects


      There are conflicting arguments suggesting that high income consumers may be either more

or less responsive to announcements of unemployment maximums. On one hand, the consumption

of people with higher incomes is likely to be more sensitive to stock market movements, so their

consumption may also be more sensitive to unemployment releases which are another form of

economic news. It is also probably the case that high income consumers are more frequently exposed

to information about the announced local unemployment rate. By contrast, one may argue that

unemployment developments are more relevant to lower income consumers, and that they have a

higher marginal propensity to consume (Mian, Rao, and Sufi, 2013), so they should respond more to

unemployment information. It is also true that for lower income consumers discretionary spending

is a smaller fraction of their overall expenditures, so their discretionary component may be more

sensitive to negative news.

      We test these competing hypotheses by regressing the log of discretionary spending on a

triple interaction between an indicator for a local 12-month unemployment maximum, a post-

announcement indicator and a consumer-level income characteristic along with the previous set

of explanatory variables and controls. This specification, detailed in (4), includes a control for

the double interaction between the indicators for a local maximum and the post-period (and the

other relevant double interactions): we are interested in the coefficient on the triple interaction


                                                26
which describes the differential response of consumers with the specified characteristic to the

announcement of a local unemployment maximum.

      The first characteristic we study is an indicator for consumers with high salaries. We calculate

the median average salary for all consumers and describe a consumer as having a high salary if her

average salary is above this median. (This characteristic, and all those described below, are time

invariant at the consumer-level.) We find, as described in the first column of Panel A of Table X,

a positive and significant triple interaction for the high salary characteristic (coefficient=0.009 and

t-statistic=3.26). This is evidence that high salary consumers respond less to local unemployment

maximums. The larger magnitude of the coefficient on the double interaction between a local

maximum and the post period (coefficient=-0.022 and t-statistic=-3.80) indicates that high salary

consumers do reduce their consumption after a maximum is announced, but they do not reduce it

by as much as low salary consumers do.

      As a second measure of consumer wealth, we define an indicator for whether the consumer

has security trading expenses (expressed as a fraction of total expenditures) that are above median.

We find that consumers with high security trading expenses are also less responsive to local 12-

month unemployment maximums, as detailed in the second column of Panel A. Our third proxy

for consumer wealth is an indicator for whether the consumer resides in a zip code with a median

house value in the 2010 census that is above the median in the sample. We find that consumers

residing in high value neighborhoods do not respond differently after 12-month maximums.

      The results in Panel A provide support for the argument that high income consumers reduce

their discretionary spending after local unemployment maximums less aggressively than do low

income consumers. This may be driven by the salience of unemployment news for low income

consumers or their higher marginal propensity to consume (especially for discretionary spending).




                                                  27
H.2    Expenditures as a Fraction of All Spending


      We provide additional evidence on how a consumer's response to unemployment news is

affected by the fraction of her spending that is fixed versus discretionary by considering high utility

expenditure consumers who are defined to be those for whom utility expenses as a fraction of

total expenditures are above the overall median. We demonstrate in the first column of Panel

B of Table X that high utility expenditure consumers respond more strongly to local 12-month

unemployment maximums (triple interaction coefficient=-0.008 and t-statistic=-3.61). Consumers

with high telephone spending and high gas spending (in both cases relative to overall expenditures)

also cut their discretionary spending more after 12-month maximums, as shown in columns two

and three of Panel B. These results are directly consistent with a mechanism under which a

consumer having a larger fixed component of expenditures must reduce her discretionary spending

more quickly after negative news, but they are not in tension with the different argument that

unemployment news is more salient for low income consumers.



H.3    Behavioral and Risk Characteristics


      We have shown that consumers respond to maximum unemployment announcements, even

those that are subsequently revised, but not to near maximums, and we have argued that this set of

responses may be difficult to rationalize. If that is the case, we may expect consumers more subject

to behavioral biases to respond more forcefully to these announcements. We test this hypothesis by

defining high education consumers to be those who reside in zip codes that had an average weighted

level of education in the 2010 census that is above the median in our sample. These consumers

may be less influenced by behavioral biases (so their response may be muted) but they may also

be more likely to learn of local unemployment releases (which would suggest a greater response).

We show in the first column of Panel C of Table X that high education consumers respond less

to 12-month unemployment maximum announcements than lower education consumers. This is


                                                  28
consistent with the argument that high education consumers are less influenced by the behavioral

considerations but it may also reflect the fact that high education consumers are likely to be high

income consumers, and we show above that the latter group responds less to these announcements.

      As a second proxy for behavioral biases, we define high-service-charge consumers to be those

with above-median bank service charges as a fraction of their total expenditures. A consumer who

spends a large amount on these fees, relatively to her income, may make other less-than-optimal

financial decisions as well. In the second column of Panel C we show that high-service-charge

consumers do indeed react more strongly to unemployment maximum announcements.

      Our third characteristic is a measure of risk aversion. We label as high-insurance consumers

those who spend an above-median fraction of their total expenditures on insurance.            These

consumers may be particularly concerned about any negative news and may therefore respond more

vigorously to a 12-month unemployment maximum. We show in the third column of Panel C that

this is indeed the case: consumers who spend relatively more on insurance reduce their discretionary

spending more after a local unemployment maximum announcement (triple interaction coefficient=-

0.006 and t-statistic=-2.23).

      The results in Table X demonstrate that while high income and high education consumers do

respond to local unemployment maximum announcements they do so in a more restrained manner

than their lower income and education peers. From a macroeconomic perspective, it is therefore the

case that negative news about unemployment should have a larger impact on discretionary spending

in lower income regions and neighborhoods. Policy makers who are interested in mitigating these

effects should therefore concentrate their attention on less favored areas.



I   Persistence


      The results in Tables IV-X use an event study methodology to demonstrate the quick response

of consumers' discretionary spending to local unemployment announcements. We now consider the


                                                 29
question of the persistence of these responses. Does an unemployment maximum depress spending

for a couple of weeks only to lead to a subsequent reversal? Or, by contrast, do these announcements

have lingering effects that have a negative impact on the spending in future periods?

      Addressing these questions requires that we examine medium-term effects of announcements,

so we can no longer only study shifts in spending in a short window around a release date. Instead,

we regress the log of the current level of discretionary spending on a series of lagged indicators for

12-month maximum announcements along with consumer and year-month fixed effects, as described

in equation (5). We measure current spending in the two week pre-period before an announcement.

This allows us to avoid any impact of a contemporaneous release and provides a lapse of roughly

two weeks from the previous announcement, which should enable us to identify the medium-term

announcement impact. We include a fixed effect for the previous unemployment rate that was

announced as we are focusing on the impact of maximum announcements rather than on the effect

of a high level of unemployment.

      We find that the lagged 12-month maximum announcement has an insignificant effect on

current spending (coefficient=-0.7% and t-statistic=-1.21), as presented in the first column of Table

XI. In columns two through sixth of Table XI we show that lagged maximum announcements from

two months earlier and, in some specifications, four months earlier have a negative impact on current

discretionary spending, with magnitudes ranging from -1.1% to -1.5%. There is no evidence of a

positive response at any horizon.

      There are two main points to be drawn from these regressions. First, a series of worsening

unemployment announcements over time can have a large cumulative effect. For example, suppose

that unemployment rates increase in a given CBSA over a five month period such that a 12-month

maximum was achieved in each of these months. Accounting for the -2.0% announcement effect

documented in column one of Table IV and the significant coefficients in column six of Table

XI, consumers in this CBSA would be predicted to reduce their discretionary spending after the



                                                 30
Figure 4. Longest Monthly Sequences of Continual 12-Month Unemployment Announcement
Maximums in 2009




                                             5 - 11        3-4
                                             4-5           0-3




fifth announcement by 4.8 percent. That is a substantial decrease in discretionary consumption

spending.

      Figure 4 illustrates that sequences of five months or longer of continual 12-month

unemployment announcement maximums were widespread across the U.S. in 2009. A five-month

sequence of continual 12-month maximums of this form was achieved in 119 of the 373 CBSAs at

some point in the ALFRED 2007-2018 data. Five-month maximum sequences were observed in 21

unique CBSAs in 2008, 111 unique CBSAs in 2009, 5 unique CBSAs in 2010 and 1 CBSA in 2015.

These events are concentrated in the Southwest and Florida, which were the areas hit hardest by

house price declines. This is not surprising, given that house prices are also likely affected by these

salient announcements. This may contribute to an upward bias in the estimates of the MPC out of

housing wealth in the literature. Second, there is clearly no evidence of later reversals. Consumers

respond to unemployment announcements both quickly and in a long-lasting manner.




                                                      31
V     Conclusion

      We find that the announcement of a 12-month local unemployment maximum leads to an

increase in local news about unemployment and a 2% reduction by consumers in their discretionary

spending. Near maximum announcements have no effect on spending, but false maximums that

were later revised downward have the same impact as actual maximums. Announcements of 12-

month maximums, in particular, have a negative effect on consumption that is not found at other

horizons. These results suggest that salient negative macroeconomic announcements have a strong

behavioral response on consumers that may be mediated by their exposure to news. Announcements

of 12-month unemployment maximums also lead consumers to reduce their credit card repayments

by 3.6% and to withdraw 1.6% less cash from their bank accounts. The reductions in discretionary

spending are strongest for lower income consumers. The decrease in spending is not reversed

in subsequent months and, in fact, unemployment maximum announcements persistently reduce

future spending at a horizon of two to four months.

      Our work has broader implications for understanding business cycles. We show that the

slant in the news coverage of government announcements can have a substantial impact on the

local economy. Since the work of Keynes, macro-economists have recognized the importance of

sentiment as a driver of business cycles. Recent work on business cycle theory imputes a role to

confidence shocks of the type we document (see, e.g., Angeletos and La'O, 2010, 2013; Benhabib,

Wang, and Wen, 2015; Heathcote and Perri, 2018).

      A series of salient, negative reports will depress consumption which would clearly have a

meaningful deleterious influence on local businesses. This raises the possibility of negative feedback

effects in which unemployment announcements reduce future discretionary spending which may, in

turn, lead to weaker future employment conditions. Anticipating these consequences, policy-makers

may need to manage macro-economic news releases by accompanying the release of salient, negative

economic news with other measures or announcements meant to buttress consumer confidence.


                                                 32
                                                Table I
                           Discretionary Spending Categories
Spending Categories        Vendor Examples

Automotive Expenses        Autozone, Honda, Pep Boys
Cable/Satellite Services   Comcast, DirecTV, Time Warner Cable
Charitable Giving          Compassion International, Feed The Children, Greenpeace
Child/Dependent Expenses   Children's Place, Gymboree, Toys "R" Us
Clothing/Shoes             Kohl's Corporation, Macy's, Nordstrom
Dues and Subscriptions     Consumer Reports, The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal
Electronics                Apple Inc., Best Buy Co., Fry's Electronics
Entertainment              Redbox, Regal Cinemas, StubHub
Gifts                      Godiva Chocolatier Inc, Hallmark, ProFlowers
Hobbies                    Camping World, Inc., Guitar Center, Hobby Lobby
Home Improvement           Bed Bath & Beyond, Home Depot, Williams And Sonoma
Home Maintenance           Merry Maids, Stanley Steemer International, Inc., Terminix International Company
Online Services            Google Play, Skype, TransUnion
Personal Care              Bath & Body Works, Great Clips, Ulta Salon, Cosmetics & Fragrance
Pets/Pet Care              Petco's, PetSmart, Wag.com
Restaurants/Dining         McDonald's Corporation, Starbucks, Subway
Travel                     Delta Air Lines, Hilton Hotels, Southwest Airlines




                                                   33
                                                                  Table II
                                                       Summary Statistics
Panel A provides summary statistics for the main spending categories analyzed in this paper. For every local unemployment announcement, we
define the announcement interval as the announcement date and the two subsequent days. Spending is measured separately over the subsequent
and prior two week periods surrounding each announcement period, and the spending presented below is aggregated at the two-week-period level.
Spending on Jewelry?, Spending on Travel?, and Initiated a New Loan? are binary indicators measured over all periods for which discretionary
spending data is available. Panel B provides summary statistics for characteristics at the consumer level. Salary is measured in every month for
which a positive value is available. Median Home Value and Educational Attainment are census variables measured at the zip code level. Educational
Attainment is on a scale from one to seven, where one denotes less than 9th grade as the highest level of attainment and seven denotes a graduate
or professional degree.


  Panel A: Spending by Consumers per Two-Week Periods
                                                                                 observations       mean        std dev      p10        p50           p90
  Discretionary Spending                                                          575995762         329.1        361.3       25.7       192          883.8
  Restaurants/Dining expenses                                                     470350912          116.2       107.9       13.9       79.8         287.8
  Spending on Jewelry?                                                            575995761          0.003        0.053        0         0              0
  Spending on Travel?                                                             575995756         0.033        0.179         0         0              0
  Credit Card Repayments                                                          330388229         1129.1       1498.4       50        472          3475.4
  Initiated a New Loan?                                                           575995762          0.005        0.072        0         0              0
  Cash Withdrawal Amount                                                          252502949         405.3        488.2        40        200           1100
  Number of Cash Withdrawals                                                      252521938           2.4          1.7         1         2              5


  Panel B: Consumer Characteristics
                                                                                 observations      mean         std dev      p10        p50        p90
  Salary                                                                           4900502        4181.21      13908.55     680.5     2856.57    7913.45
  Median Home Value                                                                9584888        314155.9      251072      91700     231300     647200
  Educational Attainment                                                           9641257          4.51          0.68       3.73      4.42        5.49




                                                                       34
                                                                 Table III
                    Local Unemployment Announcements and News Interest
Panel A reports results from regressing News Interest (defined as a day's rank within the calendar year of mentions of "unemployment" in the U.S.
press) on dates related to the release dates of the Bureau of Labor Statistics Metropolitan Area Employment and Unemployment reports. Dates are
defined over the period June 19, 2007- Dec. 31, 2019. Reported t-statistics in parentheses in Panel A are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered
at the month-year level. The News Interest data is sourced from NewsBank. Panel B reports results from regressing News Interest on indicators
for whether the last reported unemployment rate for the CBSA was a twelve-month maximum or near a twelve-month maximum (defined as within
0.2 percentage points of a twelve-month maximum but not a twelve-month maximum). Panel C reports results from regressing News Interest on
indicators for maximums of the following form: maximum at month T but not a maximum at month T + 1. Panel B and C CBSA data are sourced
from the ALFRED vintage database provided by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis and cover the period May 30, 2007- May 22, 2020. Panel
B and C t-statistics are clustered jointly at the month-year and CBSA levels. The symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


       Panel A: Daily National Data
                                                                                     National           National          National
                                                                                   News Interest      News Interest     News Interest
                                                                                        (1)               (2)               (3)
       Release Date                                                                  0.156***
                                                                                      (5.29)
       Within 3 Days of Release Date                                                                    0.084***
                                                                                                         (5.89)
       Release Week                                                                                                        0.067***
                                                                                                                            (5.42)
       Month-year FE                                                                     Yes               Yes                Yes
       Day of week FE                                                                    Yes               Yes                Yes
       N                                                                                4,579             4,576              4,573
       adj. R2                                                                          0.10              0.10                0.87


       Panel B: Daily CBSA-level Data
                                                                                      Local              Local              Local
                                                                                   News Interest      News Interest     News Interest
                                                                                        (1)                (2)               (3)
       Twelve-Month Maximum                                                         0.0148***          0.0150***          0.0091**
                                                                                      (3.55)             (3.53)            (2.12)
       Near Twelve-Month Maximum                                                                         0.0029            0.0009
                                                                                                         (0.90)            (0.26)
       Day-Month-year FE                                                                Yes               Yes                Yes
       CBSA FE                                                                          Yes               Yes                Yes
       Unemployment Rate FE                                                              No                No                Yes
       N                                                                             1,339,750         1,339,750         1,339,750
       adj. R2                                                                          0.14              0.14              0.14


       Panel C: Daily CBSA-level Data
                                                                                      Local               Local
                                                                                   News Interest      News Interest
                                                                                        (1)                (2)
       Twelve-Month Maximum but Not Thirteen-Month Maximum                          0.0155***          0.0157***
                                                                                      (3.04)             (3.07)
       Ten-Month Maximum but Not Eleven-Month Maximum                                                    0.0004
                                                                                                         (0.08)
       Eleven-Month Maximum but Not Twelve-Month Maximum                                                 0.0024
                                                                                                         (0.51)
       Thirteen-Month Maximum but Not Fourteen-Month Maximum                                             0.0010
                                                                                                         (0.05)
       Fourteen-Month Maximum but Not Fifteen-Month Maximum                                             -0.0042
                                                                                                         (-0.44)
       Day-Month-year FE                                                                Yes                Yes
       CBSA FE                                                                          Yes                Yes
       N                                                                             1,330,936         1,311,760
       adj. R2                                                                          0.14              0.14



                                                                      35
                                                                  Table IV
           Local Unemployment Announcements and Discretionary Spending
This table reports results from regressing the log of discretionary spending on an interaction between an indicator for whether the last reported
unemployment rate for the CBSA was a maximum at a twelve-month horizon and an indicator for whether discretionary spending is measured
over the two week period following the local unemployment announcement interval (labeled "Post") and controls. The announcement interval runs
from the announcement date to two day after. Spending is measured separately over the subsequent and prior two week periods (for values of one
and zero for Post, respectively). An event window includes the periods immediately before and following an announcement. Dates are defined
over the period Jan. 1, 2012- Dec. 18, 2018. The controls include near maximums (defined as within 0.2 percentage points of a maximum but
not a maximum) interacted with Post, the Post variable, and fixed effects at the consumer-event window level. False maximums are maximums
as of the initial announcement date that were later revised and revealed not to have been maximums. Reported t-statistics in parentheses are
heteroskedasticity-robust and double clustered at the CBSA- and period-levels. The symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                                        Discret.             Discret.             Discret.
                                                                       Spending             Spending             Spending
                                                                           (1)                  (2)                 (3)
                12-Month Maximum * Post                                -0.020***            -0.020***
                                                                         (-4.00)              (-4.00)

                Near 12-Month Maximum * Post                                                  0.002
                                                                                              (0.40)

                False 12-Month Maximum * Post                                                                    -0.022***
                                                                                                                   (-3.23)

                Post                                                   0.029***             0.029***             0.029***
                                                                        (6.98)               (6.89)               (6.90)

                Consumer-Event Window FE                                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes
                N                                                    507,096,536          507,096,536          507,096,536
                adj. R2                                                  0.51                 0.51                0.51




                                                                       36
Table V
Local Unemployment Announcements and Discretionary Spending:                                                                         Specific
Maxima
This table reports results from regressing the log of discretionary spending on an interaction between an indicator for specific unemployment maxima
and an indicator for whether discretionary spending is measured over the two week period following the local unemployment announcement period
(labeled "Post") and controls. Specific unemployment maxima indicators take the following form: an indicator for a maximum at month T but not
a maximum at month T + 1. The announcement interval runs from the announcement date to two day after. Spending is measured separately over
the subsequent and prior two week periods (for values of one and zero for Post, respectively). An event window includes the periods immediately
before and following an announcement. Dates are defined over the period Jan. 1, 2012- Dec. 18, 2018. The controls include near maximums
(defined as within 0.2 percentage points of a maximum but not a maximum) interacted with Post, the Post variable and fixed effects at the
consumer-event window level. The false specific maxima listed in Panel B are specific unemployment maxima as of the initial announcement
date that were later revised and revealed not to have been maxima. Reported t-statistics in parentheses are heteroskedasticity-robust and double
clustered at the CBSA- and period-levels. The symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




           Panel A: Specific Maxima
                                                                                 Discret.            Discret.            Discret.
                                                                                Spending            Spending            Spending
                                                                                    (1)                 (2)                 (3)
           12- but not 13-Month Maximum * Post                                  -0.023***           -0.023***           -0.023***
                                                                                  (-7.83)             (-7.91)             (-7.77)
           Near 12-Month Maximum * Post                                                                0.003
                                                                                                      (0.46)
           10- but not 11-Month Maximum * Post                                                                          -0.010
                                                                                                                        (-1.20)
           11- but not 12-Month Maximum * Post                                                                          -0.010
                                                                                                                        (-1.16)
           13- but not 14-Month Maximum * Post                                                                          -0.003
                                                                                                                        (-0.09)
           14- but not 15-Month Maximum * Post                                                                          -0.008
                                                                                                                        (-0.30)
           Consumer-Event Window FE                                                Yes                Yes                 Yes
           N                                                                   507,080,722        507,080,722         507,047,670
           adj. R2                                                                 0.51              0.51                0.51


           Panel B: False Specific Maxima
                                                                                 Discret.           Discret.
                                                                                Spending           Spending
                                                                                    (1)                (2)
           False 12- but not 13-Month Maximum * Post                            -0.030***          -0.030***
                                                                                  (-3.93)            (-3.94)
           False 10- but not 11-Month Maximum * Post                                                 -0.008
                                                                                                     (-0.77)
           False 11- but not 12-Month Maximum * Post                                                 -0.007
                                                                                                     (-0.63)
           False 13- but not 14-Month Maximum * Post                                                 -0.002
                                                                                                     (-0.06)
           False 14- but not 15-Month Maximum * Post                                                 -0.009
                                                                                                     (-0.35)
           Consumer-Event Window FE                                                Yes                 Yes
           N                                                                   507,080,722        507,047,670
           adj. R2                                                                 0.51                0.51


                                                                        37
Table VI
Local Unemployment Announcements and Discretionary Spending: Robustness
This table reports results from regressing the log of discretionary spending on an interaction between an indicator for whether the last reported
unemployment rate for the CBSA was a maximum at a twelve-month horizon and an indicator for whether discretionary spending is measured
over the two week period following the local unemployment announcement period (labeled "Post") and controls. The announcement interval runs
from the announcement date to two day after. Spending is measured separately over the subsequent and prior two week periods (for values of one
and zero for Post, respectively). An event window includes the periods immediately before and following an announcement. Dates are defined over
the period Jan. 1, 2012- Dec. 18, 2018. The controls include near maximums (defined as within 0.2 percentage points of a maximum but not a
maximum) interacted with Post, the Post variable, fixed effects for the unemployment rate, an indicator for a strictly increasing unemployment
rate and fixed effects at the consumer-event window level. False maximums are maximums as of the initial announcement date that were later
revised and revealed not to have been maximums. Reported t-statistics in parentheses are heteroskedasticity-robust and double clustered at the
CBSA- and period-levels. The symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                Discret.        Discret.        Discret.        Discret.         Discret.        Discret.
                                               Spending        Spending        Spending        Spending         Spending        Spending
                                                  (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)
   12-Month Maximum * Post                     -0.013**        -0.012**                        -0.011**         -0.011**
                                                (-2.44)         (-2.41)                         (-2.21)          (-2.20)
   Near 12-Month Maximum * Post                                  0.005                                            0.003
                                                                 (0.95)                                           (0.52)
   False 12-Month Maximum * Post                                                -0.016**                                         -0.014*
                                                                                 (-2.27)                                          (-1.85)
   Strictly Increasing Unemployment                                                            -0.013***       -0.013***        -0.013***
                                                                                                 (-2.62)         (-2.62)          (-2.67)
   Consumer- Event Window FE                     Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
   Unemployment Rate FE                          Yes              Yes             Yes              No              No               No
   N                                         507,096,536      507,096,536     507,096,536     507,096,536     507,096,536      507,096,536
   adj. R2                                       0.51            0.51            0.51             0.51            0.51             0.51




                                                                      38
                                                                  Table VII
              Local Unemployment Announcements and Spending Categories
Panel A reports results from regressing the log of the amount of restaurant spending on an interaction between an indicator for whether the last
reported unemployment rate for the CBSA was a maximum at twelve- or six-month horizons and an indicator for whether restaurant spending is
measured over the two week period following the local unemployment announcement period (labeled "Post") and controls. Panel B reports the
results of analogous regressions in which the dependent variable is an indicator variable for positive spending on jewelry, and Panel C reports the
results of analogous regressions in which the dependent variable is an indicator variable for positive spending on travel. The announcement interval
runs from the announcement date to two day after. Spending is measured separately over the subsequent and prior two week periods (for values of
one and zero for Post, respectively). An event window includes the periods immediately before and following an announcement. Dates are defined
over the period Jan. 1, 2012- Dec. 18, 2018. The controls include the Post variable, near maximums (defined as within 0.2 percentage points
of a maximum but not a maximum) interacted with Post, and fixed effects at the consumer-event window level. False maximums are maximums
as of the initial announcement date that were later revised and revealed not to have been maximums. Reported t-statistics in parentheses are
heteroskedasticity-robust and double clustered at the CBSA- and period-levels. The symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                     Panel A: Restaurant Spending
                                                                             (1)                (2)                (3)
                     12-Month Maximum * Post                              -0.015**           -0.015**
                                                                           (-2.41)            (-2.40)
                     Near 12-Month Maximum * Post                                             -0.003
                                                                                              (-0.58)
                     False 12-Month Maximum * Post                                                            -0.017***
                                                                                                                (-3.31)
                     Controls and FE                                        Yes                Yes                Yes
                     N                                                  402,233,108        402,233,108       402,233,108
                     adj. R2                                                0.54              0.54               0.54


                     Panel B: Spending on Jewelry?
                                                                              (1)               (2)                (3)
                     12-Month Maximum * Post                              -0.0002**         -0.0002**
                                                                            (-2.57)           (-2.51)
                     Near 12-Month Maximum * Post                                              0.000
                                                                                              (0.06)
                     False 12-Month Maximum * Post                                                           -0.0002***
                                                                                                               (-3.35)
                     Controls and FE                                        Yes                Yes               Yes
                     N                                                  507,096,536        507,096,536       507,096,536
                     adj. R2                                                0.13              0.13               0.13


                     Panel C: Spending on Travel?
                                                                              (1)               (2)                (3)
                     12-Month Maximum * Post                              -0.001***         -0.001***
                                                                            (-2.73)           (-2.78)
                     Near 12-Month Maximum * Post                                            -0.001*
                                                                                              (-1.89)
                     False 12-Month Maximum * Post                                                            -0.001***
                                                                                                                (-2.89)
                     Controls and FE                                        Yes                Yes                Yes
                     N                                                  507,096,524        507,096,524       507,096,524
                     adj. R2                                                0.21              0.21               0.21




                                                                        39
                                                                Table VIII
            Local Unemployment Announcements and Financing Transactions
Panel A reports results from regressing the log of credit card repayments on an interaction between an indicator for whether the last reported
unemployment rate for the CBSA was a maximum at twelve- or six-month horizons and an indicator for whether credit card repayments are
measured over the two week period following the local unemployment announcement period (labeled "Post") and controls. Panel B reports the
results of analogous regressions in which the dependent variable is an indicator for whether the consumer initiated a new loan during the period.
The announcement interval runs from the announcement date to two day after. Spending is measured separately over the subsequent and prior
two week periods (for values of one and zero for Post, respectively). An event window includes the periods immediately before and following an
announcement. Dates are defined over the period Jan. 1, 2012- Dec. 18, 2018. The controls include the Post variable, near maximums (defined
as within 0.2 percentage points of a maximum but not a maximum) interacted with Post, and fixed effects at the consumer-event window level.
False maximums are maximums as of the initial announcement date that were later revised and revealed not to have been maximums. Reported
t-statistics in parentheses are heteroskedasticity-robust and double clustered at the CBSA- and period-levels. The symbols ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                       Panel A: Credit Card Repayments
                                                                               (1)             (2)              (3)
                       X-Month Maximum * Post                               -0.036**        -0.035**
                                                                             (-2.41)         (-2.39)
                       Near X-Month Maximum * Post                                            0.005
                                                                                             (0.48)
                       False X-Month Maximum * Post                                                          -0.032*
                                                                                                             (-1.96)
                       Controls and FE                                       Yes              Yes              Yes
                       N                                                 218,976,110      218,976,110      218,976,110
                       adj. R2                                               0.40            0.40              0.40


                       Panel B: Initiated a New Loan?
                                                                              (1)               (2)             (3)
                       X-Month Maximum * Post                               -0.001*          -0.001*
                                                                            (-1.94)          (-1.91)
                       Near X-Month Maximum * Post                                            0.000
                                                                                              (0.01)
                       False X-Month Maximum * Post                                                         -0.001**
                                                                                                             (-2.34)
                       Controls and FE                                       Yes              Yes              Yes
                       N                                                 507,096,536      507,096,536      507,096,536
                       adj. R2                                               0.00            0.00             0.00




                                                                       40
                                                                  Table IX
                Local Unemployment Announcements and Cash Withdrawals
Panel A reports results from regressing the log of the amount of cash withdrawn on an interaction between an indicator for whether the last
reported unemployment rate for the CBSA was a maximum at twelve- or six-month horizons and an indicator for whether cash withdrawals are
measured over the two week period following the local unemployment announcement period (labeled "Post") and controls. Panel B reports the
results of analogous regressions in which the dependent variable is the log of the number of cash withdrawals. The announcement interval runs
from the announcement date to two day after. Spending is measured separately over the subsequent and prior two week periods (for values of one
and zero for Post, respectively). An event window includes the periods immediately before and following an announcement. Dates are defined
over the period Jan. 1, 2012- Dec. 18, 2018. The controls include the Post variable, near maximums (defined as within 0.2 percentage points
of a maximum but not a maximum) interacted with Post, and fixed effects at the consumer-event window level. False maximums are maximums
as of the initial announcement date that were later revised and revealed not to have been maximums. Reported t-statistics in parentheses are
heteroskedasticity-robust and double clustered at the CBSA- and period-levels. The symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                     Panel A: Cash Withdrawal Amounts
                                                                                  (1)             (2)             (3)
                     X-Month Maximum * Post                                   -0.016***       -0.016***
                                                                                (-4.33)         (-4.35)
                     Near X-Month Maximum * Post                                                 0.007
                                                                                                (0.59)
                     False X-Month Maximum * Post                                                             -0.017***
                                                                                                                (-2.68)
                     Controls and FE                                             Yes             Yes              Yes
                     N                                                       175,592,646     175,592,646     175,592,646
                     adj. R2                                                     0.52           0.52             0.52


                     Panel B: Number of Cash Withdrawals
                                                                                 (1)              (2)             (3)
                     X-Month Maximum * Post                                   -0.010**         -0.010**
                                                                               (-2.02)          (-2.10)
                     Near X-Month Maximum * Post                                                -0.005
                                                                                                (-0.61)
                     False X-Month Maximum * Post                                                              -0.007
                                                                                                               (-0.91)
                     Controls and FE                                             Yes             Yes             Yes
                     N                                                       175,609,966     175,609,966     175,609,966
                     adj. R2                                                     0.47           0.47            0.47




                                                                       41
Table X
Local Unemployment Announcements, Discretionary Spending and Consumer
Heterogeneity
This table reports results from regressing the log of discretionary spending on an interaction between an indicator for whether the last reported
unemployment rate for the CBSA was a maximum at twelve- or six-month horizons, an indicator for whether discretionary spending is measured
over the two week period following the local unemployment announcement interval (labeled "Post") and time-invariant consumer characteristic
and controls. The characteristics in Panel A are an indicator for an above-median salary, an indicator for residing in a census zip code with an
above-median median home value, and an indicator for above-median security trading expenses. The characteristics in Panel B are an indicator for
above-median utilities expenses, above-median telephone expenses, and above-median gas/fuel expenses, where all of these variables are expressed
as a fraction of total expenditures. The characteristics in Panel C are an indicator for residing in a census zip code with an above-median weighted
average education level, an indicator for above-median debit service charges and an indicator for above-median insurance expenses, where the latter
two variables are expressed as a fraction of total expenditures. Dates are defined over the period Jan. 1, 2012- Dec. 18, 2018, and the controls
include all the explanatory variables included in specification (1) in Table IV. Reported t-statistics in parentheses are heteroskedasticity-robust
and double clustered at the CBSA- and period-levels. The symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.




                    Panel A: Income
                    Dependent Variable                                                 Discret.      Discret.       Discret.
                                                                                      Spending      Spending       Spending
                    Characteristic                                                       High         Trades      High Home
                                                                                        Salary      Securities        Value
                                                                                          (1)           (2)            (3)
                    X-Month Maximum * Post * Characteristic                           0.009***       0.006**          0.006
                                                                                        (3.26)        (2.53)         (1.32)
                    X-Month Maximum * Post                                            -0.022***     -0.022***      -0.023***
                                                                                        (-3.80)       (-4.20)        (-3.74)
                    Controls and FE                                                       Yes           Yes            Yes


                    Panel B: Expenditures as a fraction of all spending
                    Dependent Variable                                                 Discret.      Discret.       Discret.
                                                                                      Spending      Spending       Spending
                    Characteristic                                                       Util.          Tel.           Gas
                                                                                       Expend.       Expend.         Expen.
                                                                                          (1)           (2)            (3)
                    X-Month Maximum * Post * Characteristic                           -0.008***      -0.007**       -0.005**
                                                                                        (-3.61)       (-2.46)        (-2.05)
                    X-Month Maximum * Post                                            -0.016***     -0.016***      -0.018***
                                                                                        (-2.98)       (-3.30)        (-3.71)
                    Controls and FE                                                       Yes           Yes            Yes


                    Panel C: Personal Characteristics
                    Dependent Variable                                                Discret.       Discret.       Discret.
                                                                                     Spending       Spending       Spending
                    Characteristic                                                      High           High          Insur.
                                                                                       Educ.        Svc. Chg.        Expen.
                                                                                         (1)            (2)            (3)
                    X-Month Maximum * Post * Characteristic                          0.007***        -0.004*        -0.006**
                                                                                       (2.68)         (-1.96)        (-2.23)
                    X-Month Maximum * Post                                           -0.023***      -0.018***      -0.016***
                                                                                       (-4.29)        (-3.54)        (-3.61)
                    Controls and FE                                                      Yes            Yes            Yes
                    N                                                               506,041,618    495,709,256    507,096,536
                    adj. R2                                                             0.51            0.51          0.51




                                                                        42
Table XI
Local Unemployment Announcements and Discretionary Spending: Persistence
Panel A reports results from regressing the log of discretionary spending in the two weeks prior to a local unemployment announcement on indicators
for whether the lagged reported unemployment rates for the CBSA at various specified horizons were at maximums at twelve-month horizons when
announced. Controls include fixed effects for each consumer, the year-month and the last unemployment rate that was announced. Panel B reports
the results from analogous regressions using 6-month maximums. Reported t-statistics in parentheses are heteroskedasticity-robust and double
clustered at the CBSA- and period-levels. The symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




  Dependent Variable                              Discret.         Discret.        Discret.         Discret.        Discret.        Discret.
                                                 Spending         Spending        Spending         Spending        Spending        Spending
                                                     (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)
  12-Month Maximumt-1                              -0.007           -0.007          -0.007           -0.007          -0.007          -0.007
                                                  (-1.21)          (-1.06)          (-0.97)          (-1.03)         (-1.01)         (-0.98)
  12-Month Maximumt-2                                             -0.011**        -0.011***        -0.012***       -0.013***       -0.013***
                                                                   (-2.51)          (-2.67)          (-3.36)         (-3.49)         (-3.45)
  12-Month Maximumt-3                                                               -0.008           -0.007          -0.007          -0.008
                                                                                    (-1.62)          (-1.42)         (-1.36)         (-1.54)
  12-Month Maximumt-4                                                                                -0.013         -0.013*         -0.015*
                                                                                                     (-1.62)         (-1.68)         (-1.84)
  12-Month Maximumt-5                                                                                                -0.004          -0.003
                                                                                                                     (-0.56)         (-0.51)
  12-Month Maximumt-6                                                                                                                -0.009
                                                                                                                                     (-1.33)
  Month, Consumer, Unemp. Rate FE                   Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
  N                                             261,649,502      240,364,925     221,206,479     203,522,632      187,229,807     172,260,292
  adj. R2                                           0.41            0.42            0.42            0.42              0.43            0.43




                                                                       43
References

Angeletos, G.-M., and J. La'O (2010): "Noisy Business Cycles," NBER Macroeconomics

  Annual, 24, 319­378.


Angeletos, G. M., and J. La'O (2013): "Sentiments," Econometrica, 81(2), 739­779.


Attanasio, O., A. Leicester, and M. Wakefield (2011):                 "Do House Prices Drive

  Consumption Growth? the Coincident Cycles of House Prices and Consumption in the Uk,"

  J. Eur. Econ. Assoc., 9(3), 399­435.


Attanasio, O. P. (1999): "Consumption," Handbook of macroeconomics, 1, 741­812.


Bailey, M., R. Cao, T. Kuchler, and J. Stroebel (2018): "The Economic Effects of Social

  Networks: Evidence from the Housing Market," J. Polit. Econ., 126(6), 2224­2276.


Bailey, M., R. Cao, T. Kuchler, J. Stroebel, and A. Wong (2018): "Social Connectedness:

  Measurement, Determinants, and Effects," J. Econ. Perspect., 32(3), 259­280.


Baugh, B., I. Ben-David, H. Park, and J. A. Parker (2018): "Asymmetric Consumption

  Smoothing," .


Benhabib, J., P. Wang, and Y. Wen (2015):                "Sentiments and Aggregate Demand

  Fluctuations," Econometrica, 83(2), 549­585.


Blinder, A. S., A. Deaton, R. E. Hall, and R. G. Hubbard (1985): "The time series

  consumption function revisited," Brookings Pap. Econ. Act., 1985(2), 465­521.


Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2012): "Salience Theory of Choice Under Risk,"

  Q. J. Econ., 127(3), 1243­1285.


        (2013): "Salience and consumer choice," J. Polit. Econ., 121(5), 803­843.




                                                 44
Brunnermeier, M. K., and S. Nagel (2008): "Do Wealth Fluctuations Generate Time-Varying

  Risk Aversion? Micro-evidence on Individuals," Am. Econ. Rev., 98(3), 713­736.

Campbell, J. Y., and J. F. Cocco (2007): "How do house prices affect consumption? Evidence

  from micro data," J. Monet. Econ., 54(3), 591­621.

Carroll, C. D., J. C. Fuhrer, and D. W. Wilcox (1994): "Does consumer sentiment forecast

  household spending? If so, why?," Am. Econ. Rev., 84(5), 1397­1408.

Cochrane, J. H. (1991): "A Simple Test of Consumption Insurance," J. Polit. Econ., 99(5),

  957­976.

Cox, N., P. Ganong, P. Noel, J. Vavra, A. Wong, D. Farrell, and F. Greig (2020):

  "Initial Impacts of the Pandemic on Consumer Behavior: Evidence from Linked Income,

  Spending, and Savings Data," .

De Nardi, M., E. French, and D. Benson (2012): "Consumption and the Great Recession,"

  Economic Perspectives, 36(1), 1­17.

DeFusco, A. A., S. Johnson, and J. Mondragon (2020): "Regulating household leverage,"

  The Review of Economic Studies, 87(2), 914­958.

DellaVigna, S. (2009): "Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field," J. Econ. Lit.,

  47(2), 315­372.

Flavin, M. A. (1981): "The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations About Future

  Income," J. Polit. Econ., 89(5), 974­1009.

Gabaix, X., and D. Laibson (2001): "The 6D Bias and the Equity-Premium Puzzle," NBER

  Macroeconomics Annual, 16, 257­312.

Ganong, P., and P. Noel (2019): "Consumer Spending during Unemployment: Positive and

  Normative Implications," Am. Econ. Rev., 109(7), 2383­2424.


                                               45
Garz, M. (2018): "Effects of unemployment news on economic perceptions­Evidence from German

  Federal States," Reg. Sci. Urban Econ., 68, 172­190.

Gelman, M., S. Kariv, M. D. Shapiro, D. Silverman, and S. Tadelis (2014):

  "Microeconomics. Harnessing naturally occurring data to measure the response of spending to

  income," Science, 345(6193), 212­215.

Gentzkow, M., and J. M. Shapiro (2010): "What drives media slant? Evidence from US daily

  newspapers," Econometrica.

Guren, A. M., A. McKay, E. Nakamura, and J. Steinsson (2018): "Housing Wealth Effects:

  The Long View," Working Paper 24729, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Guvenen, F., F. Karahan, S. Ozkan, and J. Song (2017): "Heterogeneous Scarring Effects

  of Full-Year Nonemployment," Am. Econ. Rev., 107(5), 369­373.

Heathcote, J., and F. Perri (2018): "Wealth and Volatility," Rev. Econ. Stud., 85(4), 2173­

  2213.

Hurst, E., and F. Stafford (2004): "Home Is Where the Equity Is: Mortgage Refinancing and

  Household Consumption," J. Money Credit Bank., 36(6), 985­1014.

Kaplan, G., K. Mitman, and G. Violante (2016): "Consumption and house prices in the

  great recession," Discussion paper, Working paper.

Kaplan, G., and G. L. Violante (2010): "How Much Consumption Insurance beyond Self-

  Insurance?," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(4), 53­87.

Kimball, M. S. (1990): "Precautionary Saving in the Small and in the Large," Econometrica,

  58(1), 53­73.

  szegi, B., and M. Rabin (2006): "A Model of Reference-Dependent Preferences," Q. J. Econ.,
Ko

  121(4), 1133­1165.


                                               46
        (2007): "Reference-Dependent Risk Attitudes," Am. Econ. Rev., 97(4), 1047­1073.


        (2009): "Reference-Dependent Consumption Plans," Am. Econ. Rev., 99(3), 909­936.


Ludvigson, S. C. (2004): "Consumer Confidence and Consumer Spending," J. Econ. Perspect.,

  18(2), 29­50.


Mian, A., K. Rao, and A. Sufi (2013): "Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the

  Economic Slump," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(4), 1687­1726.


Mian, A., and A. Sufi (2014):        "What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment?,"

  Econometrica, 82(6), 2197­2223.


Olafsson, A., and M. Pagel (2017): "The Ostrich in Us: Selective Attention to Financial

  Accounts, Income, Spending, and Liquidity," .


         (2018): "The Liquid Hand-to-Mouth: Evidence from Personal Finance Management

  Software," Rev. Financ. Stud., 31(11), 4398­4446.


Pagel, M. (2017): "Expectations-Based Reference-Dependent Life-Cycle Consumption," Rev.

  Econ. Stud., 84(2), 885­934.


Parker, J. A. (1999): "The reaction of household consumption to predictable changes in social

  security taxes," Am. Econ. Rev., 89(4), 959­973.


Parker, J. A., N. S. Souleles, D. S. Johnson, and R. McClelland (2013): "Consumer

  Spending and the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008," Am. Econ. Rev., 103(6), 2530­2553.


Pistaferri, L. (2016): "Why has consumption remained moderate after the Great Recession," in

  paper prepared for Boston Fed Conference.


Reis, R. (2006): "Inattentive consumers," J. Monet. Econ., 53(8), 1761­1800.




                                              47
Shiller, R. J. (2019): Narrative Economics: How Stories Go Viral and Drive Major Economic

  Events. Princeton University Press.


Sims, C. A. (2003): "Implications of rational inattention," J. Monet. Econ., 50(3), 665­690.


Van Nieuwerburgh, S., and L. Veldkamp (2009): "Information Immobility and the Home

  Bias Puzzle," J. Finance, 64(3), 1187­1215.




                                                48
