                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    CAN THE UNEMPLOYED BORROW? IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC INSURANCE

                                       J. Carter Braxton
                                      Kyle F. Herkenhoff
                                      Gordon M. Phillips

                                      Working Paper 27026
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27026


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




We thank Jacob Adenbaum, Naoki Aizawa, Gadi Barlevy, Satyajit Chatterjee, Mariacristina
DeNardi, Nathan Hendren, Bob Hunt, Greg Kaplan, Dirk Krueger, Ben Lester, Jeremy Lise, Igor
Livshits, Loukas Karabarbounis, Ellen McGrattan, Makoto Nakajima, Victor Rios-Rull, and
Shouyong Shi as well as numerous seminar participants for helpful comments. We thank Brian
Littenberg and the Census for their hospitality and ongoing support. Herkenhoff and Phillips
thank the National Science Foundation (Award No. SES-1824422), the Washington Center for
Equitable Growth, and the Heller-Hurwicz Institute for funding. This research uses data from the
Census Bureau's Longitudinal Employer Household Dynamics Program, which was partially
supported by the following National Science Foundation Grants SES-9978093, SES-0339191 and
ITR-0427889; National Institute on Aging Grant AG018854; and grants from the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to
ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not those of the Federal Reserve System or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by J. Carter Braxton, Kyle F. Herkenhoff, and Gordon M. Phillips. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Can the Unemployed Borrow? Implications for Public Insurance
J. Carter Braxton, Kyle F. Herkenhoff, and Gordon M. Phillips
NBER Working Paper No. 27026
April 2020
JEL No. D14,E21,E24,G51,J64

                                          ABSTRACT

We show that unemployed individuals maintain significant access to credit. Following job loss,
the unconstrained borrow, while the constrained default and delever. Both defaulters and
borrowers are using credit to smooth consumption. We quantitatively show that long-term credit
relationships and credit-registries allow the unemployed to partially offset income losses using
credit. We estimate the model and find that the optimal provision of public insurance is
unambiguously lower with greater credit access. Using a utilitarian welfare criterion, the optimal
steady-state policy is to lower the replacement rate of public insurance from the current US policy
of 41.2% to 38.3%. Moreover, lowering the replacement rate to 38.3% yields welfare gains to the
majority of workers along the transition path.

J. Carter Braxton                                Gordon M. Phillips
University of Minnesota                          Tuck School of Business
947 17th Ave SE #4                               Dartmouth College
Minneapolis, MN 55414                            100 Tuck Hall
braxt023@umn.edu                                 Hanover, NH 03755
                                                 and NBER
Kyle F. Herkenhoff                               gordon.m.phillips@gmail.com
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
4-101 Hanson Hall
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and IZA
kyle.herkenhoff@gmail.com
    By the first quarter of 2018, aggregate credit card limits exceeded 17% of GDP. In this paper,
we explore how the presence of this well developed credit market affects optimal labor market
policy. To what extent can ­ and do ­ displaced workers offset income loss and thus self-insure
using credit? Given the degree to which displaced workers can privately self-insure, what is the
optimal provision of public insurance?
    Our empirical contribution is to measure the borrowing behavior and borrowing ability of
unemployed individuals. Using newly linked administrative earnings and credit bureau data, we
document four facts which suggest that credit markets play an important role in the way workers
self-insure: (1) prior to displacement, workers who lose their jobs can replace a significant fraction
of their prior income with unused credit (44% with unused revolving credit, on average), (2)
credit limits and credit scores do not immediately respond to job loss and do not decline in an
economically significant manner within five years after job loss, (3) unconstrained individuals,
those with credit scores in the top two quintiles prior to job loss, borrow and replace a significant
fraction of lost earnings with credit, and (4) constrained individuals, who have credit scores in
the bottom two quintiles prior to job loss, default and delever. Both borrowing and defaulting
allow job losers to transfer resources across time and states of the world, allowing unemployed
individuals to partially self-insure their losses.
    Our empirical results reconcile two literatures with seemingly conflicting results. Studies based
on checking-account data suggest that there is roughly zero net borrowing, on average, by workers
who lose their jobs (e.g. Gelman, Kariv, Shapiro, Silverman, and Tadelis [2015], and Ganong and
Noel [2015]). On the other hand, direct questions about borrowing among workers who lose their
jobs and other survey data imply that roughly 20% of the unemployed borrow, and roughly 30%
become delinquent on debt obligations (e.g. Sullivan [2008], Hurd and Rohwedder [2010], and
Gerardi, Herkenhoff, Ohanian, and Willen [2015]).1 We reconcile these results by showing that
some job losers borrow, while other job losers default and delever. While these offsetting forces
yield zero net-borrowing by the unemployed, both the borrowers and defaulters are using credit
to smooth consumption.
    Our quantitative contribution is to compute optimal public insurance to the unemployed in
an environment that replicates our empirical findings while also matching current levels of credit
access in the U.S. We do so by integrating long-term credit lines (e.g. Mateos-Planas and R´       ios-
Rull [2010]) and employment risk (e.g. Moen [1997], Burdett, Shi, and Wright [2001], and Menzio
and Shi [2011]) into a defaultable debt framework (e.g. Eaton and Gersovitz [1981], Chatterjee,
Corbae, Nakajima, and R´    ios-Rull [2007], and Livshits, MacGee, and Tertilt [2007]).
   1
    Papers that show ex-post borrowing following job loss include Sullivan [2008], Hurd and Rohwedder [2010],
Herkenhoff [2013], Collins, Edwards, and Schmeiser [2015]. Papers that show ex-post default include Hurd and
Rohwedder [2010], Gerardi, Herkenhoff, Ohanian, and Willen [2015], Herkenhoff, Phillips, and Cohen-Cole [2015],
and Keys [2018]. Surveys of bankruptcy also cite job loss as a factor (e.g. Sullivan, Warren, and Westbrook [1999]).
Lastly, Baker and Yannelis [2015] illustrate significant differences in consumption losses between constrained and
unconstrained individuals (see also Crossley and Low [2011]).


                                                         1
    To generate the credit access and borrowing patterns we observe in the data, our theory relies
on two features of the U.S. credit market: (i) the credit registry generates reputation concerns in
the form of exclusion from credit markets in the event of default, and (ii) lenders issue long-term
contracts in the form of revolving lines of credit, such as credit cards and home equity lines of
credit, whose limits and interest rates are not contingent on subsequent income changes. Because
the unemployed value future access to credit markets, most job losers repay, and therefore lenders
offer credit contracts to individuals both before and after job loss. Conversely, in a model without
credit lines, where debt is individually priced each period, unemployed agents would face a sudden
change in borrowing capacity, which is inconsistent with the facts we establish. As Athreya, Tam,
and Young [2009] have shown, credit markets are poor insurance markets in economies with one-
period debt. It is the presence of credit lines which allows us to match both the level of credit
access and the non-responsiveness of credit limits to layoff.
    After estimating our framework to match aggregate credit access and borrowing moments in
the early 2000s, we show that our model successfully replicates the non-targeted responses of
borrowing, credit limits, and defaults upon job loss. Similar to the data, the model economy's
borrowing limits do not respond to job loss, while defaults increase. Additionally, as in the data,
the model generates heterogeneity in borrowing following job loss. Both groups of individuals, bor-
rowers and defaulters, smooth consumption using credit markets. In particular, when individuals
borrow they pay a premium in the form of a spread over the risk free rate, reflecting default risk.
In bad states of the world, such as when a borrower loses their job, they may default to smooth
consumption. Similar to Zame [1993], default partially completes the market in our framework.
    Given our model's ability to replicate the micro data, we use our framework to compute
optimal transfers to the unemployed (we express the optimal transfers as a replacement rate of
lost earnings during unemployment). We evaluate policies using a utilitarian welfare criterion,
in which equal weight is placed on all individuals. We assume the government raises funds to
cover transfers with a distortionary labor income tax. Therefore, the government faces an equity-
efficiency tradeoff that is affected by the presence of a credit market. Simultaneously cutting taxes
and public insurance improves efficiency (lower distortionary taxes) but also generates equity losses
(larger consumption losses upon layoff). In the presence of a well-developed credit market, the
ability to borrow mitigates consumption losses upon layoff and therefore lowers the equity losses
if public insurance is cut. Given levels of credit access observed in the early 2000s, the utilitarian
government's optimal steady-state replacement rate is 38.3%, which is lower than the current U.S.
replacement rate of 41.2%. If credit markets were shut down, the optimal steady-state policy is
an unambiguously higher replacement rate of 43.2%.
    Our optimal policy exercise implies a low degree of substitutability between public insurance
and private forms of self-insurance. There are two general equilibrium forces which limit the desire
of the government to substitute out of public insurance. First, for low levels of public insurance,
precautionary savings increase and individuals become less likely to borrow. Second, default rates

                                                  2
rise and credit becomes more costly if public insurance becomes sufficiently low. In other words,
public insurance and private self-insurance are complementary at the aggregate level (aggregate
transfers and aggregate borrowing comove positively for low values of public insurance), even
though at the individual level they are substitutes (ceteris paribus, individuals borrow more if the
public transfer is reduced). Therefore, moderate levels of public insurance are necessary to sustain
access to credit markets among the unemployed.
    Lastly, we compute welfare along the transition path when we reduce the replacement rate from
41.2% to 38.3%. Individuals who were alive at the time of this policy change have a utilitarian
welfare gain of .05% of lifetime consumption after the transition. We find that the majority of
individuals experience a welfare gain. However, while over 80% of individuals with the highest
human capital (at the time of the policy change) experience a welfare gain, only 65% of individuals
with the lowest human capital have a welfare gain. Even though our model does not have search
effort in the labor market, directed search generates moral hazard. As a consequence, cutting
transfers raises the employment rate by approximately .5% as workers search in areas of the job
market with higher job finding rates.
    Our paper contributes to recent work which has integrated credit markets into models with
labor markets (e.g. Athreya and Simpson [2006], Herkenhoff [2013], Bethune, Rocheteau, and
Rupert [2013], Bethune [2017], Athreya, S´ anchez, Tam, and Young [2015], Luo and Mongey [2016],
and Ji [2018]). The most closely related paper is by Athreya and Simpson [2006] who compute
the responsiveness of bankruptcies to public insurance provision, showing that more generous
unemployment insurance may actually raise bankruptcies. We build on Athreya and Simpson
[2006] in three key ways. We model long-term credit contracts which allows us to match the
degree of self-insurance provided by the credit market, we model the labor market in general
equilibrium, and we calculate the optimal provision of public insurance.
    Our model adds to a small but growing literature on individual credit lines, credit scoring,
and long-term relationships between borrowers and lenders.2 Of particular note, work by Mateos-
Planas and R´  ios-Rull [2010] analyzes bankruptcy reform in an economy with credit lines and
private information about endowments. We depart from Mateos-Planas and R´          ios-Rull [2010] by
modeling the labor market and we obtain tractability via competitive search over credit contracts.
    Our paper is related to studies which integrate unemployment insurance into Bewley-Huggett-
Aiyagari frameworks (e.g. Lentz and Tranaes [2001], Krusell, Mukoyama, and S     ¸ ahin [2010], Naka-
jima [2012a], and Nakajima [2012b]) as well as studies of optimal unemployment insurance with
assets (inter alia Shimer and Werning [2005], Chetty [2008], Lentz [2009], Koehne and Kuhn
[2015], Chaumont and Shi [2017], and Griffy [2017]).3 Related papers by Shimer and Werning
   2
     See Mateos-Planas and Seccia [2006], Mateos-Planas and R´ios-Rull [2010], and Mateos-Planas [2013] on models
of credit lines; Chatterjee, Corbae, and Rios-Rull [2008a], Chatterjee, Corbae, and Rios-Rull [2008b], and Chen
[2012] on models of credit scoring; and Mitman [2011] and Hedlund [2011] for models of long term relationships
between borrowers and lenders.
   3
     Our paper also complements studies on optimal UI over the business cycle (Mitman and Rabinovich [2011],


                                                       3
[2005] and Lentz [2009] compute optimal UI in models with savings. Relative to these studies
we make several contributions: (i) we empirically document the large income-replacement or self-
insurance role that credit markets play in the US economy, (ii) we incorporate the institutions
that allow this self-insurance to exist in our model (long-term contracts, reputation concerns, and
defaultable debt), and (iii) we quantify the substitutability between private borrowing and public
forms of insurance.
   Our article is also related to the literature on private unemployment insurance (e.g. Chiu
and Karni [1998] and Hendren [2015]). We contribute to this literature in two ways, (i) we focus
on private self-insurance or income replacement through credit markets, and (ii) Hendren [2015]
focuses on two-period models which abstract from reputation concerns and long-run interactions
present in our data and model. While both papers take very different approaches to the question
of how substitutable private and public forms of insurance are, our results are consistent with
Hendren [2015] in the sense that the scope for private self-insurance is limited, even with long-
term contracts and strong dynamic reputation concerns.
   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 describes our main empirical results, Section 2
describes the model, Section 3 describes the calibration, Section 4 computes optimal transfers to
the unemployed, and Section 5 concludes.


1     Empirical Results Using Administrative Data
Do the unemployed have access to credit? Do they borrow or default? We answer these questions
by studying time-series and cross-sectional credit market outcomes for workers who lose their
jobs. To mitigate endogeneity of job loss, we focus on mass layoffs (e.g. Jacobson, LaLonde, and
Sullivan [1993]). We first compare the average response of borrowing, credit limits, and scores
between workers who lose their jobs and those that do not. We find that workers who lose their
jobs have significant amounts of credit access, and that credit access does not respond in an
economically meaningful way to job loss. The mean amount borrowed by workers who lose their
jobs is approximately zero.
    We show that the zero-net-borrowing result is driven by heterogeneity among workers who
lose their jobs. Using the cross-section of workers who lose their jobs, we show that roughly 1/3
of workers who lose their jobs borrow, 1/3 default or delever, and roughly 1/3 do not alter their
borrowing. We establish that unconstrained individuals, those with credit scores in the top two
quintiles prior to job loss, borrow and replace a significant fraction of lost earnings with credit,
and constrained individuals, those with credit scores in the bottom two quintiles prior to job loss,
default and delever.
Birinci and See [2017], and references therein).




                                                   4
1.1    Data
Our main dataset is a randomly drawn panel of 5 million TransUnion credit reports linked through
a scrambled social security number to the Longitudinal Employment and Household Dynamics
(LEHD) administrative records database. The TransUnion database contains information on
the balance, credit score, limit, and status (delinquent, current, etc.) across different types of
consumer debt held by individuals at an annual frequency from 2001 through 2008. The LEHD
database is a matched employer-employee dataset covering 95% of U.S. private sector jobs. The
LEHD includes quarterly data on earnings, worker demographic characteristics, firm size, firm age,
and average wages. Our primary sample of employment records includes individuals with credit
reports between 2001 and 2008 from the 11 states for which we have LEHD data: California,
Illinois, Indiana, Maryland, Nevada, New Jersey, Oregon, Rhode Island, Texas, Virginia, and
Washington.
     Since job dismissal and reason of dismissal are not recorded in the LEHD, we follow Jacobson
et al. [1993] and focus on mass layoffs. Unlike Jacobson et al. [1993] who focus on workers from
Pennsylvania with 6 years of tenure prior to job loss, we focus on a representative cross-section
of workers with 3 years of tenure prior to job loss. We show that much of earnings losses in our
sample are temporary and that nearly 1/3 of the workers who lose their jobs immediately find
a job that pays more than their prior job (e.g. of 31k displaced workers only 19k have a loss
1 year after displacement), and thus their earnings losses are purely transitory. In a companion
paper, Braxton, Herkenhoff, and Phillips [2019], we use filtering methods to recover permanent
and transitory income shocks. We show that individuals borrow in response to negative transitory
shocks and default in response to negative permanent shocks.
     Our analysis focuses on revolving credit because it can be drawn down immediately after job
loss, with no additional application or income verification, and it can be repaid slowly. The main
components of revolving credit include bank revolving (bank credit cards), retail revolving (retail
credit cards), finance revolving credit (other personal finance loans with a revolving feature), and
mortgage related revolving credit (HELOCs). Appendix B includes an analysis of bank cards
as well as total credit, each of which exhibit similar patterns to revolving credit. However, it is
important to note that not all types of credit balances affect the budget constraint in the same
way. A first mortgage lowers liquid resources on hand (buying a house involves handing money
to the bank), whereas an increase in revolving debt augments liquid resources on hand. We also
study the response of credit scores, delinquencies (30 days late and 60 days late), and chargeoffs
to job loss.




                                                 5
1.2     Sample Descriptions and Summary Statistics
We use two samples in this paper.4

   1. Panel Sample: Our first sample includes all 18 to 64 year olds who were at a firm that
      underwent a mass layoff episode, had at least 3 years of tenure at the time of the mass layoff
      and made at least $5,000 dollars at the firm in the prior year.5 We split this sample into a
      treatment group of 31,000 individuals who were displaced as part of the mass layoff, and a
      randomly selected control group of roughly equal size that includes individuals who worked
      at a firm with a mass layoff but were not displaced. We require that individuals in the
      treatment group are never displaced as part of another mass layoff episode, and we require
      the control group is never displaced as part of a mass layoff episode.

   2. Cross Sectional Sample: Our second sample includes 19,000 displaced workers in the
      treatment group who had a decline in annual earnings comparing the year after displacement
      relative to the year prior to displacement.

Table 1 includes summary statistics for both samples. Panel (A) of Table 1 provides summary
statistics for the treatment and control groups in the Panel Sample in the year prior to the mass
layoff event. Annual earnings, as well as credit limits and balances are deflated by the CPI.
Column (1) of Table 1 summarizes the treatment group while column (2) summarizes the control
group. The treatment group earned $44k in the year prior to displacement while the control group
earned over $49k. In the empirical analysis we include individual fixed effects, controls for age,
and proxies for wealth to account for differences across treatment and control groups.
    The treatment and control groups are very similar in terms of their credit market variables.
Our measure of the credit score is the TransUnion "bankruptcy score," which is designed to
measure the probability of bankruptcy.6 The bankruptcy score lies between 0 and 1000 and higher
scores reflect lower odds of bankruptcy. The treatment group has an average credit score in the
year before displacement of 427, while the control group's average score is 437. Revolving credit
balances, limits and unused limits to income are also very similar across treatment and control
groups.
    Individuals have substantial revolving credit limits in the year before job loss, with an average
of nearly $27k for the treatment group. Individuals in the treatment group can replace, on average,
44 percent of their income with unused revolving debt in the year before job loss.7 The magnitude
   4
     All sample sizes are rounded to the nearest thousand in compliance with Census Bureau disclosure rules.
   5
     These restrictions on tenure and prior earnings are common in the literature, e.g. Davis and Von Wachter
[2011], and are used to mitigate issues associated with seasonal employment or weak labor force attachment.
   6
     Rather than using a traditional credit risk score, we use the TransUnion bankruptcy score in the regression
analysis. Bankruptcy scores are used only by more sophisticated lenders, and when they are used, they are used
in conjunction with a traditional credit risk score.
   7
     Note unused revolving credit to income is winsorized at the 1 percent level at the top and bottom of the
distribution.


                                                       6
of unused credit prior to layoff indicates that these individuals have significant reserves of unused
credit which can be drawn down when they enter into unemployment.
    Panel (B) of Table 1 includes summary statistics for the cross sectional sample in the year prior
to mass layoff. In the analysis that follows, we define credit constraints using the credit score.
Table 1 shows that unused credit is monotonically increasing by credit score quintile. The table
also shows that in the year prior to mass layoff, the majority of individuals have a substantial
amount of unused credit. Individuals with the highest credit scores have unused revolving credit
that totals more than their annual income, while individuals in the third credit score quintile are
able to replace 27 percent of their annual income with revolving credit.
    The summary statistics of Table 1 indicate that individuals have, on average, a large stock of
credit prior to layoff. We next examine how access to ­ and use of ­ credit evolves following job
loss.


1.3       Average Response of Earnings and Credit Following Job Loss
Our first approach is to estimate the average response of credit variables following job loss using
a distributed lag framework as in Jacobson et al. [1993] around a mass layoff episode.8 This
empirical strategy compares displaced to nondisplaced individuals before and after the mass layoff
episode to identify how individuals use credit following job loss.
    Let i index individuals and t index years. Let i denote a set of individual fixed effects
and t denote year dummies. Let Yi,t denote the outcome of interest (such as real earnings, credit
score, real revolving debt balance, etc.). Let Dx,i,t be a dummy variable taking the value 1 when an
individual is x periods before (if x is negative) or after (if x is positive) displacement. For example,
D-1,i,t is a dummy variable indicating an individual is 1 period before displacement. The vector
Xi,t contains control variables, including a quadratic in age and deciles for lagged cumulative
earnings. We include deciles for lagged cumulative earnings to proxy for an individual's wealth
prior to displacement. The specification we use is of the following form:

                                                        5
                                   Yi,t = i + t +             j Dj,i,t +  Xi,t + i,t                (1)
                                                      j =-4


The objects of interest are 0 , 1 , ..., 5 , which summarize the impact of job loss on the outcome
variable in the year of displacement and subsequent years. To examine the validity of the point
estimates, we show that the treatment and control groups have parallel trends prior to displacement
(i.e. -4 , -3 , .., -1 are not statistically different from zero).
    Table 2 documents the average response of earnings and borrowing behavior following job loss.
The coefficients in Table 2 correspond to (-4 , -3 , ..., 4 , 5 ) in equation (1), and are interpreted
  8
      Appendix A includes details on the identification of mass layoffs.



                                                            7
as the difference in the outcome variable between displaced and nondisplaced individuals. Figure
1 plots the coefficient estimates from Table 2 along with 95 percent confidence intervals.
    Panel (a) of Figure 1 plots the differences in real annual earnings between displaced and
non-displaced individuals. The figure shows that earnings losses following job loss are large and
persistent. In the year of job loss, a displaced individual makes nearly $3k less than a nondisplaced
individual, and one year later, this difference in earnings increases to nearly $14k. Five years after
job loss, a displaced individual still earns $3k less than a nondisplaced individual. These large and
persistent effects of job loss are consistent with prior studies, e.g. Jacobson et al. [1993], Davis
and Von Wachter [2011], Jarosch [2014], and Huckfeldt [2014].9
    Panel (b) of Figure 1 shows the impact of job loss on an individual's credit score. The graph
shows that displaced and nondisplaced workers exhibit parallel pretrends. However, in the year
of layoff, a displaced individual's credit score declines by nearly 6.5 points, on average, relative to
nondisplaced individuals. In the following year, the difference in credit scores between displaced
and nondisplaced individuals is roughly 16 points. While statistically significant, these changes are
economically small. The average credit score for an individual in the treatment group is 427 points
in the year prior to displacement, with a standard deviation of 268 points. Relative decreases of
6 and 16 points, then represent less than a 1.5 percent and 4 percent decline in credit scores,
respectively. As credit scores represents the marginal cost of borrowing, our results indicate that
the marginal cost of borrowing is unresponsive to job loss.
    Panel (c) of Figure 1 demonstrates that the stock of credit is also largely unresponsive to job
loss. Panel (c) compares the revolving credit limits of displaced and nondisplaced individuals
around a layoff episode. In the year of displacement, a displaced individual's credit limit decreases
relative to a nondisplaced individual by $1k, on average. One year after displacement, the differ-
ence in credit limits between displaced and nondisplaced individuals increases to just over $1,700.
In the year prior to displacement, individuals in the treatment group had, on average, a revolving
credit limit of nearly $27k. Thus, by the year following displacement, the borrowing limit declines
to $25k, on average. These results indicate that following job loss, individuals maintain substantial
lines of credit.
    Panel (d) of Figure 1 measures the impact of job loss on borrowing. We focus on revolving
credit since it can be drawn down immediately, without notice or further income verification,
upon job loss. Panel (d) shows that, on average, displaced individuals do not borrow more than
nondisplaced individuals. This zero response of borrowing following job loss is consistent with the
recent work of Gelman et al. [2015] and Ganong and Noel [2015].10 However, the cross-sectional
analysis in Section 1.4 reveals that there is significant heterogeneity among workers who lose their
   9
     The increase in earnings of the treatment group relative to the control group prior to displacement is also
observed in Davis and Von Wachter [2011] and Jarosch [2014].
  10
     The results presented in Table 2 and Figure 1 include all types of revolving credit (HELOCs, etc.) rather than
just credit cards. In Appendix B.2, we present results for credit card (bank card) balances as well as limits. The
pattern of the results for credit card balances are nearly identical to revolving balances.


                                                        8
jobs as nearly two-thirds of workers alter their balances and default upon job loss, and a significant
fraction use the credit market to borrow.

1.3.1    Default Following Job Loss

We now investigate whether individuals can use credit markets to relax their budget constraint
by defaulting and not making scheduled debt repayments. When a lender and borrower enter
into a debt contract, both sides know that there is potential for the borrower to not repay the
loan. Lenders price contracts accordingly by charging a premium over the risk free rate, and in
bad states of the world, an indebted individual may default to smooth consumption. Table 3 and
Figure 2 document the propensity of individuals to smooth consumption via default following job
loss.
    Panel (a) of Figure 2 shows the difference in the probability of having a 60 day delinquency
within the past year for displaced and nondisplaced individuals around a mass layoff episode.
One year after job loss, displaced individuals are 3.1 percentage points more likely to be 60 days
delinquent.11 This result suggests that individuals use the skipping of payments as a means to
smooth consumption following job loss.
    After a sufficient amount of time (typically 6 months) the creditor ceases to try to collect
missing payments and they notify the credit bureau to "chargeoff" the debt. Panel (b) of Figure 2
shows the difference in the probability of having a debt chargeoff within the past year for displaced
and nondisplaced individuals. Prior to job loss, displaced and nondisplaced individuals are not
significantly different in their probability of having a debt chargeoff. However, in the year of job
loss, the probability a displaced individual will have a debt chargeoff is nearly 0.9 percentage
points higher than a nondisplaced individual. One year after displacement, the difference is nearly
3 percentage points.
    After charging off a debt, the creditor can sell the debt obligation to a collection agency who will
attempt to collect on the debt. The collection agency reports to the credit bureau, and the credit
bureau flags individuals in collection. Panel (c) of Figure 2 displays the difference in the probability
of having a debt enter into collections within the past 12 months for displaced and nondisplaced
individuals around a mass layoff. In the year they are laid off, the probability a displaced individual
enters collections is 1.1 percentage points higher than a nondisplaced individual. This represents
a 10% increase relative to the average collection rate of 11.2 percent between 2001 and 2008.12
    The effect of job loss on collections is very persistent. Four years after job loss, displaced
individuals remain nearly 2 percentage points more likely to be in collections than nondisplaced
  11
     These results are robust to using other measures of default or delinquencies. See Appendix B.2 for additional
average response results for measures of credit access, usage and default.
  12
     The share of consumers in collections comes from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's Quarterly Report
on Household Debt and Credit. Accessed from "https://www.newyorkfed.org/microeconomics/databank.html" on
6/14/2017.



                                                        9
individuals. The persistent emergence of collections following job loss indicates that individuals
relax their budget constraint by missing debt payments following job loss for a substantial period
of time.
    Panel (d) of Figure 2 shows the difference in the probability of having a derogatory public
flag within the past year for displaced and non-displaced individuals.13 One-year after job loss,
displaced individuals are 0.7 percentage points more likely to have a derogatory flag on their credit
report relative to a non-displaced individual.
    The results presented in Table 3 and Figure 2 indicate that individuals use missed debt repay-
ments and default in response to job loss. A striking feature of these results is their persistence.
Two years after job loss, individuals remain significantly more likely to have their outstanding
debts charged off. Four years after displacement, individuals are still more likely to be in col-
lections. The results in this section show that despite not borrowing on average, credit markets
play a central role in an individual's response to unemployment through the use of defaults (e.g
missed payments, chargeoffs, and collections). In the next section, we show that while there is zero
borrowing on average, this result masks substantial heterogeneity in borrowing behavior following
job loss.


1.4        Heterogeneous Responses: Credit Replacement Rates
We now explore the cross-sectional patterns of borrowing by workers who lose their jobs. Despite
the fact that there is zero net borrowing following job loss, we now show that roughly 1/3 of workers
who lose their jobs borrow, 1/3 delever or default, and roughly 1/3 do not alter their borrowing
patterns. Both defaulters and borrowers are using credit markets to smooth consumption.
    To formalize the analysis of heterogeneous responses of borrowing to job loss, we measure
revolving credit replacement rates (we will refer to this as the `replacement rate' in this section).
Let t denote year of displacement and i denote the individual. The replacement rate is the ratio
of an individual's change in their revolving debt balance to the change in their earnings, where we
measure the change in revolving debt balance and earnings from the year prior to displacement to
                                          -(debti,t+1 -debti,t-1 )
the year after displacement (RRit = earningsi,t   +1 -earningsi,t-1
                                                                    ).14 Since the replacement rate is only
defined for those with an earnings loss, we restrict our sample to individuals with an earnings loss
between the year prior to displacement and the year after displacement. The numerator in the
replacement rate is the negative of the change in revolving debt to ease interpretation. Figure 3
presents a smoothed density of the replacement rates in our cross-sectional sample. The density
exhibits significant variance, with some individuals replacing over 70 percent of their earnings loss
  13
       Individuals obtain a derogatory flag on their credit report for bankruptcy, tax liens, foreclosure, civil judgments,
etc.
  14
    We measure the change in earnings and revolving debt balances over a two year window since Panel (a) of
Figure 2 shows that the decline in earnings due to job loss is concentrated in the year after displacement. Our
previous draft used a one year window (comparing t to t-1) and found similar results ­ those results are available
upon request.


                                                             10
with revolving debt (replacement rate of 0.7) and some individuals who decrease their balances
by over 70 percent of their earnings loss (replacement rate of -0.7).15
    In Figure 3, 39% of the displaced workers delever. Among those who delever, a large fraction
default. Table 4 reveals that roughly 43.6% (=.17/.39) of those who delever enter delinquency
in the year after layoff. Moreover, 21% (=.08/.39) of those who delever receive a debt chargeoff.
Among those who delever without a deliquency flag, it may be the case that the banks renegotiated
the loan without charging it off (Adelino, Gerardi, and Willen [2013]), however, we cannot identify
renegotiations.
    Our theory, which we present later in Section 2, as well as existing theories, predict that
credit constraints are an important determinant of the borrowing decision. To proxy for credit
constraints, we separate individuals into credit score quintiles based on their credit score in the
year prior to displacement.16 Let Cy,i,t-1 be a dummy variable taking the value 1 when individual
i is in credit score group y in year t - 1 and will be displaced in year t. For example, C3,i,t-1 is a
dummy variable indicating an individual is in credit score quintile 3 one year before being displaced
in year t. The vector Xi,t contains control variables, including a quadratic in age and deciles for
lagged cumulative earnings. Using our cross sectional sample of displaced workers who had an
earnings loss, we estimate regressions of the replacement rate (RRit ) on credit score quintiles:

             RRit = 1 + 2 C2,i,t-1 + 3 C3,i,t-1 + 4 C4,i,t-1 + 5 C5,i,t-1 + t + Xit + it                         (2)

The objects of interest are (1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 ). The coefficient k for k  2, gives the difference in
replacement rates for individuals in the k th credit score quintile relative to individuals in the first
credit score quintile, holding all else constant.
   To estimate the average replacement rate for an individual in the k th credit score quintile we
take the average values of the control variables for individuals in the sample denoted by X     ¯ i and
use the OLS coefficients in the following expression:

                                              ^ k=
                                             RR   ^k + ^1 + ^X
                                                             ¯i                                                  (3)
               ^ k can be interpreted as the average replacement rate for the k th group conditional
The statistic RR
on the controls. Additionally, taking the difference between RR  ^ k and RR^ 1 returns the marginal
effect at the mean of moving from credit score group 1 to credit score group k .
    Table 5 documents the role that credit scores prior to displacement play in determining an indi-
vidual's replacement rate. The coefficients in column (1) of Table 5 correspond to (1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 )
in equation (2). The first column of Table 5 documents significant differences in replacement rates
  15
     In Appendix B.4, we show that the credit replacement rate for the unemployed measured in the 2007-09 SCF
panel reveals a similar pattern of credit usage around job loss.
  16
     Note the credit score quintiles are defined among all displaced individuals in our cross sectional sample. These
individuals experienced an earnings loss in the 2-year window around displacement, which compares real annual
earnings in the year after displacement relative to the year before displacement.


                                                         11
across credit score quintiles.17 Holding all else constant, an individual in the fifth credit score
quintile has a replacement rate that is 18.4 percentage points higher than an individual in the first
credit score quintile.
    Figure 4 displays the estimated replacement rate (RR    ^ k ) by credit score quintile. The figure
shows that average replacement rates are an increasing function of credit score quintile. Individuals
in the bottom two credit score quintiles reduce their revolving debt balances while individuals in
the top three credit score quintiles replace earnings losses with revolving debt. Individuals in the
fourth credit score quintile replace 9 percent of their lost earnings by borrowing, while individuals
in the highest credit score quintile replace 15 percent of their lost earnings by borrowing. For
comparison, in Section 3, we estimate that job losers replace 41.2% of lost earnings with public
transfers. Hence the amount of income-replacement that individuals with the highest credit scores
obtain through increasing their revolving credit balances is equivalent to over a third of the amount
of public insurance currently offered in the U.S.
    While replacement rates are easy to interpret and capture overall credit market use during
job loss, replacement rates may be driven by factors other than earnings losses (e.g. high score
individuals may simply borrow more, on average). In the next section, we isolate the portion of
the replacement rate attributable to earnings losses.


1.5     Heterogeneous Response: Role of Earnings Losses
Our final approach is to estimate the heterogeneous responses of credit outcomes to earnings losses
across individuals with different credit scores. Let ei,t+1,t-1 = ei,t+1 - ei,t-1 be the change in
earnings between year t + 1 and year t - 1 for an individual i who was displaced in year t and had
an earnings loss. As above, let Cy,i,t-1 be a dummy variable taking the value 1 when individual i
is in credit score group y in year t - 1 and will be displaced in year t. Let Yi,t+1 be the outcome
variable of interest (such as the change in real revolving debt balances, or an indicator variable
for having a 60-day delinquency). We estimate the following specification:

                                            5
       Yi,t+1 = t +  + µei,t+1,t-1 +              (j Cj,i,t-1 + µj Cj,i,t-1 × ei,t+1,t-1 ) +  Xi,t + i,t   (4)
                                           j =2


The objects of interest are (µ, µ2 , µ3 , µ4 , µ5 ). The coefficient µ summarizes the marginal change in
the outcome variable for each dollar lost among individuals in the lowest credit score group, and
the sum of the coefficients µ + µj return the marginal effect for individuals in the j th credit score
group. We relegate the corresponding tables to Appendix B.3.
   We first consider the heterogeneous responses of borrowing to changes in earnings. Panel (a) of
Figure 5 plots the marginal effect of a $10k earnings loss on revolving credit balances by credit score
  17
    Note the replacement rate used in the estimation of equation (2) is winsorized at the top and bottom of the
distribution by 10 percent.


                                                        12
quintile. Individuals with the highest credit scores replace 5.39% of lost earnings by borrowing.
So for every $10k of lost earnings, they borrow $539 (= -10, 000 × [0.0210 - 0.0749]). Individuals
in the lowest credit score quintile reduce their credit balances by 2.1% of lost earnings (the p-value
of this point estimate is just slightly larger than .1). For every $10k of lost earnings, they reduce
borrowing by $210 (-10, 000 × 0.021). These results highlight that there is heterogeneity in the
role that earnings losses play in an individual's borrowing behavior following displacement. Hence
part of the heterogeneity in replacement rates observed in Figure 4 is attributable to differences
across credit score groups in the response of revolving debt balances to earnings losses. Thus, some
component of the borrowing response to job loss may be consistent with contemporaneous and
innovative work by Hundtofte and Pagel [2017] who use Icelandic data and attribute delevering
upon job loss to heterogeneous preferences to smooth debt.
    We next consider the heterogeneous responses of default to changes in earnings. Panel (b) of
Figure 5 plots the marginal effect of a $10k earnings loss on the probability of a 60-day delinquency
in the year after displacement. For individuals in the lowest two credit score quintiles, a $10k
decline in earnings increases the probability of a 60-day delinquency by 1.23 percentage points.
For individuals in the three highest credit score groups, a decline in earnings is not associated
with higher delinquency rates. Panels (c) and (d) of Figure 5 plot the marginal effect of a $10k
earnings loss on the probability of a debt chargeoff and a derogatory public flag, respectively. For
those in the lowest credit score quintiles, a $10k decline in earnings increases the probability of
a chargeoff by .74 percentage points and increases the probability of a derogatory public flag by
.61 percentage points. For those in the highest credit score quintiles, the chargeoff and derogatory
flag response is roughly two to four times weaker.


1.6    Taking Stock: Heterogeneous Responses
Across credit score quintiles, individuals use credit markets to smooth consumption in very differ-
ent ways. Unconstrained individuals in the highest credit score quintile increase their revolving
credit balances in response to income losses. Conversely, constrained individuals in the middle
and bottom of the credit score distribution default and chargeoff loans in response to income
losses. Both groups of individuals are using credit markets in response to job and income loss.
In the subsequent sections, we develop a quantitative model to replicate these observations from
the data. We then quantify the optimal degree of public insurance given the level of credit access
observed in the data.


2     Model
In this section, we compute optimal transfers to the unemployed (which we will also call `public
insurance') in an environment that replicates the borrowing behavior documented in Section 1.

                                                 13
Our framework is a labor search model (e.g. Menzio and Shi [2011]) with long-term credit lines (e.g.
Mateos-Planas and R´    ios-Rull [2010]). By modeling credit lines, we are able to replicate the non-
responsiveness of credit access to job loss. In the calibrated model, when public insurance becomes
sufficiently low, high asset individuals precautionary save, while low asset individuals become more
likely to default, and the credit market endogenously contracts. This complementarity between
public and private insurance limits the willingness of the government to substitute out of public
insurance.
     Time is discrete and runs forever. There is a unit measure of individuals, a continuum of
potential risk-neutral lenders, and a continuum of potential entrant firms. There are T  2
overlapping generations of risk averse individuals that face idiosyncratic risk, similar to Menzio,
Telyukova, and Visschers [2012]. Each individual lives T periods. Individuals have heterogeneous
discount factors. Let i be a type i individual's discount factor, where i  {H, L} denotes an
individual's type and types are both observable and permanent. We set 0 < H < L < 1, i.e.
type L individuals are more patient (`low profit' to lenders) than type H individuals (`high profit'
to lenders). The share of type i individuals in the economy is i . Heterogeneous discount factors
will allow us to match the cost of credit and use of credit observed in the U.S. data.
     At the start of each period, individuals direct their search for jobs (e.g. Moen [1997], Burdett
et al. [2001], and Menzio and Shi [2011]). Individuals then participate in an asset market where
they make asset accumulation, borrowing, and default decisions. Let t denote age and t0 denote
birth cohort. We assume that individuals must apply (i.e. search) for credit contracts at utility
cost S . Let Si,t,t+t0 be a dummy that equals 1 if a type i, age t individual searches for credit
in period t + t0 . Individuals may default on their loans bi,t,t+t0 at utility cost D (bi,t,t+t0 )Di,t,t+t0 ,
where Di,t,t+t0 is a dummy that equals 1 in the event of default. The objective of an individual is
to maximize the present discounted value of utility over non-durable consumption (ci,t,t+t0 ) net of
any utility penalties of default and application costs:

                            T
                      Et0         it (u(ci,t,t+t0 ) - D (bi,t,t+t0 )Di,t,t+t0 - S Si,t,t+t0 )
                            t=1


For the remainder of the paper we focus on a recursive representation of the problem, dropping
the time subscript t + t0 .
    In addition to types, individuals are heterogeneous along multiple dimensions. Individuals are
either employed or unemployed, with employed value functions denoted W , and unemployed value
functions denoted U . Let e  {W, U } denote employment status. Let b  B  [B, B          ¯ ]  R denote
the net asset position of the individual, where b > 0 indicates saving and b < 0 indicates borrowing.
Let h  H  [h,     ¯
                ~ h
                  ~ ] × [ , ¯]  R2 be a tuple representing an individual's human capital. Human
capital is comprised of two components, a persistent component (h     ~ ) and a transitory component
( ). Human capital follows a Markov chain which depends on an individual's employment status,


                                                         14
and it is calibrated to match earnings changes of the employed, as well as earnings losses following
job loss. Workers differ with respect to their piece-rate   [0, 1] which denotes the share of their
per-period match output that they receive as a wage. Individuals also differ with respect to their
credit access a  {C, N }, where a = C denotes those with credit access who can borrow, and
a = N denotes those without credit access who are unable to borrow. Individuals that have credit
access are heterogeneous with respect to their borrowing limit b  B  [B, 0] as well as their
interest rate r  R [r, r    ¯]  R+ .
    Unemployed individuals direct their search for employment across vacancies which specify a
fixed piece rate  for the duration of the employment match. Let M (u, v ) denote the labor
market matching function, and define labor market tightness to be the ratio of vacancies (v )
to unemployment (u). Since search is directed, there is a separate labor market tightness for
each submarket, defined by an agent's age (t), requested piece-rate ( ), and human capital (h).
Although individuals differ along other dimensions, an agent's age, human capital, and requested
piece-rate are the only characteristics that matter for firm profitability. In each submarket, the
job finding rate for individuals, p(·), is a function of labor market tightness t (, h), such that
p(t (, h)) = M (ut (u
                    ,h),vt (,h))
                      (,h)
                                 . On the other side of the market, the hiring rate for firms pf (·) is
                           t
                                                                                                           M (ut (,h),vt (,h))
also a function of labor market tightness and is given by pf (t (, h)) =                                          vt (,h)
                                                                                                                               .   Once
matched with a firm, a worker produces f (h) : H  R+ and keeps a share  of this production as
their wage. Matches end exogenously each period with probability  . It is important to note that
because we model piece-rate contracts, workers' wages grow over time with their human capital.
This generates a motive for employed workers to borrow against future income, and we need newly
laid off workers to be indebted prior to job loss in order to generate defaults and delevering.
    Every period individuals without credit access choose whether or not to search for a credit line,
which entails a utility cost S . After incurring the utility cost, the agent then directs their search
over the menu of credit lines, which specify a borrowing limit b, and interest rate r. Let MC (uC , vC )
denote the credit market matching function, and define the credit market tightness to be the ratio
of vacant credit contracts (vC ) to individuals searching for a credit contract (uC ). As in the labor
market, since search is directed, credit market tightness is specific to each submarket. A submarket
is defined by an agent's age (t), type (i), employment status (e  {W, U }), piece-rate wage ( ),
prior debt (b), human capital (h), and the requested contract (b, r). In each submarket, the credit
finding rate for individuals, pc (·), is a function of the credit market tightness. For unemployed
                                          c,U                        c,U
individuals, the tightness is given by i,t    (b, h; b, r) where pc (i,t (b, h; b, r)) is the associated credit
finding rate.18 On the other side of the market, the probability a lender matches with a borrower,
                                                                                           c,U
denoted pc                                                                              c
          f (·), is also a function of credit market tightness and is given by pf (i,t (b, h; b, r )).
                                                                                                         19
                                                                                                            An
  18                           c,U                 MC (uC,i,U,t (b,h;b,r ),vC,i,U,t (b,h;b,r ))
       For the unemployed, pc (i,t (b, h; b, r)) =           uC,i,U,t (b,h;b,r )
                                                                                                . For the employed, the tightness
                                 c,W                             c,W                          M (u      (,b,h;b,r ),vC,i,W,t (,b,h;b,r ))
depends on the wage piece-rate, i,t   (, b, h; b, r) and pc (i,t     (, b, h; b, r)) = C C,i,W,tu                                         .
                                                                                                         C,i,W,t (,b,h;b,r )
  19                         c,U                   MC (uC,i,U,t (,b,h;b,r ),vC,i,U,t (,b,h;b,r ))
     For the unemployed, pc
                          f (i,t (b, h; b, r )) =              vC,i,U,t (,b,h;b,r )
                                                                                                   . For the employed, the credit


                                                                   15
individual remains matched with a lender until the individual defaults, or the match is destroyed
exogenously at rate C .
    The timing is such that individuals enter the credit search stage and must decide whether to
apply for a credit line. They then make borrowing, saving, and consumption decisions. Idiosyn-
cratic human capital risk is then realized. At the start of the next period individuals enter the
labor market and apply for jobs, and they may endogenously separate from lenders by defaulting
or they may receive an exogenous credit separation shock.
          S
    Let Ui,t (b, h; 0, 0) denote the value of entering the credit search stage for an unemployed, age
t, type i individual with net worth b, and human capital h. The last two elements of the state
space are zero, reflecting the fact that the agent does not have a credit contract, and thus b = 0
and r = 0. This agent must decide whether to pay the utility cost S of searching for a credit
contract or remaining without credit,

                     S                            A                  N
                    Ui,t (b, h; 0, 0) = max -S + Ui,t (b, h; 0, 0), Ui,t (b, h; 0, 0)                 t  T


                 S
                Ui,T +1 (b, h; 0, 0) = 0


          N
where Ui,t  (b, h; 0, 0) is the value of an unemployed individual without credit access, specified below,
      A
and Ui,t (b, h; 0, 0) is the value of applying for a credit contract which is given by

   A                             c,U                                          c,U
  Ui,t (b, h; 0, 0) =    max pc (i,t               C
                                     (b, h; b, r))Ui,t (b, h; b, r) + 1 - pc (i,t                N
                                                                                  (b, h; b, r)) Ui,t (b, h; 0, 0)
                        (b,r)B×R


    After the asset market closes, the agent makes their consumption and savings decisions with
savings accruing interest at the risk free rate rf . For an agent that did not receive a credit contract,
their consumption and savings problem is constrained in that the agent is not allowed to borrow.
An unemployed individual receives a public transfer z . This transfer incorporates all forms of
assistance that unemployed workers receive, which can include unemployment compensation and
emergency unemployment assistance as well as general transfer programs such as welfare and food
stamps that unemployed individuals may be enrolled in. As discussed in Section 3, we will calibrate
z to be consistent with the change in total transfers relative to the change in income for job losers.
The transfer to unemployed individuals is funded through a proportional tax  on labor income
that is levied across all employed individuals. Additionally, unemployed individuals receive the
value of home production g , which is assumed to be constant across the duration of unemployment
as well as homogeneous across unemployed individuals. In the model, home production proxies
for other resources that individuals have access to following job loss, such as transfers from friends
and family, or changes in spousal labor supply. We will calibrate the value of home production to
                                                 c,W                      MC (uC,i,W,t (,b,h;b,r ),vC,i,W,t (,b,h;b,r ))
finding rate depends on the wage piece-rate, pc
                                              f (i,t (, b, h; b, r )) =               vC,i,W,t (,b,h;b,r )
                                                                                                                         .



                                                          16
match estimates of consumption following job loss.
    After consuming, idiosyncratic human capital risk is realized. Unemployed individuals, on
average, lose human capital, while employed individuals gain human capital. Individuals then
enter the labor market where they direct their search over piece-rate wage contracts  . At the end
of the period, individuals without credit access enter the credit search stage. The continuation
value of an unemployed agent without credit access is,

               N                                                     S
              Ui,t (b, h; 0, 0) = max u(c) + i E max p(t+1 (~
                                                             , h ))Wi,t +1 (~
                                                                             , b , h ; 0, 0)+
                                  b 0                ~

                                                            S
                                        1 - p(t+1 (~
                                                    , h )) Ui,t +1 (b , h ; 0, 0)    t  T


            N
           Ui,T +1 (b, h; 0, 0) = 0


subject to the budget constraint,

                                        c + q (b , 0)b  z + g + b

and the law of motion for human capital, which is indexed by employment status U ,

                                             h = H (h, U )                                       (5)

The bond price q (b , r) includes both the discount on the face-value of loans as well as the savings
rate,
                                                   1                1
                             q (b , r) = I{b < 0}     + I{b  0}
                                                  1+r             1 + rf
    For an agent that received a credit contract, their consumption and savings problem is con-
strained by their borrowing limit b. The agent chooses their asset position, searches for jobs, and
then decides whether to default on any outstanding debts. The value function of an agent with
credit is given by,

               C                                                     D
              Ui,t (b, h; b, r) = max u(c) + i E max p(t+1 (~
                                                             , h ))Wi,t +1 (~
                                                                             , b , h ; b, r)+    (6)
                                  b b                ~

                                                            D
                                        1 - p(t+1 (~
                                                    , h )) Ui,t +1 (b , h ; b, r )   t  T


            C
           Ui,T +1 (b, h; 0, 0) = 0


subject to the budget constraint,

                                        c + q (b , r)b  z + g + b


                                                    17
and the law of motion for unemployed individuals' human capital (equation (5)). After directing
their search over firms in the labor market, the agent observes if their credit relationship has been
exogenously destroyed. With probability C , the agent looses their credit market access. After
the realization of the credit separation shock, the agent decides whether or not to default. The
default decision and the resulting continuation value for an unemployed worker is given by

             D                               N                              N
            Ui,t +1 (b , h ; b, r ) = C max{Ui,t+1 (0, h ; 0, 0) - D (b ), Ui,t+1 (b , h ; 0, 0)}               (7)
                                                N                               C
                                + (1 - C ) max{Ui,t +1 (0, h ; 0, 0) - D (b ), Ui,t+1 (b , h ; b, r )}


      N,U
Let Di,t +1 (b , h ; b, r ) be an indicator function denoting an individual's default decision when they
                                                                       N,U
are unemployed and are hit by the credit separation shock (Di,t         +1 (b , h ; b, r ) = 1 when the in-
                                                                C,U
dividual defaults and is equal to zero otherwise). Let Di,t+1 (b , h ; b, r) be an indicator function
denoting an individual's default decision when they are unemployed and are not hit by the credit
separation shock.
   Employed individuals in the economy face similar credit constraints as unemployed individuals.
The two main differences between the employed and unemployed are that (1) with probability  ,
employed individuals are laid off and must search for a new job, and (2) employed individuals
pay a proportional labor income tax  which is used to fund the public insurance transfer. The
Appendix C.1 contains the Bellman equations for employed workers.


2.1     Lenders
There is a continuum of potential lenders who are risk neutral and can obtain funds without
constraint at the risk free rate rf . Lenders discount their stream of future profits at rate lf  (0, 1).
Lenders offer credit contracts which specify a borrowing limit b < 0 and an interest rate r. Let
  U
i,t (x) denote the profits to a lender of being matched with a type i, age t, unemployed individual
                                                                             ^ N,U (x ) denote the asset
where an individual's state is given by x = (b, h; b, r).20 Let bi,t (x) and D i,t+1
and default policy functions of the individual. The profits to the lender of offering a contract with
borrowing limit b, and interest rate r are given by,

   U                                (rf - r)       ^ N,U (x ) + (1 - C )D
                                                                        ^ C,U (x )
   i,t (b, h; b, r) = lf bi,t (x)            + E C D i,t+1                i,t+1               × I{bi,t (x) < 0}
                                     1+r
                                                                                                                (8)
                   + lf (1 - C )E         ^ C,U (x ) 
                                        1-D          ^ i,t
                                                       U
                                                           +1 (x )
                                            i,t+1


At the end of the period an age t agent makes their savings decision, bi,t (x). If the individual is
borrowing, bi,t (x) < 0, then in the next period the lender earns the spread between the interest
  20
    For employed individuals the state is x = (, b, h; b, r), and lender profits are defined analogously in Appendix
C.2. Let x denote the state space of the individual in the next period.


                                                        18
rate r and the risk free rate rf . However, the lender faces default risk on the outstanding loan
bi,t (x). The default risk faced by the lender incorporates the probability of the credit separation
shock, as well as shocks to human capital and the individual's job search decision. The default
probability of the agent who receives the credit separation shock is denoted D^ N,U (x ), and is given
                                                                                i,t+1
     21
by:

       ^ N,U (x ) = p t+1 (^
       D                           N,W
                            , h ) Di,t      , b , h ; b, r) + 1 - p t+1 (^                   N,U
         i,t+1                         +1 (^                             , h )              Di,t +1 (b , h ; b, r )    (9)

where  ^ is the unemployed worker's choice of where to search for a job.22 If the agent does not
default and the credit match is not hit by the credit separation shock, then the match between
the lender and borrower continues to the next period. The profits to the lender in the next period
are denoted by   ^ U (x ) and take into account the agent's choice of where to search for a job.
                  i,t+1
The continuation profits to the lender are

        ^ i,t
          U                           W
                                , h ) i,t
              +1 (x ) = p t+1 (^               , b , h ; b, r) + 1 - p t+1 (^                 U
                                          +1 (^                             , h )             i,t +1 (b , h ; b, r )


    Free entry determines the number of lenders who enter each submarket in equilibrium. The
free entry condition is
                                       c,U
                             C  pc                     U
                                   f i,t (b, h; b, r ) i,t (b, h; b, r )                 (10)
                                                              c,U
The free entry condition binds for all submarkets such that i,t   (b, h; b, r) > 0. Note that individ-
uals who are searching for credit contracts are not currently able to borrow, b  0.
   Lenders in a match with an employed individual face a similar problem, but their continuation
value must take into account the probability that the individual becomes unemployed. Appendix
C.2 contains the Bellman equation for a lender in a match with an employed worker.


2.2       Firms
Firms are assumed to have access to a linear production technology, and to have an exogenous job
destruction rate  . Firms have the same discount factor lf as lenders. The continuation value of
a firm that has committed to pay piece rate  to their age t employee with human capital h is

                         Jt (, h) = (1 -  )f (h) + lf E (1 -  )Jt+1 (, h )                t  T

                      JT +1 (, h) = 0
  21
     The default probability when the agent is not hit by the credit separation shock is denoted D  ^ C,U (x). It follows
                                                                                                      i,t+1
the same structure as equation (9), but with the policy functions for default when the agent is not hit by the credit
                     C,W         C,U
separation shock, Di,t +1 and Di,t+1 .
  22
     Note the choice of where to search for a job is a function of state variables which are suppressed for convenience.




                                                           19
subject to the law of motion for human capital for employed individuals,

                                                     h = H (h, W )

   Firms must pay cost  to post a vacancy. A vacancy specifies a wage piece rate  , as well as
a human capital requirement h, and age t. Free-entry requires that:

                                                  pf t (, h) Jt (, h)                                     (11)

The free entry condition binds for all submarkets such that t (, h) > 0.


2.3     Government
The government determines the level of transfers to the unemployed, i.e. public insurance. We
assume the government must maintain budget balance in every period.
   All unemployed individuals receive public transfers z . Public transfers are paid for by a pro-
portional labor income tax,  , which is levied on all employed individuals to satisfy

                                z               u
                                                ^i,t (x) =                (f (h)^
                                                                                ei,t (x))                 (12)
                                    (i,t)   x                (i,t)   x


where u^i,t (x) is the share of individuals with state x that are type i and age t who are unemployed,
    ^i,t (x) = 1 - u
and e                ^i,t (x) is the share who are employed.23


2.4     Equilibrium
In equilibrium, individual decision rules are optimal, free entry holds in both the credit and labor
market, the government balances its budget, and the distribution of individuals across states is
consistent with the decision rules. The formal definition of equilibrium is given in Appendix D.
    In Appendix D, we prove that if the government budget constraint is ignored and  is exoge-
nously given, then the model is Block Recursive (e.g. Menzio and Shi [2011]). Given an exogenous
 , Block Recursivity means that the individual, lender, and firm problems can be solved indepen-
dently of the distribution of individuals across states.
    The equilibrium tax rate that balances the government budget constraint will ultimately de-
pend on the distribution of individuals across states and, in the case of transition dynamics, the
path of tax rates will also depend on the path of the distribution of individuals across states.
However, the fact that equilibrium prices and the distribution of individuals across states are only
linked by  greatly simplifies our computation of the transition path.
  23
   There is a slight abuse of notation where x = (b, h; b, r) for the unemployed and x = (, b, h; b, r) for the
employed.


                                                              20
3      Calibration
Due to the computationally demanding nature of the model, our calibration strategy is to assign
values from the literature to standard parameters wherever possible and then estimate the re-
maining non-standard parameters to match moments from the data.24 We estimate our steady
state to match moments from 1995 to 2007, although several of our moments are only available
at different points in time.
    The period is one quarter. We set the annualized risk free rate to 4%, and the corresponding
quarterly discount factor for firms and lenders is lf = 0.99. The low worker type (who generates
low profits to the lender) also discounts the future at the same rate, L = 0.99. We estimate
the discount factor of the high type (who generates high profits for the lender), H = .632, to
match the 95th percentile of the real credit card interest rate distribution. We measure the 95th
percentile of real credit card interest rates to be 19.03% in the SCF between 1995 and 2007.25
    We calibrate the fraction of individuals that are high types, denoted H = 1 - L = .096, to
target the fact that 31.38% of individuals report having a ratio of net liquid assets to annual gross
income that is less than 1 percent in the SCF between 1995 and 2007. This measure allows us to
capture the large mass of individuals at, or marginally above, zero net liquid assets.26
    In terms of labor market variables, we set the job destruction rate to a constant 10% per
quarter,  = 0.1 (Shimer [2005]). For the labor market matching function, we use a constant
returns to scale matching function that yields well-defined job finding probabilities:

                                                          u·v
                                       M (u, v ) =                  [0, 1)
                                                     (u   + v  )1/

The matching elasticity parameter is chosen to be  = 1.6 as measured in Schaal [2012]. The labor
vacancy posting cost  = .995 is estimated to target an unemployment rate of 5.0%, which is the
average reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics from 1995 to 2007.
    Human capital evolves following a Markov chain with a persistent and transitory component.
          ~ ), denote the human capital of an agent, where h
Let h = (h,                                                    ~ denotes the individual's persistent
human capital, and denotes the transitory component. We assume the production function is
                                                                ~ + . The process for the persistent
linear and additive in the human capital of the worker, f (h) = h
component of human capital is governed by two parameters ph,L   ~  and ph,H
                                                                        ~ .

                                        
                                        h~ -  w/ pr. p~ if unemployed
                                    ~ =               h,L
                       HP (h, U ) = h
                                        h~    w/ pr. 1 - ph,L
                                                          ~   if unemployed
  24
     Appendix E describes our solution algorithm in detail.
  25
     Interest rates are made real by subtracting the CPI inflation rate in a given year.
  26
     As in Herkenhoff et al. [2015], for each individual we sum cash, checking, money market funds, CDs, corporate
bonds, government savings bonds, stocks, and mutual funds less credit card debt over annual gross income.



                                                          21
                                          
                                          h~ +  w/ pr. p~ if employed
                                      ~ =               h,H
                         HP (h, W ) = h
                                          h~    w/ pr. 1 - ph,H
                                                            ~   if employed

   The grid for the persistent component of human capital h  ~  [0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1, 1.1, 1.2] as
well as the step size  = 0.1 between grid points are taken as given. To estimate the probability
that the persistent component of a worker's human capital increases while employed ph,H~   = 0.083,
we target the semi-elasticity of earnings with respect to age using the 1995 to 2007 Current
Population Surveys.27 To estimate the probability that a worker's productivity decreases while
unemployed ph,L~   = 0.651, we target the 6.9% decline in earnings 5 years following job loss as
measured in Section 1.3. The rapid pace at which workers lose the persistent component of their
human capital tends to dampen the importance of credit for self-insurance. Smaller values of ph,L~

considered in earlier drafts of this paper resulted in greater substitutability between credit and
public insurance.
   The process for the transitory component of human capital is governed by the parameters p ,L
and and p ,H :
                                               
                                                  ~)
                                                 (h     w/ pr. p ,H
                                               
                               ~ ,W) =
                           HT (h              = 0       w/ pr. 1 - p ,L - p ,H                                    (13)
                                               
                                               - (h
                                                    ~ ) w/ pr. p ,L

The step size  (h~ ) = 0.095h ~ is taken as given, and we estimate the parameters p ,H = 0.252
and p ,L = 0.111 to target the share of employed workers who experience a 9.5% wage increase
and decrease over a given year, respectively, as reported in Kurmann and McEntarfer [2017].28
Given the processes for the transitory and persistent components of human capital, the evolution
of human capital proceeds as:

                                 H (h, W ) = (HP (h, W ), HT (HP (h, W ), W ))
                                  H (h, U ) = (HP (h, U ), 0)

       The public transfer to unemployed workers z = .327 is estimated to match the 41.2% public
  27
     We estimate the earnings gain associated with an increase in age using the following regression of age on
earnings on a cross-section of individuals in period t: ln(Yi,t ) =  + age Agei,t + i,t ,where Yi,t denotes the earnings
of individual i in year t, and Agei,t denotes the age of individual i in year t. The coefficient age estimates the
average increase in log earnings associated with an increase in age. Using data from the CPS for the years 1995-
2007 among full-time workers between the ages of 25 and 54, we estimate a relative gain in earnings with a 1-year
increase in age of 0.93%. We additionally include educational attainment dummies, as well as industry and year
dummies in the estimation.
  28
     Kurmann and McEntarfer [2017] report that between 2009 and 2010, 7.65% of job stayers (individuals who
report being at the same establishment (SEIN) for 10 consecutive quarters) experienced a wage decline of at least
9.5% during that year. They report 19% of job stayers experienced a wage increase of 9.5% or higher during that
year.


                                                          22
transfer replacement rate (change in public transfers divided by change in annual income) among
laid-off workers observed in the PSID between 2001 and 2013.29 We focus on the change in transfers
around job loss rather than the level of transfers to focus on the transfers that are received upon
job loss.
    The value of home production g = 0.146 is calibrated to target the decline in consumption
associated with job loss. Using the PSID, we estimate that, on average, individuals who experience
at least 1-quarter of unemployment have annual consumption that is 93.8% of their consumption
level prior to layoff.30
    In terms of credit market variables, we set the quarterly exogenous credit separation rate to
2.6% per quarter, C = 0.026, based on Fulford [2015]. For the credit market matching function,
we again use a constant returns to scale matching function that yields well-defined credit finding
probabilities:

                                                           uC · vC
                                  MC (uC , vC ) =                      [0, 1)
                                                    (uC
                                                       C      C 1/C
                                                           + vC )
The matching elasticity parameter is chosen to be C = 0.37 as measured in Herkenhoff [2013].
    There is an exogenously given grid of interest rates for credit contracts over the interval [r, r
                                                                                                    ¯].
We set the minimum annual interest rate (r) to be 10.5%, which comes from taking the sum of
average interest charges and total fees as reported in Agarwal, Chomsisengphet, Mahoney, and
Stroebel [2014] for individuals with FICO scores greater than 800. We set the maximum interest
rate (¯
      r) to be 22.5%, which is the 99th percentile of the real credit card interest rate distribution
in the SCF from 1995 to 2007.
    Credit contracts also specify a borrowing limit which must lie in the interval [B, 0), where
B < 0 is the minimum value of the asset grid. We estimate B = -1.149, so that the average
unused credit (credit limit less outstanding balance) to income ratio is 23.5% as measured in the
SCF from 1995 to 2007.31 The credit posting cost C = 2.214 × 10-5 is estimated so that the
  29
     Our measure of income from the PSID is household income less transfers, which is the sum across household
members of (1) wage and salary income; (2) business income; and (3) interest dividend income. Transfers are also
measured at the household level. We measure the public transfer replacement rate (change in transfers over the
change in household income less transfers), for households where either the head of household or spouse has an
involuntary unemployment spell with a duration of greater than 1 quarter. We additionally require an income
decline of at least $1k, and we winsorize the replacement rate at the 1% level. We focus on involuntary layoffs to
avoid unemployment spells due to quits, and as involuntary layoffs are more consistent with the notion of a layoff
in the model. We similarly use individuals with an unemployment duration of at least three months given the
quarterly timing of the model where unemployed individuals are out of work for at least a full quarter. Using the
SIPP, Rothstein and Valletta [2017] estimate a replacement rate (changes in transfers over changes in earnings) of
43.6%.
  30
     In the PSID, we measure the change in family consumption across survey waves for families where the head of
household had an involuntary unemployment spell with a duration of at least one quarter between 2005 and 2013.
Additionally, we require that the household have at least $5k of consumption both before and after layoff, and
that the head of household was employed in the prior wave of the PSID. We winsorize the change in consumption
among this sample at the 5% level.
  31
     Using the SCF from 1995-2007, we estimate an unused credit to income ratio of 23%.


                                                       23
credit finding rate in the model matches the new-borrower credit approval rate of 65.0%, which
can only be measured in the 2007 to 2009 SCF panel. The utility cost of searching for a credit
contract S = 1.272 × 10-4 is calibrated to match the fact that 69.8% of the population has credit
access in the SCF from 1995 to 2007.
    A worker's life span is set to T = 120 quarters (30 years). Newly born individuals enter as
unemployed workers, with zero assets and without a credit contract. Their initial persistent human
capital is drawn from an exponential distribution with parameter H . We calibrate the parameter
H to match the P75-P25 earnings ratio of young workers (workers between 25 and 29), which we
                ~
             earnings         ~
                      p75 -earningsp25
measure as                                        ~
                                       , where earnings j is the j th percentile of residualized earnings.
                                                                                                          32
                   earningsavg
Using the CPS from 1995 to 2007 we measure the P75-P25 earnings ratio among workers age 25
to 29 to be 0.4843. Individual preferences over non-durable consumption are given by:

                                                         c1- - 1
                                                u(c) =
                                                           1-

    We set the risk aversion parameter to a standard value,  = 2. The utility penalty of default
is assumed to be linear in the amount of assets defaulted upon:

                                                 D (b) = -b · 

We set the default penalty  = 14.771 to match the bankruptcy rate in the U.S. from 1998-2007
of 0.145% per quarter.33
    Table 6 contains a summary of the model parameters, and Table 7 displays the calibrated
parameters and their calibration targets. The estimated model matches the targeted moments
very well. We discuss non-targeted moments in the next section.


3.1     Model Estimated Borrowing and Default Responses to Job Loss
In this section, we compare the model estimated borrowing and default responses of displaced
workers to the data. These moments were not targeted in the calibration.
    To measure the average effect of job loss on credit access and usage, we estimate the distributed
lag regression model of equation (1) on model simulated data. We impose the same sampling
requirements in the simulation as in the data. In particular, we require individuals to have 3 years
of tenure at a firm in order to be in either the treatment or control samples.
    Figure 6 plots the estimated coefficients. To facilitate the comparison between model estimates
and the data, we normalize reported coefficients by pre-displacement earnings. Panel (a) presents
the difference in earnings between displaced and non-displaced individuals from the model simula-
  32
    We residualize earnings by removing year and industry fixed effects, and controlling for the years of education.
  33
    This is computed using the SCF from 1998 (the date they first record bankruptcies) to 2007. We measure that
0.58% of individuals with a credit card report having filed for bankruptcy within the past year.


                                                         24
tion. Similar to the data, displaced individuals' earnings drop by approximately 30%, on average.
The shorter term recovery of earnings is quicker in the model than in the data; however, the losses
5 years after layoff are closer to the data since they are targeted in our calibration.
    Despite the large and persistent decline in earnings, Panel (b) shows that borrowing limits
are largely unaffected by job loss. Individuals take out credit lines prior to job loss and thus
borrowing limits are unresponsive to job loss, similar to the data. The change in credit limits is
effectively zero in the model. In the data, credit limits fall in years 1 and 2, but are insignificantly
different from zero elsewhere. This stands in contrast to models which have one period debt, e.g.
Herkenhoff [2013] and Athreya et al. [2009].
    Borrowing follows a similar pattern. Panel (c) reveals that debt is largely unresponsive to
job loss in both the model and data. Borrowing increases marginally in the model. In the data,
borrowing is indistinguishable from zero in all years.
    Panel (d) examines the propensity of individuals to default in the model following job loss.
When we compare the model to the data, we consider default to be any derogatory public flag
which includes bankruptcy, foreclosure, tax liens and other debt discharges. While our model's
concept of default is Chapter 7 bankruptcy, these derogatory public flags (including bankruptcy)
are typically correlated and result in the same end-result of debt discharge. These are rare events
in the data, and so we use public derogatory flags in the data to maximize power. Between the
year before layoff (t=-1) and the year after layoff (t=1), the default rate rises by .261% in the
model and by .639% in the data. Thus, the model accounts for nearly 41% (=.261/.639) of the
rise in defaults following job loss.
    Lastly, Figure 7 shows the model's heterogeneous response of borrowing and default to job
loss. We plot the model's distribution of credit replacement rates following job loss versus the
distribution of credit replacement rates in the 2007 to 2009 SCF panel (the change in debt can
only be measured in the panel years). The model is able to partially replicate the distribution
of replacement rates observed in the data. The model produces too little deleveraging, but it
successfully captures the large mass at zero and a significant fraction of borrowing.
    The relatively weak deleveraging response is driven by too little net and gross borrowing among
the employed, which is a common problem in consumer credit models (e.g. Herkenhoff [2013]).
Upon job loss, too few individuals have debts which limits how many job losers default or pay
down existing debt. Our framework partially addresses this issue by allowing human capital and
wages to grow over the lifecycle, generating a role for borrowing among young, employed workers.
In our baseline calibration 6.2% of job losers delever after job loss, whereas in the SCF data,
24% of job losers delever over the same period.34 Therefore our model captures roughly 25% of
  34
     In the SCF, we identify an individual to be unemployed in a given wave if they are either unemployed at the
time of the survey or have had an unemployment spell of longer than 4 weeks within the past year. We measure
the replacement rate and share of individuals deleveraging among household heads and their spouses who were not
identified as unemployed in the 2007 wave, but were identified as unemployed in the 2009 wave and had an earnings
loss between the 2007 and 2009 waves.


                                                       25
observed delevering among job losers.
   Overall, we view Figures 6 and 7 as evidence that the model generates similar unemployed
borrowing and default patterns as the data. We view the model's ability to reproduce unresponsive
borrowing among job losers, despite featuring strong precautionary motives and rising defaults,
as providing validation of the model.


4      Optimal Public Insurance to the Unemployed
In this section, we compute optimal public transfers to the unemployed under various levels of
credit access. Our benchmark U.S. economy features a transfer to the unemployed that replaces
41.2% of lost earnings on average. We first compute optimal transfers in steady state. When
assessing optimality in steady-state, we use a utilitarian welfare criterion, which is an equally
weighted average of newly born individuals' consumption-equivalent gains of moving to the new
policy.35 We find that the optimal replacement rate of public insurance is 38.3%.
    Second, we compute the general equilibrium transition path from current U.S. policy to the
new optimum. When assessing welfare along the transition path, we compute the consumption-
equivalent gains of all individuals alive at the time of the policy reform.36 We find that there
are small positive welfare gains along the transition path when the replacement rate of public
insurance is lowered from 41.2% to 38.3%.


4.1     Optimal Policy in Steady State
We first compute optimal transfers to the unemployed in steady state. We do so by comparing
utilitarian welfare across steady states of the model with differing levels of public transfers, z .
As we have done throughout the paper, instead of reporting z , we report the replacement rate of
public transfers which is the average fraction of lost earnings replaced by a given level of z . Table
8 summarizes our findings. Column (1) replicates the baseline U.S. calibration in which 41.2% of
lost earnings is replaced by the government, 19.6% of individuals borrow, the default rate is .142%
per quarter, and annual consumption falls by 6.0% for individuals who have an unemployment
spell.
    Column (2) reports the optimal replacement rate in the baseline U.S. calibration, where all
parameters except for z are held fixed at their values in Table 6. Welfare is maximized when
the public insurance transfer, z , replaces 38.3% of lost earnings. The fraction of individuals who
borrow increases to 20.4%, and annual consumption falls by 6.1% for individuals who have an
unemployment spell, which are both marginally greater than in the baseline calibration. With
  35
     See Appendix F for details on the estimation of the share of lifetime consumption an individual would be
willing to give up to move across economies.
  36
     See Appendix F.2 for details on the estimation of welfare along the transition path.



                                                     26
a weaker safety net, workers now find jobs faster, and the unemployment rate declines by .5%.
Although our environment does not feature search effort, the model still features moral hazard
because of directed search. With lower public transfers, individuals direct their search into sub-
markets where they find jobs more quickly.
    At a moderately lower public insurance replacement rate of 38.3%, the default rate declines.
In our framework, the cost of default is preclusion from future credit access. In an economy with a
marginally weaker safety net, individuals value future credit access more. Therefore, they are less
likely to default and the quarterly default rate declines to .135%. Importantly for our exercise,
the default rate is non-monotonic in the replacement rate of public transfers. We will illustrate
this property of the default rate in the next section.
    On average, individuals are willing to give up 0.129% of lifetime consumption to be born in an
economy with a 38.3% replacement rate as opposed to our baseline economy with a 41.2% replace-
ment rate. Figure 8 graphically illustrates steady-state utilitarian welfare for various replacement
rates. Welfare is single peaked with respect to the replacement rate. Lowering the replacement
rate too much generates significant welfare losses. We discuss the mechanisms behind this result
in the next section.
    We now counterfactually shut down credit markets (i.e. no borrowing, B = {0} and thus b = 0
for all contracts) and redo our optimal steady-state policy analysis. This exercise allows us to
study how optimal policy interacts with the presence of a well-developed credit market. Column
(3) of Table 8 reports our results. The optimal replacement rate increases to 43.2% when credit
markets are shut down. This replacement rate exceeds the current U.S. replacement rate of 41.2%.
    Without credit, there is limited private self-insurance for low asset individuals. A consequence
is that the government can partially complete the market by raising the public insurance replace-
ment rate from 41.2% to 43.2%. Because of moral hazard, however, when the safety net expands,
the unemployment rate increases by .1%. The relatively weak moral hazard effects from expanding
the safety net are in line with existing quantitative and empirical exercises (e.g. see Nakajima
[2012b] for a recent summary). To cover the cost of the expanded safety net, the equilibrium labor
tax rate increases by .15%.37
    Public insurance replacement rates can only be cut by 4.9 percentage points (=43.2-38.3) as
we move from a steady state in which 0% of individuals have access to credit (Column (3) of Table
8) to a steady state in which 70.5% of individuals have access to credit (Column (2) of Table
8). Therefore our steady state results suggest a limited scope for substitution between public and
private insurance. In what follows, we explore which features of the environment generate this
lack of substitutability.
  37
    We find that the effects of taxation are close to linear in our framework. In results available upon request, we
endow the government with necessary spending level G in order to generate reasonable initial labor income tax
levels. We find very similar results to what is reported in the text.




                                                        27
4.2     What limits the substitutability of public and private insurance?
Despite extremely well developed credit markets in the U.S., Column (2) of Table 8 reveals that it
is only optimal to moderately cut public insurance. What limits further substitution out of public
insurance and into borrowing? When public insurance is cut, there are two effects. First, those
who enter unemployment with zero assets have a much weaker safety net and borrow more, ceteris
paribus. This is what we refer to as micro substitutability between public insurance and borrowing.
Second, in general equilibrium, individuals save more in order to avoid entering unemployment
with zero assets. Fewer job losers borrow, and this is what we refer to as macro complementarity
between public insurance and borrowing.
    We measure the micro substitutability between public insurance and credit by analyzing the
borrowing patterns of unemployed individuals with zero net worth. By conditioning on zero net
worth, we are able to measure how borrowing responds to public insurance separately from pre-
cautionary shifts in the wealth distribution. Let ¯b0 denote the asset choice of a typical unemployed
individual with zero net worth. Panel (A) of Figure 9 plots ¯ b0 as a function of the public insurance
replacement rate. As the government replaces less income with public insurance, individuals with
zero net worth monotonically borrow more (¯     b0 becomes more negative). With a weaker safety
net, individuals with zero net worth optimally replace a greater share of their lost income through
borrowing. Therefore, we call public insurance and credit micro substitutes. This property holds
globally.
    At the center of the optimal public insurance decision is the endogenous cost of credit. Panel
(B) of Figure 9 plots the default rate, which is the key determinant of the cost of credit. The
relationship between public insurance and the default rate is non-monotonic. First, consider the
region with public insurance replacement rates greater than 38%. In this region, the default rate
rises when the public insurance replacement rate increases from 38% to 42%. To understand why
this is the case, consider the default punishment. Households borrow to smooth consumption,
and if they do not repay, they are excluded from future credit markets for a stochastic period of
time. Exclusion from credit markets is significantly less costly when the safety net expands, and
therefore the default rate rises when transfers increase.
    Now consider the region with public insurance replacement rates less than 38%. In this region,
the default rate rises when the public insurance replacement rate decreases from 38% to 28%.
With a smaller safety net, smaller income shocks trigger default. Consequently, default rates rise
in this region.
    Panel (C) of Figure 9 plots the interest rate, and Panel (D) of Figure 9 plots the credit finding
rate. Profit maximizing lenders understand the relationship between the default rate and the
safety net.38 In an environment with higher overall default rates, they adjust their behavior
  38
    The negative relationship between defaults and UI replacement rates, whether internalized by lenders or not,
is quite strong in the data, e.g. Hsu, Matsa, and Melzer [2014].



                                                      28
accordingly by providing credit offers (vC ) in submarkets with higher interest rates as well as
reducing the number of credit offers. The individual credit finding rate falls, and the cost of
credit, conditional on obtaining credit, rises. Panel (C) illustrates that the interest rate follows
the same non-monotonic pattern as the default rate. Panel (D) illustrates that the individual
credit finding rate declines when public insurance replacement rates fall beyond 38%. The higher
interest rate and lower credit finding rate both represent an increasing cost to credit as public
transfers are cut.
    We now turn to the macro complementarity of public transfers and credit. We measure the
macro complementarity between public insurance and credit by analyzing the fraction of indi-
viduals who borrow. When public insurance is cut, individuals save more in order to avoid large
consumption losses following an income shock. The fraction of individuals who borrow summarizes
how strong these general equilibrium precautionary motives are.
    Panel (E) of Figure 9 plots the fraction of individuals borrowing as a function of the public
insurance replacement rate. At high levels of public insurance which replace more than 36.9% of
lost earnings, public insurance and credit are aggregate substitutes. Increasing the replacement
rate from 38% to 42% lowers the fraction of individuals who borrow. However, at low levels of
public insurance which replace less than 36.9% of lost earnings, the fraction of individuals who
borrow declines as replacement rates are cut. The size of the credit market begins to contract
for further cuts to public insurance. Therefore, for low levels of public insurance, we call credit
and public insurance macro complements. The macro complementarity between credit and public
insurance at low levels of replacement rates is ultimately what prevents the government from
substituting further out of public insurance and into credit.
    Two key drivers of the macro complementarity are precautionary credit line accumulation
and precautionary savings. Panel (F) of Figure 9 plots the unused credit limit to income ratio
which rises monotonically as benefits are cut. Despite a falling fraction of borrowers, individuals'
precautionary motives dominate, and more individuals pay the utility cost of applying for credit.
Since so many more individuals apply for credit, the fraction of individuals with credit access rises
despite the lower credit finding rate. As a consequence, aggregate unused credit limits rise.
    In terms of precautionary saving, Panel (G) of Figure 9 plots the top and bottom deciles of the
wealth distribution. A result of lower replacement rates is rising wealth dispersion. Conditional on
borrowing, individuals must borrow more since there is a weaker safety net. The 10th percentile
of the wealth distribution falls. On the other hand, employed individuals now save more in order
to avoid borrowing at higher rates. The 90th percentile of the wealth distribution rises. The net
effect is significantly more wealth dispersion as the safety net is weakened.
    Ultimately, the overall substitutability between public insurance and credit is quite low and the
consumption of job losers declines as the replacement rate is cut. Panel (H) of Figure 9 plots the
year-over-year consumption loss of individuals who are displaced. Even thought there is increased
saving, the rising cost of credit and lower credit approval rate imply larger consumption losses

                                                 29
upon layoff as transfers are cut.
    What Panels (A) through (H) of Figure 9 establish is that despite micro substitutability be-
tween credit and public insurance, public insurance and credit are macro complements at low levels
of public insurance replacement rates. This limits the government's willingness to substitute out
of public insurance and into private borrowing. A consequence is that moderate amounts of public
insurance are necessary to keep the costs of borrowing low.
    Distribution of gains and losses. While the policy of decreasing the replacement rate of
public insurance from 41.2% to 38.3% raises welfare on average, it is not Pareto-improving. Figure
10 presents the welfare change of moving from a 41.2% to 38.3% replacement rate by the persistent
component of an individual's initial human capital. The majority of individuals with the lowest
initial level of human capital have a welfare loss when public insurance is cut. On the other hand,
the majority of individuals with the highest initial level of human capital have a welfare gain
when public insurance is cut. In our framework, human capital and assets are highly correlated.
Low asset, low human capital individuals must increasingly rely on more costly debt when public
insurance is cut, and thus they have welfare losses from the policy change.


4.3       Transition Path
In this section, we compute welfare gains along the transition path when public insurance replace-
ment rates are cut from current U.S. levels of 41.2% to 38.3%. We measure welfare along the
transition path for all individuals alive at the time of the policy reform.39
    To conduct the experiment, we start from the steady state of the baseline economy. We
simulate an unexpected decline in the generosity of the public insurance to the unemployed, where
the replacement rate is lowered to 38.3%. After the initial unexpected decline, individuals in the
economy have rational expectations that the lower replacement rate is permanent. What makes
the transition experiment tractable is the fact that our model is Block Recursive conditional on 
(see Section 2.4 and Appendix D). We allow the labor income tax rate,  , to adjust non-linearly
during the transition to the new steady state. See Appendix G for computational details of the
transition path experiment.
    Panel (A) of Figure 11 illustrates the path of the public insurance replacement rate. We let
t = 0 correspond to the year in which public insurance is cut from 41.2% to 38.3%. Panel (B) of
Figure 11 illustrates the path of the labor income tax,  , which is levied on employed individuals
to fund the public transfer. The tax rate declines by .27% in the first year after the policy change,
and then marginally declines thereafter to the new steady state.
    Panel (C) of Figure 11 plots the fraction of individuals borrowing. Since the initial U.S.
steady state prior to date t = 0 features a high public insurance transfer, when benefits are cut,
the fraction of individuals borrowing increases by roughly 1 percentage point. As Panel (E) of
 39
      See Appendix F.2 for details on the estimation of welfare effects in the transition experiment.


                                                          30
Figure 9 made clear, the government cuts transfers up until the point where fraction of individuals
borrowing reaches it maximum. Further cuts to public insurance would reduce borrowing.
    Panel (D) of Figure 11 illustrates that the unemployment rate declines along the transition
path with a weaker safety-net. What drives the decline in unemployment is that individuals direct
their search toward submarkets with greater job finding rates since they are less able to smooth
consumption through either public or private means. Even though our framework features wealth
accumulation, our model produces very fast transition dynamics, which is common in linear-
utility Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides models as well as frameworks that incorporate risk aversion
(Krusell et al. [2010]).
    We find that the average individual who is alive at the time that the transition occurs has a
0.05% consumption equivalent gain. Figure 12 plots the fraction of individuals, alive at the time
of the reform, who have welfare gains along the transition path. We stratify the welfare gains by
the persistent component of human capital at the time of the policy change. The figure shows
that at higher (lower) levels of persistent human capital, approximately 80% (65%) of individuals
have a welfare gain from the policy change. In summary, at all levels of persistent human capital,
the majority of individuals experience a welfare gain as the economy transitions from the current
41.2% replacement rate to a 38.3% replacement rate.


5    Conclusions
In this paper we ask two questions: Can the unemployed borrow? What does the presence of a
well-developed credit market imply for optimal public insurance to the unemployed?
    To answer the first question, we built a new dataset which links employment records to Tran-
sUnion credit reports. Our empirical contribution is to show that workers who lose their jobs
maintain access to credit and that unconstrained workers who lose their jobs borrow, while con-
strained workers who lose their jobs default and delever. We reconcile previous studies by showing
that displaced workers do not borrow on average, but roughly 1/3 of displaced workers default and
delever, and roughly 1/3 of displaced workers borrow more. Thus credit markets are important
for both sets of workers in their borrowing and consumption decisions.
    To answer the second question, we develop a new framework that integrates credit lines (e.g.
Mateos-Planas and R´  ios-Rull [2010]) into a competitive labor search model with employment risk
(e.g. Moen [1997], Burdett et al. [2001], and Menzio and Shi [2011]). Our quantitative contribution
is to measure the optimal degree of public insurance in an economy that features current levels of
U.S. credit access, and matches the responsiveness of credit access following job loss.
    We validate our model using our new micro facts, and we find that the optimal provision of
public insurance is unambiguously lower as credit access expands. In our benchmark economy, the
utilitarian government would prefer to have the income replacement rate from public unemploy-


                                                31
ment insurance lowered from the current US policy of 41.2% to 38.3%. We find this policy change
would generate welfare gains both in the new steady state as well as along the transition path.
    We then use the framework to explore the factors that limit the ability to further substitute
out of public insurance and into private borrowing. We find that for low levels of public insurance,
there is a strong macro-complementarity between credit markets and public insurance: credit
markets and public insurance comove positively. Cutting public insurance too much increases the
cost of credit and individuals precautionarily save. Consumption losses upon layoff increase and
individuals are strictly worse off. Individuals default more and thus, in anticipation of default,
lenders increase interest rates and provide fewer credit offers. Despite reputation concerns and
significant expansions of long-term credit, the U.S. government is quite close to the optimal public
insurance replacement rate.
    Beyond the contributions made in this paper, this paper documents basic facts regarding job
loss, default, and borrowing. These new facts can also be used to calibrate or examine policy
relevant mechanisms in incomplete-market frameworks. Moreover, the long-term credit model
developed in this paper is extremely flexible and allows us to better characterize the interaction
between credit and income. In concurrent work, we are using credit bureau data and modifying
the model framework to (i) identify permanent and transitory income processes (Braxton et al.
[2019]), and (ii) study the impact of credit access on earnings mobility (in progress).



References
Manuel Adelino, Kristopher Gerardi, and Paul S Willen. Why don't lenders renegotiate more home
 mortgages? redefaults, self-cures and securitization. Journal of monetary Economics, 60(7):835­853,
 2013.

Sumit Agarwal, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Neale Mahoney, and Johannes Stroebel. Regulating consumer
  financial products: Evidence from credit cards. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(1):111­164,
  2014.

Kartik Athreya, Xuan S Tam, and Eric R Young. Unsecured credit markets are not insurance markets.
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 56(1):83­103, 2009.

Kartik Athreya, Juan M S´ anchez, Xuan S Tam, and Eric R Young. Labor market upheaval, default
  regulations, and consumer debt. Review of Economic Dynamics, 18(1):32­52, 2015.

K.B. Athreya and N.B. Simpson. Unsecured debt with public insurance: From bad to worse. Journal of
  Monetary economics, 53(4):797­825, 2006.

Scott R Baker and Constantine Yannelis. Income changes and consumption: Evidence from the 2013
  federal government shutdown. Available at SSRN 2575461, 2015.

Zach Bethune. Consumer credit, unemployment, and aggregate labor market dynamics. Technical report,
  Working Paper, 2017.



                                                 32
Zach Bethune, Guillaume Rocheteau, and Peter Rupert. Aggregate unemployment and household unse-
  cured debt. 2013.

Serdar Birinci and Kurt Gerrard See. How should unemployment insurance vary over the business cycle.
  Manuscript, 2017.

J. Carter Braxton, Kyle F. Herkenhoff, and Gordon Phillips. The borrowing and default response to
   persistent and transitory income shocks. Manuscript, 2019.

Kenneth Burdett, Shouyong Shi, and Randall Wright. Pricing and matching with frictions. Journal of
  Political Economy, 109(5):1060­1085, 2001.

S. Chatterjee, D. Corbae, M. Nakajima, and J.V. R´  ios-Rull. A quantitative theory of unsecured consumer
   credit with risk of default. Econometrica, 75(6):1525­1589, 2007.

S. Chatterjee, D. Corbae, and J.V. Rios-Rull. A finite-life private-information theory of unsecured con-
   sumer debt. Journal of Economic Theory, 142(1):149­177, 2008a.

S. Chatterjee, D. Corbae, and J.V. Rios-Rull. A theory of credit scoring and competitive pricing of
   default risk. Unpublished working paper, University of Texas at Austin, 2008b.

Gaston Rene Chaumont and Shouyong Shi. Wealth accumulation, on the job search and inequality.
  Manuscript, 2017.

D. Chen. The interaction between labor and credit markets: The impact of bankruptcy on labor supply
  decisions. 2012.

R. Chetty. Moral hazard vs. liquidity and optimal unemployment insurance. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, 2008.

W Henry Chiu and Edi Karni. Endogenous adverse selection and unemployment insurance. Journal of
 Political Economy, 106(4):806­827, 1998.

J Michael Collins, Kathryn Edwards, and Maximilian Schmeiser. The role of credit cards for unemployed
  households in the great recession. Manuscript, 2015.

Thomas F Crossley and Hamish W Low. Job loss, credit constraints and consumption growth. Institute
  for Fiscal Studies, 2011.

Steven Davis and Till Von Wachter. Recessions and the costs of job loss. 2011.

J. Eaton and M. Gersovitz. Debt with potential repudiation: Theoretical and empirical analysis. The
   Review of Economic Studies, pages 289­309, 1981.

Scott L Fulford. How important is variability in consumer credit limits? Journal of Monetary Economics,
  72:42­63, 2015.

Peter Ganong and Pascal Noel. How does unemployment affect consumer spending? Technical report,
  Working paper, 2015.

Michael Gelman, Shachar Kariv, Matthew D Shapiro, Dan Silverman, and Steven Tadelis. How individ-
  uals smooth spending: Evidence from the 2013 government shutdown using account data. Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2015.



                                                   33
Kristopher Gerardi, Kyle F Herkenhoff, Lee E Ohanian, and Paul S Willen. Can't pay or won't pay?
  unemployment, negative equity, and strategic default. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, 2015.

Ben Griffy. Borrowing constraints, search, and life-cycle inequality. Manuscript, 2017.

A. Hedlund. Illiquidity and foreclosures in a directed search model of the housing market. 2011.

Nathaniel Hendren. Knowledge of future job loss and implications for unemployment insurance. Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2015.

K.F. Herkenhoff. The impact of consumer credit access on unemployment. Manuscript, 2013.

Kyle F Herkenhoff, Gordon Phillips, and Ethan Cohen-Cole. How credit constraints impact job finding
  rates, sorting & aggregate output. Manuscript, 2015.

Joanne W Hsu, David A Matsa, and Brian T Melzer. Positive externalities of social insurance: Unem-
  ployment insurance and consumer credit. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  2014.

Christopher Huckfeldt. The scarring effect of recessions: A quantitative analysis. New York University,
  2014.

Sean Hundtofte and Michaela Pagel. Credit smoothing. Manuscript, 2017.

Michael D Hurd and Susann Rohwedder. Effects of the financial crisis and great recession on american
  households. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2010.

Louis S Jacobson, Robert J LaLonde, and Daniel G Sullivan. Earnings losses of displaced workers. The
  American Economic Review, pages 685­709, 1993.

Gregor Jarosch. Searching for job security and the consequences of job loss. 2014.

Yan Ji. Job search under debt: Aggregate implications of student loans. Manuscript, 2018.

Benjamin J Keys. The credit market consequences of job displacement. Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 100(3):405­415, 2018.

Sebastian Koehne and Moritz Kuhn. Should unemployment insurance be asset tested?             Review of
  Economic Dynamics, 18(3):575­592, 2015.

Per Krusell, Toshihiko Mukoyama, and Ay¸   seg¨
                                              ul S
                                                 ¸ ahin. Labour-market matching with precautionary
  savings and aggregate fluctuations. The Review of Economic Studies, 77(4):1477­1507, 2010.

Andr´
    e Kurmann and Erika McEntarfer. Downward wage rigidity in the united states: New evidence from
  administrative data. 2017.

Rasmus Lentz. Optimal unemployment insurance in an estimated job search model with savings. Review
  of Economic Dynamics, 12(1):37­57, 2009.

Rasmus Lentz and Torben Tranaes. Job search and savings: Wealth effects and duration dependence.
  2001.

I. Livshits, J. MacGee, and M. Tertilt. Consumer bankruptcy: A fresh start. The American Economic
   Review, 97(1):402­418, 2007.

                                                   34
Mi Luo and Simon Mongey. Student debt and job choice: Wages vs. job satisfaction. New York University,
  2016.

Xavier Mateos-Planas. Credit limits and bankruptcy. Economics Letters, 121(3):469­472, 2013.

Xavier Mateos-Planas and Jose Victor R´
                                      ios-Rull. Credit lines. Technical report, Manuscript, 2010.

Xavier Mateos-Planas and Giulio Seccia. Welfare implications of endogenous credit limits with
  bankruptcy. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 30(11):2081­2115, 2006.

G. Menzio and S. Shi. Efficient search on the job and the business cycle. Journal of Political Economy,
  119(3):468­510, 2011.

Guido Menzio, Irina A Telyukova, and Ludo Visschers. Directed search over the life cycle. Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2012.

K. Mitman. Macroeconomic effects of bankruptcy & foreclosure policies. 2011.

Kurt Mitman and Stanislav Rabinovich. Pro-cyclical unemployment benefits? optimal policy in an
  equilibrium business cycle model. 2011.

Espen R Moen. Competitive search equilibrium. Journal of Political Economy, 105(2):385­411, 1997.

Makoto Nakajima. Business cycles in the equilibrium model of labor market search and self-insurance*.
 International Economic Review, 53(2):399­432, 2012a.

Makoto Nakajima. A quantitative analysis of unemployment benefit extensions. Journal of Monetary
 Economics, 59(7):686­702, 2012b.

Jesse Rothstein and Robert G Valletta. Scraping by: Income and program participation after the loss of
  extended unemployment benefits. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 36(4):880­908, 2017.

Edouard Schaal. Uncertainty, productivity and unemployment in the great recession. Federal Reserve
  Bank of Minneapolis, mimeo, 2012.

R. Shimer. The cyclical behavior of equilibrium unemployment and vacancies. American economic review,
  pages 25­49, 2005.

Robert Shimer and Iv´
                    an Werning. Liquidity and insurance for the unemployed. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, 2005.

J.X. Sullivan. Borrowing during unemployment. Journal of Human Resources, 43(2):383­412, 2008.

Teresa A Sullivan, Elizabeth Warren, and Jay Lawrence Westbrook.          As we forgive our debtors:
  Bankruptcy and consumer credit in America. Beard Books, 1999.

W.R. Zame. Efficiency and the role of default when security markets are incomplete. The American
 Economic Review, pages 1142­1164, 1993.




                                                  35
Tables and Figures

                                  Table 1: Summary Statistics

                     (A) Panel Sample (Year Prior to Mass Layoff )
                                               (1)             (2)
                                           Treatment        Control
         Annual Earnings                    $44,230         $49,260
         Credit Score                         427             437
         Age                                  40.6            41.3
         Revolving Credit Balance           $10,680         $11,200
         Revolving Credit Limit             $26,910         $28,580
         Unused Revolving Credit to Income    0.44            0.41
         Observations (Rounded to 000s)      31000           30000

                  (B) Cross Sectional Sample (Year Prior to Mass Layoff )
                                                  Avg. Unused Revolving Debt to Income
          Credit Score Quintile 1                                    0.06
          Credit Score Quintile 2                                    0.12
          Credit Score Quintile 3                                    0.27
          Credit Score Quintile 4                                    0.58
          Credit Score Quintile 5                                    1.04
Note: Sample selection criteria in Section 1.2. Annual earnings, revolving credit balance and
revolving credit limit are in 2008 dollars. Credit score refers to the TransUnion bankruptcy score.
Unused revolving credit to income is winsorized at the 1-percent level at the top and bottom of the
distribution.




                                                36
                               Table 2: Average Response of Earnings and Credit Variables to Displacement

                                                         (1)           (2)                (3)               (4)
                                                       Earnings    Credit Score   Revolving Credit   Revolving Credit
                                                                                        Limit            Balance
                       4 Years Before Displacement      1,169***      0.0699            -217.5             39.66
                                                         (167.2)      (1.664)          (232.3)           (149.9)
                       3 Years Before Displacement      2,757***       -0.964           -363.8            -49.26
                                                         (220.1)      (2.013)          (334.7)           (202.9)
                       2 Years Before Displacement      5,049***       1.019            -365.1            -36.50
                                                         (262.8)      (2.210)          (403.0)           (240.8)
                       1 Year Before Displacement       5,157***      -4.488*           -347.4             47.28
                                                         (296.8)      (2.427)          (473.4)           (281.0)
                       Year of Displacement            -2,850***     -6.352**          -996.4*            -473.2
                                                         (353.5)      (2.595)          (533.7)           (315.8)
                       1 Year After Displacement      -13,830***    -15.79***        -1,738***           -583.7*
                                                         (410.6)      (2.714)          (572.3)           (336.9)
37




                       2 Years After Displacement      -9,735***    -15.40***         -1,503**            -455.1
                                                         (429.0)      (2.966)          (624.8)           (368.3)
                       3 Years After Displacement      -7,246***    -12.52***          -1,223*            -211.5
                                                         (446.3)      (3.216)          (693.2)           (414.8)
                       4 Years After Displacement      -5,293***    -11.99***          -1,423*            -186.9
                                                         (491.2)      (3.554)          (783.8)           (474.0)
                       5 Years After Displacement      -3,081***     -9.055**          -1,667*            -653.4
                                                         (556.1)      (4.146)          (889.9)           (552.1)
                       Individual Fixed Effects             Y            Y                 Y                 Y
                       Year Fixed Effects                   Y            Y                 Y                 Y
                       Age and Wealth Controls              Y            Y                 Y                 Y
                       R-squared                          0.153        0.019             0.026             0.017
                       Indiv-Yr Obs.                     472000       472000           472000            472000
                       No. of Indiv                       61000        61000            61000             61000
     Notes: Clustered SE in parenthesis, where the clustering is performed at the level of the firm where the worker was displaced.***p <
     0.01, **p < 0.05,*p < 0.1. Age and wealth controls include a quadratic in age, and deciles for lagged cumulative earnings. The set
     of variables "K Years Before (After) Displacement" are dummy variables equal to one when an individual is K years before (after)
     displacement, and equal to zero otherwise. Annual earnings, revolving credit balance and revolving credit limit are in 2008 dollars.
     Credit score refers to the TransUnion bankruptcy score.
                                      Table 3: Average Response of Default Measures to Displacement

                                                           (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)
                                                    60 Day Delinq. (d)    Chargeoff (d)   Collections (d)    Derogatory
                                                                                                            Public Flag (d)
                     4 Years Before Displacement          0.000733           0.00274         0.00353            -0.00147
                                                         (0.00428)         (0.00350)        (0.00388)          (0.00230)
                     3 Years Before Displacement         -0.000547          0.00445         -0.000502          -0.000245
                                                         (0.00473)         (0.00357)        (0.00408)          (0.00237)
                     2 Years Before Displacement         -0.0118**         -0.00644*         0.00228           0.000440
                                                         (0.00490)         (0.00354)        (0.00424)          (0.00245)
                     1 Year Before Displacement           -0.00520          -0.00171         0.00351            0.000849
                                                         (0.00516)         (0.00374)        (0.00452)          (0.00253)
                     Year of Displacement                 0.00688          0.00872**        0.0109**             0.00385
                                                         (0.00544)         (0.00391)        (0.00480)          (0.00262)
                     1 Year After Displacement           0.0308***         0.0287***        0.0278***         0.00724***
                                                         (0.00563)         (0.00406)        (0.00495)          (0.00270)
38




                     2 Years After Displacement          0.0186***         0.0151***        0.0298***         0.00743**
                                                         (0.00618)         (0.00438)        (0.00538)          (0.00297)
                     3 Years After Displacement           0.00993            0.00666        0.0251***            0.00408
                                                         (0.00685)         (0.00483)        (0.00585)          (0.00322)
                     4 Years After Displacement           -0.00834          0.00111         0.0187***            0.00267
                                                         (0.00771)         (0.00535)        (0.00649)          (0.00354)
                     5 Years After Displacement          -0.0190**          -0.00704          0.0123            -0.00284
                                                         (0.00947)         (0.00648)        (0.00776)          (0.00423)
                     Individual Fixed Effects                 Y                 Y                Y                  Y
                     Year Fixed Effects                       Y                 Y                Y                  Y
                     Age and Wealth Controls                  Y                 Y                Y                  Y
                     R-squared                              0.007             0.003            0.010              0.001
                     Indiv-Yr Obs.                         472000            472000           472000             472000
                     No. of Indiv                          61000              61000           61000               61000
     Notes: Clustered SE in parenthesis, where the clustering is performed at the level of the firm where the worker was displaced.***p <
     0.01, **p < 0.05,*p < 0.1. Age and wealth controls include a quadratic in age, and deciles for lagged cumulative earnings. The symbol
     (d) indicates a dummy variable. The set of variables "K Years Before (After) Displacement" are dummy variables equal to one when
     an individual is K years before (after) displacement, and equal to zero otherwise. All outcome variables are indicators for having the
     outcome occur within the past 12 months.
   Table 4: The Fraction of Displaced Workers who Delever or Default in the Year of Layoff

      Fraction of Displaced Workers with...
      Decline in Revolving Credit Balances                                   0.39
      Decline in Revolving Credit Balances and 60-day Delinquency            0.17
      Decline in Revolving Credit Balances and Debt Chargeoff                0.08
Note: Summary statistics for cross-sectional sample in Figure 3.


           Table 5: Replacement Rates of Revolving Credit by Credit Score Quintile

                                           (1) OLS                    (2) Predicted Value
                                   Replacement Rate (2-Year)       Replacement Rate (2-Year)
      Credit Score Quintile 1                                              -0.0359***
                                                                            (0.00435)
      Credit Score Quintile 2                 -0.00804                     -0.0439***
                                             (0.00651)                      (0.00502)
      Credit Score Quintile 3               0.0319***                        -0.00395
                                             (0.00790)                      (0.00660)
      Credit Score Quintile 4                0.124***                       0.0883***
                                             (0.00823)                      (0.00696)
      Credit Score Quintile 5                0.184***                        0.148***
                                             (0.00822)                      (0.00685)
      Constant                                -0.0742*
                                              (0.0390)
      Year FE                                     Y                           Y
      Age and Wealth Controls                     Y                           Y
      R squared                                 0.040                        NA
      No Obs.                                  19000                        19000
Notes: Clustered SE in parenthesis, where the clustering is performed at the level of the firm where
the worker was displaced. ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05,*p < 0.1. Replacement rate is the negative of
the change in revolving credit balance over the change in earnings, where the change in earnings
and the change in borrowing is measured from the year after displacement relative to the year before
displacement. The replacement rate is only defined for individuals who had a decline in earnings
around displacement. A replacement rate of 0.2 indicates that an individual replaced 20 percent
of their lost earnings with revolving credit. Credit score quintiles are based upon an individuals
TransUnion bankruptcy score in the year prior to displacement. Age and wealth controls include
a quadratic in age, and deciles for lagged cumulative earnings. Column (1) reports OLS estimates
of equation (2) which estimates the replacement rate as a function of credit score quintile. The
replacement rate used in the estimation is winsorized at the top and bottom at the 10 percent level.
Column (2) reports predicted values of the replacement rate by credit score quintile implied by
the results of Column (1), where the control variables are evaluated at their sample means, as in
equation (3).




                                                 39
                          Table 6: Model Parameters

                                  Non-estimated
Variable      Value       Description
   rf          0.04       Risk free rate
  lf           0.99       Discount factor: lenders and firm
  L            0.99       Discount factor low worker type
                0.1       Exogenous job destruction rate
                1.6       Labor match elasticity
  C           0.026       Exogenous credit destruction rate
  C            0.37       Credit match elasticity
  r           10.5%       Minimum (annualized) interest rate
  r           22.5%       Maximum (annualized) interest rate
                 2        Risk aversion
  T            120        Lifespan in quarters
                                 Jointly-estimated
Variable      Value       Description
   z           0.327      Public insurance transfer to unemployed
               0.995      Firm entry cost
  C        2.214 × 10-5   Lender entry cost
  S        1.272 × 10-4   Utility penalty of searching for credit
  D           14.771      Utility penalty of default
 ph,L
  ~            0.651      Prob. persistent human capital decrease
 ph,H
  ~            0.083      Prob. persistent human capital increase
 p ,L          0.111      Prob. transitory human capital low
 p ,H          0.252      Prob. transitory human capital high
  H            2.943      Exponential parameter initial persistent human capital
   g           0.146      Home production
  B           -1.149      Lower bound for borrowing limit
  H            0.632      Discount factor: high worker type
  L            0.904      Share of low type individuals




                                       40
                                                       Table 7: Model Calibration

       Variable      Value       Target                                                   Model     Data Source
       z              0.327      Transfer to Income Loss                                   41.2%   41.2% PSID 2001-2013
                      0.995      Unemployment Rate                                         5.3%     5.0% BLS 1995-2007
       C          2.214 × 10-5   Credit Finding Rate                                       64.1%   65.0% SCF 2007-2009
       S          1.272 × 10-4   Share of Individuals w/ Credit Access                    69.9%    69.8% SCF 1995-2007
                     14.771      Bankruptcy Rate                                          0.142%   0.145% SCF 1998-2007
       ph,L
         ~            0.651      Earnings Loss 5 Yr. After Layoff                           6.6%    6.9% LEHD/TU 2003-2008
41




       ph,H
         ~            0.083      Earnings Gain With Age                                   0.92%    0.93% CPS 1995-2007
       p ,L           0.111      Share of Indiv. w/ 9.5% Wage Decline                       8.6%   7.65% KM (2017)
       p ,H           0.252      Share of Indiv. w/ 9.5% Wage Increase                    17.2%     19.0% KM (2017)
       H              2.943      P75-P25 Earnings Ratio Among Young Workers                0.479    0.484 CPS 1995-2007
       g              0.146      Consumption After Layoff                                  94.0%    93.8% PSID 2005-2013
       B             -1.149      Unused Credit Limit to Income                             23.5%   23.0% SCF 1995-2007
       H              0.632      P95 Real Credit Card Interest Rate                        16.0%   19.0% SCF 1995-2007
       L              0.904      Share of Individuals w/ Net Liquid Assets to Income < 1% 31.6%    31.4% SCF 1995-2007
     Notes: KM (2017) refers to Kurmann and McEntarfer [2017].
                      Table 8: Optimal Public Insurance to the Unemployed

                                                       (1)   (2)                       (3)
                                                       Optimal Policy            Optimal Policy
                                              Baseline   w/ Credit                w/o Credit
     Transfer/Income Loss                      41.2%       38.3%                     43.2%
     Mean Welfare Chg.                            -       0.129%                    0.084%
     Unemployment Rate                          5.3%        4.8%                      5.4%
     Fraction of Individuals Borrowing         19.6%       20.4%                        -
     Default Rate                             0.142%      0.135%                        -
     Fraction of Individuals w/ Credit Access 69.9%        70.5%                        -
     Consumption Loss 1Q After Job Loss        94.0%       93.9%                     94.0%
     Marginal Tax rate                         2.12%       1.77%                     2.27%
Notes: `Welfare' is the consumption equivalent of leaving an economy with the US policy of a 41.2%
replacement rate to an economy with an alternate replacement rate. For example, in column (2), the
mean welfare change of 0.129% indicates that an individual, on average, would give up 0.129% of lifetime
consumption to have a 38.3% replacement rate as opposed to a 41.2% replacement rate. See Appendix F
for details on the estimation of the welfare effect.




                                                  42
                                Figure 1: Average Response of Earnings and Credit Variables to Displacement
                                          (a)                                                        (b)
43




                                          (c)                                                       (d)




     Notes: Figure presents estimates of the effect of job loss on earnings and credit variables. Solid line is the difference in the outcome
     variable between displaced and nondisplaced individuals. Dashed line represents a 95 percent confidence interval. Figures present
     coefficient estimates from Table 2.
                                      Figure 2: Average Response of Default Measures to Displacement
                                          (a)                                                      (b)
44




                                          (c)                                                      (d)




     Notes: Figure presents estimates of the effect of job loss on measures of default and delinquency. Solid line is the difference in the
     outcome variable between displaced and nondisplaced individuals. Dashed line represents a 95 percent confidence interval. Figures
     present coefficient estimates from Table 3.
             Figure 3: Replacement Rate of Lost Earnings with Revolving Credit




Notes: Figure shows the distribution of replacement rates using a kernel density. Replacement
rate is the negative of the change in revolving credit balance over the change in earnings, where
the change in earnings and the change in borrowing are measured from the year after displacement
relative to the year before displacement. The replacement rate is defined for individuals who had
a decline in earnings around displacement. A replacement rate of 0.2 indicates that an individual
replaced 20 percent of their lost earnings with revolving credit.


 Figure 4: Replacement Rate of Lost Earnings with Revolving Credit by Credit Score Quintile




Notes: Replacement rate estimates are from Column (2) of Table 5. See notes to Figure 3 for
definition of replacement rate. Credit score quintiles are based upon an individual's TransUnion
bankruptcy score in the year prior to displacement.




                                               45
                                     Figure 5: Marginal Effect of Earnings Loss on Borrowing and Default Activity
                                                  (a)                                                                 (b)
46




                                                  (c)                                                                 (d)




     Notes: Squares in the figures present the marginal effect of earnings loss on the variable of interest. Earnings loss is measured as the difference in real annual
     earnings in the year after displacement relative to the year before displacement. The estimates are taken from Column (3) of Tables 12-15. The coefficient
     for Credit Score Quintile 1 correspond to the coefficient 2 Yr. Chg. Earnings from the table, while the coefficient for Credit Score Quintile k corresponds to
     the sum of the coefficients 2 Yr. Chg. Earnings and 2 Yr. Chg. Earnings Credit Quin k . The dots represent a 95 percent confidence interval.
                   Figure 6: Model Predictions of the Average Response of Earnings and Credit Variables to Displacement
                                          (a)                                                        (b)
47




                                          (c)                                                       (d)




     Notes: Figure presents estimates of the effect of job loss on earnings and credit variables comparing estimates from the data (red solid
     line) to estimates from the model (blue dashed line). The gray finely dashed lines represent 95 percent confidence intervals of data
     estimates.
              Figure 7: Kernel Density of Replacement Rates, Model versus Data




Notes: Figure presents the models estimate of the replacement rate of credit (blue dashed line)
following job loss compared to the data estimate of the replacement rate of credit around job loss
as measured in the 2007-2009 SCF panel (red solid line).


             Figure 8: Welfare Effect of Change in Public Transfer to Unemployed




Notes: `Welfare' is the consumption equivalent of leaving an economy with the US policy of a
41.2% replacement rate to an economy with an alternate replacement rate. For example, the
welfare change of 0.129% indicates that an individual, on average, would give up 0.129% of lifetime
consumption to have a 38.3% replacement rate as opposed to a 41.2% replacement rate. See
Appendix F for details on the estimation of the welfare effect.




                                                48
                                                        Figure 9: Steady State Welfare Experiment
        (a) Asset Choice Zero Net Worth                 (b) Default Rate                    (c) Avg. Interest Rate                 (d) Credit Finding Rate




      (e) Fraction of individuals Borrowing    (f) Unused Credit Limit to Income            (g) Wealth Distribution          (h) Consumption Following Job Loss
49




     Notes: Figure shows output from the steady state welfare experiment where the replacement rate of public insurance to the unemployed is adjusted.
  Figure 10: Distribution of Welfare Changes from Changing Public Transfer to Unemployed




Notes: `Welfare' is the consumption equivalent of leaving an economy with the US policy of a
41.2% replacement rate to an economy with a 38.3% replacement rate. See Appendix F for details
on the estimation of the welfare effect.




                                             50
                                                          Figure 11: Transition Path Experiment
                                                 (a) Transfer                                        (b) Tax Rate
51




                                            (c) Fraction Borrowing                              (d) Unemployment Rate




     Notes: Figure shows output from the transition path welfare experiment where the replacement rate of public insurance to the unemployed is adjusted.
         Figure 12: Welfare Gains by Persistent Human Capital Along Transition Path




Notes: The figure shows the share of the population alive at the time of the transition that has a
welfare gain when the replacement rate is lowered from 41.2% to 38.3%, where welfare is measured
using consumption equivalents. The population is stratified by the persistent level of human capital.




                                                 52
A     Data Appendix
A.1     Identifying Mass Layoffs
To identify mass layoffs, we combine data from the Longitudinal Business Dynamics (LBD)
database on establishment exits with the LEHD. In each state, employers are assigned a State
Employment Identification Number (SEIN) in the LEHD database. This is our unit of analysis for
mass layoffs. We define a mass layoff to occur when an SEIN with at least 25 employees reduces
its employment by 30% or more within a quarter and continues operations, or exits in the LEHD
with a contemporaneous plant exit in the LBD. In California, we do not have LBD establishment
exit information, however. To ensure that the there was actually a mass layoff, we then verify that
fewer than 80% of laid-off workers move to any other single SEIN using the Successor Predecessor
File (SPF). This allows us to remove mergers, firm name-changes, and spin-offs from our sample.


B     Robustness
In this appendix, we provide various robustness checks on our primary results. We include sum-
mary statistics for additional measures of consumer credit. We also present additional results
for the average response of credit variables following job loss, and estimates of the response of
borrowing to unemployment as measured in the SCF.


B.1     Summary Statistics: Additional Credit Measures
Table 9 provides summary statistics on the panel sample for additional measures of credit access
and usage. The table shows that the treatment and control groups are very similar in their use of
bank cards as well as their limits and unused limits to income in the year prior to mass layoff. The
table also shows that individuals in the treatment and control groups are similar in their amount
of total outstanding credit as well as credit limit in the year prior to layoff.


B.2     Additional Average Response Results
In this section, we estimate the average response of additional credit variables to job loss. First,
we examine estimates of credit access as well as usage (Table 10), and then examine the im-
pact on measures of default (Table 11). The coefficients in Tables 10 and 11 correspond to
(-4 , -3 , ..., 4 , 5 ) in equation (1), and are interpreted as the difference in the outcome variable
between displaced and nondisplaced individuals. Figure 13 plots the coefficient estimates from
Tables 10 and 11 along with 95 percent confidence intervals for bank card limits and balances, as
well as 60 day delinquencies and bankruptcy flags.



                                                 53
                   Table 9: Summary Statistics: Bank Cards and Total Credit

                             Panel Sample (Year Prior to Mass Layoff)
                                                              (1)         (2)
                                                         Treatment Control
                     Bank Card Balance                     $5,641       $6,103
                     Bank Card Limit                       $16,660     $18,020
                     Unused Bank Card Limit to Income        0.30        0.28
                     Total Balance                        $116,900 $125,500
                     Total Limit                          $143,300 $154,200
                     Observations (Rounded to 000s)         31000       30000
Note: Sample selection criteria in Section 1.2. Credit balances and limits are in 2008 dollars.
Unused bank card credit limit to income is winsorized at the 1-percent level at the top and bottom
of the distribution.

B.2.1    Credit Access and Usage

Table 10 documents the average response of additional measures of credit access and usage follow-
ing job loss. Column (1) of Table 10 and Panel (a) of Figure 13 shows the difference in bank card
limits for displaced and nondisplaced individuals around a mass layoff event. The figure shows
that displaced and nondisplaced individuals do not have significantly different bank card limits
prior to job loss; however in the years following displacement, displaced individuals have bank card
limits which are significantly lower than nondisplaced individuals. While statistically significant,
the size of the difference in bank card limits between displaced and nondisplaced individuals never
exceeds $1200 and is economically small relative to the size of limits that individuals have prior
to job loss (over $16.5k for individuals in the treatment group).
    Column (2) of Table 10 and Panel (b) of Figure 13 displays the difference in bank card balances
for displaced and nondisplaced individuals around a mass layoff event. The figure shows that
displaced and nondisplaced individuals do not have significantly different bank card balances in
the years prior to job loss and for the first several years following job loss. Two years after job
loss, the difference in bank card balances between displaced and nondisplaced individuals is only
$282, which, while statistically significant, is not economically significant, especially relative to
the size of earnings losses, which two years after layoff remain over $9k.
    Columns (3) and (4) show that there are similar results for total credit limits and balances
around job loss. The magnitude of the decline in total credit balances is larger and statistically
significant, however, column (5) shows the decline in total credit balances following job loss is
driven almost entirely by declining mortgage balances.
    Column (6) of Table 10 shows the difference in the probability to take out a new home equity
line of credit for displaced and nondisplaced individuals around a mass layoff event. One year after
job loss, the probability a displaced individuals takes out a new home equity line is 0.379 percentage
points less than a nondisplaced individual. In all other years, there is no significant difference

                                                 54
between the probability of taking out a new home equity line for displaced and nondisplaced
individuals.

B.2.2   Measures of Default

Table 11 documents the average response of additional measures of default activity following job
loss.
    Column (1) of Table 11 and Panel (c) of Figure 13 shows the difference in the probability of
having a 30 day delinquency within the past year between displaced and nondisplaced individuals.
The figure shows that individuals begin to default on their outstanding debt balances following
job loss. One year after displacement, the probability that a displaced individual has a 30 day
delinquency is nearly 3 percentage points higher than a nondisplaced individual.
    Column (2) of Table 11 and Panel (d) of Figure 13 shows the difference in the probability of
having a bankruptcy flag between displaced and nondisplaced individuals. The figure shows that
following job loss there is a steady increase in the probability that an individual has a bankruptcy
flag on their credit report.
    Column (3) of Table 11 shows the difference in the probability of having a foreclosure within
the past year between displaced and nondisplaced individuals. The coefficient estimates show that
in the year following displacement, the probability an individual has a foreclosure increases by
nearly 0.5 percentage points.
    Column (4) of Table 11 shows the difference in the probability of having a 60-day mortgage
delinquency within the past year between displaced and nondisplaced individuals. The coefficient
estimates show that in the year following displacement, the probability an individual has a sixty
day mortgage delinquency increases by nearly 0.8 percentage points.




                                                55
                   Table 10: Average Response of Additional Credit Variables to Displacement: Credit Access and Usage

                                                  (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)             (6)
                                            Bank Card Bank Card Total Credit Total Credit Mortgage                 New Home
                                                Limit     Balance         Limit         Balance      Balance     Equity Line (d)
           4 Years Before Displacement (d)      -85.24       41.51         440.2         629.2        756.4         -0.000220
                                               (123.6)     (70.73)       (1,040)        (982.4)      (914.7)        (0.00155)
           3 Years Before Displacement (d)      -202.1      -4.864        -891.8         -622.0       -747.1        -1.20e-05
                                               (161.7)     (87.64)       (1,412)        (1,319)      (1,214)        (0.00164)
           2 Years Before Displacement (d)      -301.0      -33.00        -2,015         -1,624       -1,968         0.000381
                                               (186.6)     (94.32)       (1,746)        (1,622)      (1,483)        (0.00169)
           1 Year Before Displacement (d)       -244.7       4.168        -2,909         -2,211       -2,854        -8.66e-05
                                               (209.2)     (102.3)       (2,081)        (1,929)      (1,750)        (0.00182)
           Year of Displacement (d)           -486.1**      -139.1      -7,670***      -6,488***    -6,111***       -0.000649
                                               (227.8)     (108.5)       (2,343)        (2,171)      (1,981)        (0.00190)
           1 Year After Displacement (d)     -837.3***      -149.9     -14,710***     -12,590*** -11,280***        -0.00379**
                                               (242.0)     (114.6)       (2,576)        (2,385)      (2,178)        (0.00179)
56




           2 Years After Displacement (d)    -966.1***    -282.6**     -13,440***     -11,230*** -10,100***         -6.11e-05
                                               (262.7)     (124.0)       (2,841)        (2,632)      (2,404)        (0.00199)
           3 Years After Displacement (d)    -1,059***   -385.9***     -11,540***      -9,111***    -8,310***        0.00260
                                               (288.3)     (136.2)       (3,185)        (2,958)      (2,704)        (0.00225)
           4 Years After Displacement (d)    -1,148***    -307.3**     -12,860***     -10,180***    -9,742***        0.000949
                                               (328.4)     (156.3)       (3,567)        (3,313)      (3,026)        (0.00241)
           5 Years After Displacement (d)    -1,133***    -427.7**     -13,000***     -10,490***    -9,551***        0.00299
                                               (390.4)     (184.7)       (3,972)        (3,696)      (3,366)        (0.00268)
           Individual Fixed Effects                Y           Y             Y              Y            Y               Y
           Year Fixed Effects                      Y           Y             Y              Y            Y               Y
           Age and Wealth Controls                 Y           Y             Y              Y            Y               Y
           R-squared                             0.012       0.006         0.081          0.074        0.072           0.007
           Indiv-Yr Obs.                       472000      472000        472000         472000       472000           472000
           No. of Indiv                         61000       61000         61000          61000        61000           61000
     Notes: Clustered SE in parenthesis, where the clustering is performed at the level of the firm where the worker was displaced.
     ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05,*p < 0.1. Age and wealth controls include a quadratic in age, and deciles for lagged cumulative earnings.
     The symbol (d) indicates a dummy variable. Bank card limit and balance are in 2008 dollars.
                     Table 11: Average Response of Additional Credit Variables to Displacement: Measures of Default

                                                             (1)           (2)             (3)              (4)
                                                           30 Day     Bankruptcy Foreclosure (d) 60 Day Mort.
                                                        Delinq. (d)      Flag (d)                     Delinq. (d)
                       4 Years Before Displacement (d)     0.00430     0.00539**         0.00114        -0.000562
                                                         (0.00467)      (0.00212)     (0.000782)        (0.00164)
                       3 Years Before Displacement (d)    -0.00153     0.00978***        0.00104          0.00293
                                                         (0.00510)      (0.00276)     (0.000786)        (0.00186)
                       2 Years Before Displacement (d) -0.00938*       0.00862***       0.00110         -0.000114
                                                         (0.00527)      (0.00320)     (0.000822)        (0.00196)
                       1 Year Before Displacement (d)     -0.00308     0.0119***        0.00154*          0.00128
                                                         (0.00556)      (0.00363)     (0.000895)        (0.00215)
                       Year of Displacement (d)           0.0120**     0.0160***       0.00247**        0.00405*
                                                         (0.00577)      (0.00399)     (0.000966)        (0.00227)
                       1 Year After Displacement (d)     0.0295***      0.0206***     0.00468***       0.00792***
                                                         (0.00600)      (0.00426)      (0.00103)        (0.00243)
57




                       2 Years After Displacement (d)    0.0185***      0.0232***     0.00347***         0.00172
                                                         (0.00651)      (0.00463)      (0.00106)        (0.00260)
                       3 Years After Displacement (d)      0.00455      0.0235***      0.00287**         0.000879
                                                         (0.00725)      (0.00498)      (0.00121)        (0.00287)
                       4 Years After Displacement (d)    -0.0181**      0.0255***       0.00172          -0.00396
                                                         (0.00811)      (0.00561)      (0.00136)        (0.00328)
                       5 Years After Displacement (d)    -0.0246**      0.0318***      0.000127         -0.00762*
                                                         (0.00979)      (0.00676)      (0.00159)        (0.00414)
                       Individual Fixed Effects               Y             Y               Y                Y
                       Year Fixed Effects                     Y             Y               Y                Y
                       Age and Wealth Controls                Y             Y               Y                Y
                       R-squared                            0.008         0.020           0.003            0.006
                       Indiv-Yr Obs.                       472000        472000          472000           472000
                       No. of Indiv                         61000         61000           61000            61000
     Notes: Clustered SE in parenthesis, where the clustering is performed at the level of the firm where the worker was displaced.
     ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05,*p < 0.1. Age and wealth controls include a quadratic in age, and deciles for lagged cumulative earnings.
     The symbol (d) indicates a dummy variable. Bank card limit and balance are in 2008 dollars.
                                               Figure 13: Additional Average Response Results
                                         (a)                                                     (b)
58




                                         (c)                                                     (d)




     Notes: Figure presents estimates of the effect of job loss on credit market variables and measures of default and delinquency. Solid
     line is the difference in the outcome variable between displaced and nondisplaced individuals. Dashed line represents a 95 percent
     confidence interval. Figures present coefficient estimates from Tables 10 and 11.
B.3     Heterogeneous Response to Earnings Changes
In this Appendix we present the estimation results of equation (4) for: (1) changes in revolving
credit balances (Table 12); (2) 60 day delinquencies (Table 13); (3) debt chargeoffs (Table 14);
and (4) derogatory public flags (Table 15). These results underlie the graphs presented in Figure
5.


B.4     SCF Evidence
In this section we present results from the publicly available SCF and show that they are consistent
with the results from our LEHD/TransUnion sample.
    In Figure 14, we present the credit replacement rate of the unemployed as measured in the
SCF. To estimate the credit replacement rate in the SCF, we exploit the panel nature of the SCF
between 2007 and 2009. In the SCF, we identify an individual to be unemployed in a given wave if
they are either unemployed at the time of the survey or have had an unemployment spell of longer
than 4 weeks within the past year. We measure the replacement rate and share of individuals
deleveraging among household heads and their spouses who were not identified as unemployed
in the 2007 wave, but were identified as unemployed in the 2009 wave and had an earnings loss
between the 2007 and 2009 waves. Among these individuals, we estimate the change in non-
mortgage debt over the change in income in order to measure the replacement rate. Figure 14
reveals a similar pattern on the borrowing activity of the unemployed as our LEHD/TransUnion
sample (Figure 3).

                 Figure 14: Credit Replacement Rate of Unemployed from SCF




Notes: Figure presents the credit replacement rate using the 2007-2009 waves of the SCF.


                                                59
     Table 12: Earnings Losses and Change in Revolving Credit Balances by Credit Score

                                                 2 Yr. Chg.           2 Yr. Chg.      2 Yr. Chg.
                                                Revolving Bal.      Revolving Bal. Revolving Bal.
 2 Yr. Chg. Earnings                             -0.0304***            0.0330**           0.0210
                                                  (0.00853)             (0.0135)        (0.0145)
 2 Yr. Chg. Earnings x Credit Score Quin 2                               0.00454        0.00595
                                                                        (0.0209)        (0.0209)
 2 Yr. Chg. Earnings x Credit Score Quin 3                               -0.0299         -0.0303
                                                                        (0.0234)        (0.0235)
 2 Yr. Chg. Earnings x Credit Score Quin 4                             -0.0515**       -0.0517**
                                                                        (0.0241)        (0.0241)
 2 Yr. Chg. Earnings x Credit Score Quin 5                            -0.0737***      -0.0749***
                                                                        (0.0222)        (0.0223)
 Constant                                               324.6           -627.7**        -4,587**
                                                       (246.3)           (305.0)         (1,991)
 Credit Score Quin 2 (d)                                                  -359.7          -321.1
                                                                         (504.3)         (507.9)
 Credit Score Quin 3 (d)                                                  -335.3          -220.1
                                                                         (595.6)         (596.9)
 Credit Score Quin 4 (d)                                                3,220***        3,369***
                                                                         (704.6)         (699.9)
 Credit Score Quin 5 (d)                                                6,365***        6,618***
                                                                         (754.6)         (749.5)
 Year Fixed Effects                                       N                  N               Y
 Age and Wealth Controls                                  N                  N               Y
 R-Square                                               0.001              0.031           0.034
 No of Indiv.                                           19000             19000           19000
 P-Value Chg Earn Quin 2                                                  0.0197           0.113
 P-Value Chg Earn Quin 3                                                   0.870           0.632
 P-Value Chg Earn Quin 4                                                   0.347           0.139
 P-Value Chg Earn Quin 5                                                  0.0209        0.00403
Notes: Clustered SE in parenthesis, where the clustering is performed at the level of the firm
where the worker was displaced. ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05,*p < 0.1. The 2-year change in real
annual earnings, and 2-year change in real revolving balances are measured comparing the year
after displacement relative to the year prior to displacement, are both winsorized at the top and
bottom at the 1 percent level, and are measured in 2008 dollars. Credit Score Quin k refers to credit
score quintile k , where credit score quintiles are based upon an individuals TransUnion bankruptcy
score in the year prior to displacement. The symbol (d) indicates a dummy variable. Age and
wealth controls include a quadratic in age, and deciles for lagged cumulative earnings. P-Value
2-Year Chg Earn Quin k refers to the p-value for the sum of the coefficients 2-Year Chg. Earn
and 2-Year Chg. Earn x Credit Score Quin k .




                                                 60
Table 13: Earnings Losses and 60 Day Delinquency by Credit Score In Year After Mass Layoff

                                                             (1)            (2)           (3)
                                                          60 Day          60 Day        60 Day
                                                         Delinq (d)    Delinq (d) Delinq (d)
                                                                (Year After Mass Layoff)
     2 Yr. Chg. Earnings                                8.57e-07***    -6.54e-07* -1.23e-06***
                                                         (1.33e-07)    (3.78e-07)    (3.90e-07)
     2 Yr. Chg. Earnings x Credit Score Quin 2 (d)                      -2.21e-08     -2.22e-08
                                                                       (5.45e-07)    (5.45e-07)
     2 Yr.Chg. Earnings x Credit Score Quin 3 (d)                       9.57e-07*     9.67e-07*
                                                                       (4.96e-07)    (4.96e-07)
     2 Yr. Chg. Earnings x Credit Score Quin 4 (d)                      7.70e-07*     8.11e-07*
                                                                       (4.53e-07)    (4.53e-07)
     2 Yr. Chg. Earnings x Credit Score Quin 5 (d)                     9.88e-07** 1.03e-06**
                                                                       (4.24e-07)    (4.25e-07)
     Constant                                            0.419***        0.526***      0.486***
                                                         (0.00557)       (0.0129)      (0.0540)
     Credit Score Quin 2 (d)                                              -0.0302      -0.0320*
                                                                         (0.0185)      (0.0185)
     Credit Score Quin 3 (d)                                           -0.0835*** -0.0822***
                                                                         (0.0179)      (0.0179)
     Credit Score Quin 4 (d)                                            -0.241***     -0.236***
                                                                         (0.0170)      (0.0170)
     Credit Score Quin 5 (d)                                            -0.309***     -0.301***
                                                                         (0.0163)      (0.0164)
     Year FE                                                 N               N             Y
     Age and Wealth Controls                                 N               N             Y
     R-Square                                              0.002           0.074         0.078
     No of Indiv.                                          19000           19000         19000
     P-Value 2-Year Chg Earn Quin 2                                       0.0862        0.00190
     P-Value 2-Year Chg Earn Quin 3                                        0.354         0.432
     P-Value 2-Year Chg Earn Quin 4                                        0.646         0.116
     P-Value 2-Year Chg Earn Quin 5                                       0.0851         0.325
 Notes: Clustered SE in parenthesis, where the clustering is performed at the level of the firm
where the worker was displaced. ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05,*p < 0.1. The 2-year change in real
annual earnings measures the change in earnings from the year after mass layoff relative to the
year before mass layoff and is winsorized at the top and bottom at the 1 percent level. Earnings are
measured in 2008 dollars. The dependent variable 60-day delinquency is measured in the year after
displacement. Credit Score Quin k refers to credit score quintile k , where credit score quintiles are
based upon an individuals TransUnion bankruptcy score in the year prior to displacement. The
symbol (d) indicates a dummy variable. Age and wealth controls include a quadratic in age, and
deciles for lagged cumulative earnings. P-Value 2-Year Chg Earn Quin k refers to the p-value for
the sum of the coefficients 2-Year Chg. Earn and 2-Year Chg. Earn x Credit Score Quin k .



                                                 61
   Table 14: Earnings Losses and Debt Chargeoff by Credit Score In Year After Mass Layoff

                                                          (1)               (2)              (3)
                                                         Debt              Debt             Debt
                                                    Chargeoff (d) Chargeoff (d) Chargeoff (d)
                                                               (Year After Mass Layoff)
  2 Yr. Chg. Earnings                                3.88e-07***        -3.62e-07      -7.36e-07**
                                                      (9.88e-08)       (3.42e-07)       (3.46e-07)
  2 Yr. Chg. Earnings x Credit Score Quin 2 (d)                         -3.15e-09        -2.31e-08
                                                                       (4.71e-07)       (4.69e-07)
  2 Yr.Chg. Earnings x Credit Score Quin 3 (d)                           2.85e-07         2.85e-07
                                                                       (4.20e-07)       (4.17e-07)
  2 Yr. Chg. Earnings x Credit Score Quin 4 (d)                          3.75e-07         4.32e-07
                                                                       (3.78e-07)       (3.76e-07)
  2 Yr. Chg. Earnings x Credit Score Quin 5 (d)                          3.09e-07         3.84e-07
                                                                       (3.59e-07)       (3.57e-07)
  Constant                                             0.179***         0.249***          0.319***
                                                      (0.00428)          (0.0117)         (0.0432)
  Credit Score Quin 2 (d)                                                 -0.0133          -0.0154
                                                                         (0.0159)         (0.0159)
  Credit Score Quin 3 (d)                                              -0.0629***       -0.0625***
                                                                         (0.0151)         (0.0150)
  Credit Score Quin 4 (d)                                               -0.150***        -0.146***
                                                                         (0.0137)         (0.0137)
  Credit Score Quin 5 (d)                                               -0.195***        -0.189***
                                                                         (0.0129)         (0.0130)
  Year FE                                                  N                 N                Y
  Age and Wealth Controls                                  N                 N                Y
  R-Square                                               0.001             0.046            0.050
  No of Indiv.                                          19000              19000            19000
  P-Value 2-Year Chg Earn Quin 2                                           0.278           0.0263
  P-Value 2-Year Chg Earn Quin 3                                           0.756           0.0767
  P-Value 2-Year Chg Earn Quin 4                                           0.941           0.0893
  P-Value 2-Year Chg Earn Quin 5                                           0.631          0.00478
 Notes: Clustered SE in parenthesis, where the clustering is performed at the level of the firm
where the worker was displaced. ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05,*p < 0.1. The 2-year change in real
annual earnings measures the change in earnings from the year after mass layoff relative to the
year before mass layoff and is winsorized at the top and bottom at the 1 percent level. Earnings
are measured in 2008 dollars. The dependent variable debt chargeoff is measured in the year after
displacement. Credit Score Quin k refers to credit score quintile k , where credit score quintiles are
based upon an individuals TransUnion bankruptcy score in the year prior to displacement. The
symbol (d) indicates a dummy variable. Age and wealth controls include a quadratic in age, and
deciles for lagged cumulative earnings. P-Value 2-Year Chg Earn Quin k refers to the p-value for
the sum of the coefficients 2-Year Chg. Earn and 2-Year Chg. Earn x Credit Score Quin k .



                                                 62
  Table 15: Earnings Losses and Derogatory Flag by Credit Score In Year After Mass Layoff

                                                        Derogatory    Derogatory Derogatory
                                                         Flag (d)       Flag (d)       Flag (d)
                                                               (Year after Mass Layoff)
       2 Year Chg. Earnings                              -1.03e-07    -5.60e-07** -6.13e-07**
                                                        (6.86e-08)     (2.75e-07)     (2.77e-07)
       2 Year Chg. Earnings x Credit Score Quin 2                       1.84e-07       1.84e-07
                                                                       (3.52e-07)     (3.51e-07)
       Chg. Earnings x Credit Score Quin 2                              7.85e-08       7.12e-08
                                                                       (3.30e-07)     (3.30e-07)
       Chg. Earnings x Credit Score Quin 2                              3.57e-07       3.66e-07
                                                                       (2.98e-07)     (2.99e-07)
       Chg. Earnings x Credit Score Quin 2                              4.04e-07       4.08e-07
                                                                       (2.85e-07)     (2.86e-07)
       Constant                                        0.0572***       0.0940***       0.0444*
                                                        (0.00270)      (0.00864)       (0.0260)
       Credit Score Quin 2 (d)                                         -0.0270**      -0.0269**
                                                                        (0.0111)       (0.0110)
       Credit Score Quin 3 (d)                                        -0.0410*** -0.0405***
                                                                        (0.0106)       (0.0106)
       Credit Score Quin 4 (d)                                        -0.0654*** -0.0641***
                                                                       (0.00982)      (0.00982)
       Credit Score Quin 5 (d)                                        -0.0829*** -0.0810***
                                                                       (0.00920)      (0.00921)
       Year Fixed Effects                                   N               N              Y
       Age and Wealth Controls                              N               N              Y
       R-Square                                           0.000          0.020           0.021
       No of Indiv.                                       19000          19000          19000
       P-Value Chg Earn Quin 2                                           0.0941         0.0592
       P-Value Chg Earn Quin 3                                          0.00830        0.00360
       P-Value Chg Earn Quin 4                                           0.0978         0.0528
       P-Value Chg Earn Quin 5                                           0.0441         0.0191
Notes: Clustered SE in parenthesis, where the clustering is performed at the level of the firm
where the worker was displaced. ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05,*p < 0.1. The 2-year change in real
annual earnings measures the change in earnings from the year after mass layoff relative to the
year before mass layoff and is winsorized at the top and bottom at the 1 percent level. Earnings are
measured in 2008 dollars. The dependent variable derogatory public flag is measured in the year
after displacement. Credit Score Quin k refers to credit score quintile k , where credit score quintiles
are based upon an individuals TransUnion bankruptcy score in the year prior to displacement. The
symbol (d) indicates a dummy variable. Age and wealth controls include a quadratic in age, and
deciles for lagged cumulative earnings. P-Value 2-Year Chg Earn Quin k refers to the p-value for
the sum of the coefficients 2-Year Chg. Earn and 2-Year Chg. Earn x Credit Score Quin k .




                                                  63
C        Employed Value Functions
In this appendix we present the value functions for employed individuals, as well as lenders who
are matched with an employed individual.


C.1      Bellman Equations for Employed Individuals
In this appendix, we present the Bellman equations for an employed agent.
    Every period employed individuals without a credit contract, decide whether or not to search
for a credit contract:

                S                              A                    N
              Wi,t (, b, h; 0, 0) = max -S + Wi,t (, b, h; 0, 0), Wi,t (, b, h; 0, 0)            t  T
             S
           Wi,T +1 (, b, h; 0, 0) = 0


where:

                     A                                c,W
                   Wi,t (, b, h; 0, 0) =      max pc (i,t                  C
                                                          (, b, h; b, r))Wi,t (, b, h; b, r)
                                            (b,r)B×R
                                                       c,W
                                             + 1 - pc (i,t                   N
                                                           (, b, h; b, r)) Wi,t (, b, h; 0, 0)

   After the asset market closes, the agent makes their consumption and savings decisions. For
an agent that did not not receive a credit contract, their consumption and savings problem is
constrained in that the agent is not allowed to borrow. At the start of the next period with
probability  the agent looses their job, and is immediately able to search for a job.40 The value
function summarizing the payoffs of an employed agent without credit access is

     N                                           S                                             S
   Wi,t (, b, h; 0, 0) = max u(c) + i E (1 -  )Wi,t +1 (, b , h ; 0, 0) +  max p(t+1 (~
                                                                                       , h ))Wi,t +1 (~
                                                                                                       , b , h ; 0, 0)
                         b 0                                                      ~

                                                   S
                             +(1 - p(t+1 (~
                                           , h )))Ui,t +1 (b , h ; 0, 0)   t  T


  N
Wi,T +1 (, b, h; 0, 0) = 0


subject to the budget constraint,

                                         c + q (b , 0)b  (1 -  )f (h) + b
  40
   Given the model period is 1 quarter we must allow individuals to search immediately in order for the model to
match labor flows in the data.




                                                           64
and law of motion for employed individuals' human capital,

                                                  h = H (h, W )                                             (14)

                                                             1               1
As before, the bond price is given by: q (b , r) = I{b < 0} 1+ r
                                                                 + I{b  0} 1+ rf
                                                                                 .
   For an agent with a credit contract, their consumption and savings problem is constrained by
their borrowing limit b. At the start of the next period with probability  the agent loses their
job, and is immediately able to search for a job. The value function summarizing the payoffs of
an employed agent with credit access is

     C                                           D                                              D
   Wi,t (, b, h; b, r) = max u(c) + i E (1 -  )Wi,t +1 (, b , h ; b, r ) +  max p(t+1 (~
                                                                                        , h ))Wi,t +1 (~
                                                                                                        , b , h ; b, r)
                         b b                                                       ~

                                                   D
                             + 1 - p(t+1 (~
                                           , h )) Ui,t +1 (b , h ; b, r )   t  T


  C
Wi,T +1 (, b, h; 0, 0) = 0


subject to the budget constraint,

                                       c + q (b , r)b  (1 -  )f (h) + b

and the law of motion for human capital (equation (14)). After the labor market closes, the
agent observes if their credit match has been exogenously ended. With probability C the agent
looses their credit market access. After the realization of the credit separation shock the agent
decides whether or not to default. The default decision and the resulting continuation value for
an unemployed worker is given by

        D                                 N                                N
      Wi,t +1 (, b , h ; b, r ) = C max{Wi,t+1 (, 0, h ; 0, 0) - D (b ), Wi,t+1 (, b , h ; 0, 0)}
                                                N                                 C
                               + (1 - C ) max{Wi,t +1 (, 0, h ; 0, 0) - D (b ), Wi,t+1 (, b , h ; b, r )}


       N,W
Let Di,t +1 (, b , h ; b, r ) be an indicator function denoting an individual's default decision when
                                                                          N,W
they are employed and are hit by the credit separation shock, (i.e. Di,t    +1 = 1 when the individual
                                                    C,W
defaults and is equal to zero otherwise). Let Di,t+1 (, b , h ; b, r) be an indicator function denoting
an individual's default decision when they are employed and are not hit by the credit separation
shock.


C.2      Bellman Equation for Lender Matched with Employed Worker
In this appendix, we present the Bellman equations for a lender in a match with an employed
worker.


                                                        65
         W
   Let i,t  denote the profits to a lender of being matched with a type i, age t, employed indi-
vidual. The profits to the lender of offering a contract with borrowing limit b, and interest rate r
is

 W                               (rf - r)          ^ N,W (x ) + (1 - C )D
                                                                        ^ C,W (x )
 i,t (, b, h; b, r) = lf bi,t (x)         + E C D    i,t+1                i,t+1                × I{bi,t (x) < 0}
                                  1+r
                    + lf (1 - C )E 1 - D  ^ C,W (x )    ^ W (x )
                                            i,t+1        i,t+1


    At the end of the period an age t agent makes their consumption/savings decision bi,t . If the
individual is borrowing, bi,t < 0, then in the next period the lender receives income from the
difference between the interest rate r and the risk free rate rf . However the lender faces default
risk on the outstanding loan bi,t . The default risk faced by the lender incorporates the probability
of the credit separation shock, as well as shocks to human capital and probability that the borrower
loses their job. When the worker exogenously separates from the firm, the worker immediately is
able to search again. The default probability when hit by the credit shock is41

       ^ N,W (x ) = (1 -  )DN,W (x )
       D i,t+1              i,t+1
                                   N,W                                                     N,U
                 +  p t+1 (^
                            , h ) Di,t      , b , h ; b, r) + 1 - p t+1 (^
                                       +1 (^                             , h )            Di,t +1 (b , h ; b, r )


where  ^ is the unemployed worker's choice for where to search for a job. If the agent does not
default and the credit match is not hit by the credit separation shock, then the match between the
lender and borrower continues to the next period. The profits to the lender in the next period are
denoted by   ^ W (x ), and take into account the probability that the agent loses their job. The
              i,t+1
continuation profits to the lender are

       ^ W (x ) = (1 -  ) W (, b , h ; b, r)
        i,t+1            i,t+1
                                  W                                                       U
                 +  p t+1 (^
                            , h ) i,t      , b , h ; b, r) + 1 - p t+1 (^
                                      +1 (^                             , h )             i,t +1 (b , h ; b, r )


   Lenders pay cost C to enter the lending market. Free-entry in the lending market requires
that the cost of entering the market is equal to the expected payout of entering the market:

                                     c,W
                               C  pc                     W
                                   f i,t (, b, h; b, r ) i,t (, b, h; b, r )                                        (15)

Note that individuals who are searching for credit contracts are not currently able to borrow,
hence the free entry condition (equation (15)) holds for b  0.
  41                                                                                                    ^ C,W (x ),
     Note the default probability when an individual is not hit by the credit separation shock, denoted D i,t+1
is defined analogously.




                                                        66
D      Equilibrium Definition
Let µ : {e, a, i, , b, h, b, r, t}  [0, 1] be the distribution of individuals across states. Let x sum-
marize the state vector of a individual, where with a slight abuse of notation, x = (b, h; b, r) for
the unemployed and x = (, b, h; b, r) for the employed.
    Definition. A recursive equilibrium in this economy is a set of individual policy functions for
                                                                                                 a,e
savings and borrowing {bi,e,t (x)}T                                           T                          T
                                        t=1 , credit applications {Si,e,t (x)}t=1 , bankruptcy {Di,t (x)}t=1 , job
search choice {   ^ i,t (x)}T                                              T
                            t=1 , credit contract choice {(r, b)i,e,t (x)}t=1 , labor market tightness function
                                                            c,e
{t (, h)}T                                                         T
          t=1 , credit market tightness function {i,t (x)}t=1 for employed e = W and unemployed
e = U individuals as well as patient i = L and impatient i = H individuals, a public insurance
transfer to the unemployed z , a proportional tax rate  , and a distribution of individuals across
states µ:

  i. Households' decision rules are optimal.

 ii. The labor market tightness satisfies the free entry condition in the labor market (equation
     (11)).

iii. The credit market tightnesses satisfy the free entry conditions for lenders entering into credit
     contracts with unemployed workers (equation 10) and employed workers (equation 15).

iv. The distribution of individuals across states µ is consistent with individual policy functions.

 v. The tax rate  balances the government budget.

    Suppose  is given and the government budget constraint is not required to balance (i.e.
equilibrium condition v. is not imposed). Then the individual, lender, and firm problems can be
solved independently of the distribution of individuals across states µ (i.e. equilibrium conditions
i. through iii. depend on the aggregate distribution of individuals across states only through
 ). We will refer to this property of the model as Block Recursivity. Ultimately, the equilibrium
tax rate  depends on µ, but this intermediate form of Block Recursivity allows us to solve the
transition path. We state this property formally below.

Proposition 1. Suppose  is given and the government budget does not need to balance (i.e. equi-
librium condition v. is not imposed). Assume that the utility function meets standard conditions
(u > 0, u < 0, limc u (c) = 0 and u is invertible), the labor and credit matching functions
are invertible and constant returns to scale, and there are compact supports for the choice set of
interest rates r  R  [r, r¯], borrowing limits b  B  [B, 0], and the piece rate of wages   [0, 1],
then individual policy functions, the credit market tightness, and the labor market tightness do not
depend on the distribution of individuals across states, µ.



                                                       67
Proof. The proof is performed using backward induction. Let t = T and consider an unemployed
individual for the sake of brevity (the proof follows in an identical manner for employed individ-
uals). Since the individuals' continuation value is zero for T + 1 onward, the individual dynamic
programming problem does not depend upon the aggregate distribution of individuals across states
µ.
   In the terminal age T , individuals set their asset choice to zero (i.e. bi,T (b, h; b, r) = 0), which
gives the following continuation values for the terminal period:

                                        a
                                       Ui,T (b, h; b, r) = u (z + g + b)

This holds for both unemployed individuals with credit access a  C , and individuals without
credit access a  N . This does not depend on µ.
   Individuals with credit access make a default decision in the terminal period, which does not
depend upon the aggregate distribution µ,

                  D                         N                          N
                 Ui,T (b, h; b, r) = C max{Ui,T (0, h; 0, 0) - D (b), Ui,T (b, h; 0, 0)}
                                                N                          C
                                + (1 - C ) max{Ui,T (0, h; 0, 0) - D (b), Ui,T (b, h; b, r)}

        a,U
Let Di,T    (b, h; b, r) denote the default policy of the individual. Since there is a utility penalty
of defaulting, debt can be supported in equilibrium, and the default decision policy will not be
trivially equal to one.
    Lender's profits also do not depend upon the aggregate distribution µ. Lenders make zero
                                                                                              c,U
profits in the terminal period since bi,T (b, h; b, r) = 0 for all states. This implies i,T       (b, h; b, r) =
0, which does not depend upon the aggregate distribution µ. Given the credit finding rate is
                                                                                              A
zero all individuals will choose not to search in the credit market, and we have Ui,T             (b, h; 0, 0) =
  N                            S                 N
Ui,T (b, h; 0, 0), and thus Ui,T (b, h; 0, 0) = Ui,T (b, h; 0, 0). Hence, the payoffs to individuals who do
not have a credit contract, and would be searching for one also does not depend upon the aggregate
distribution µ.
    In the labor market, the firm's value function is independent of the aggregate distribution µ
as well, and is given by,
                                            JT (, h) = (1 -  )f (h)

Given this value to the firm of a match, the labor market tightness will also be independent of the
aggregate distribution µ, and is given by,

                                                               
                                        T (, h) = p-
                                                   f
                                                     1
                                                           JT (, h)

An unemployed individual at age T - 1 makes a labor market search choice over piece rates  :


                                                      68
                                   a                                        a
                 max p(T (~
                           , h ))Wi,T   , b , h ; b, r) + 1 - p(T (~
                                      (~                            , h )) Ui,T (b , h ; b, r)
                    ~

As long as  ~ is chosen within a closed, bounded interval, the extreme value theorem guarantees
at least one solution to this problem.
    The same holds true for employed individuals since  is given.
    Working backwards from t = T - 1, ..., 1, and repeating the above procedure completes the
proof.


E       Solution Algorithm
We solve the model using value function iteration on a discrete grid. Assets lie on the grid
[-1.1492, 3.5] with 56 grid points including the ends of the grid. The grid points are spaced
symmetrically around zero using exponential spacing.42 The grid contains 16 grid points below
zero, a grid point at 0, and 39 grid points above zero.43 We set the curvature parameter for the
exponential spacing of the asset grid to 1.1 25
                                                . Borrowing limits lie on the grid [-1.1492, -0.0359]
with 5 evenly spaced grid points including the end of the grid. We set the highest value of the
borrowing limit grid to -0.0359 as it is the largest strictly negative grid point in asset grid.
Annualized interest rates lie on the grid [10.5%, 22.5%] with 15 grid points. The grid points are
exponentially spaced with curvature parameter 1.5. Persistent human capital lies on the grid
[0.6, 1.2] with 7 evenly spaced grid points including the ends of the grid. The grid for transitory
human capital is given by equation 13 where the step size is given by  (h    ~ ) = 0.095h
                                                                                        ~ for persistent
human capital h  ~ . The piece rate for wages lie on the grid [0.60, 0.90] with 10 grid points including
the ends of the grid. The grid points are exponentially spaced with curvature parameter c = 5. In
the simulation to check the government's budget balance we simulate 125,000 individuals for 260
periods, 10 times, burning the first 120 periods. We report averages over the 10 simulations.
    Solving the model proceeds in the following steps:
    1. Taxes: Guess  .

    2. Firms Bellman: Compute the value to a firm of being in a match in the terminal period
       JT (, h). Using the value of a firm in the terminal period, invert the free entry condition to
       obtain labor market tightness T (, h).
  42
     Let ygrid = [y1 , y2, , ..., yN ] be the desired exponential spaced grid with N grid points inclusive of the end points.
               1/c
Define yi = xi , where i denotes a point in the grid and c is referred to as the curvature parameter. Inverting the
                                  c
expression we have xi = yi          . To create the exponentially spaced grid, we pick y1 and yN , as well as the curvature
parameter c, and with these values calculate x1 and xN . We then define a linearly spaced grid with N points from
                                                                    1/c
x1 to xN . Then define the elements of ygrid by using yi = xi . When c > 1 points at the top of the grid are closer
to one another than grid points at the bottom of the grid. When c < 1 grid points at the bottom of the grid are
closer together than points at the top of the grid. When c = 1 the grid is evenly spaced.
  43
     Recall the value of lowest value of the asset grid (and hence the number of grid points in the negative asset
region) is a calibrated parameter of the model


                                                             69
    3. Individual Problem: Solve the individual problem in the terminal period.

        (a) Compute the value to the individual of being in a credit match and not in a credit
                                                                     C                  C
            match for both employed and unemployed individuals, Wi,T   (, b, h; b, r), Ui,T (b, h; b, r)
                  N                   N
            and Wi,T (, b, h; 0, 0), Ui,T (b, h; 0, 0) respectively.
                                                                                 D
        (b) Solve the individual's default decisions, which returns the values Wi,T (, b, h; b, r) and
             D
            Ui,T (b, h; b, r).
                                                                                              W
    4. Lenders Bellman: Compute the lender's Bellman equation in the terminal period, i,T       (, b, h; b, r)
              U
       and i,T (b, h; b, r). Invert the free entry condition for lenders to obtain the credit market
                                            c,W                    c,U
       tightness for each credit contract i,T   (, b, h; b, r) and i,T (b, h; b, r).
                                                                                             c,e
    5. Individual Credit Search: Use the credit market tightness functions i,T                   (b, h; b, r) to
                            a                        a
       find the values of Wi,T (, b, h; 0, 0) and Ui,T (b, h; 0, 0). Using these value functions, compute
                                                                                    e
       each individual's policy function for searching for a credit contract Si,T     (b, h; 0, 0) as well as
                       S                       S
       the value of Wi,T (, b, h; 0, 0) and Ui,T (b, h; 0, 0).

    6. Individual's Job Search: Use the estimate of T (, h) to solve the individual's job search
       problem.

    7. Repeat for ages T - 1, T - 2, ..., 1.

    8. Budget Balance: Simulate a mass of individuals and check that the government's budget
       constraint is satisfied. Update guess of  until the government budget is balanced.


F      Welfare Calculation
In this section, we describe our process for performing the welfare calculation. We first discuss
the welfare calculation for the steady state experiment, and then discuss the welfare calculation
for the transition path experiment.


F.1      Steady State Welfare Calculation
Let ({cj     j    j tmax
        t , Dt , St }t=1 ) be the consumption, default, and credit search policy functions for an indi-
vidual j over their lifetime under the baseline public insurance policy. Let ({c    ~j   ~ j ~j tmax
                                                                                     t , Dt , St }t=1 ) be
the consumption, default, and credit search policy functions for an individual j under an alter-
native public insurance policy. We will perform welfare calculations by estimating the share of
lifetime consumption an individual would be willing to forgo (or must receive) to leave the baseline
economy and move to an economy with an alternative public insurance policy. Let i(j ) denote




                                                       70
the individual's type. Formally, we estimate the scaling factor for consumption j that makes
individual j indifferent between living under either public insurance policy:44


       T                1-                                               T                          1-
                     j cj
                        t  -1                                                                 ~j
                                                                                              c t     -1
           it(j )             - D (bj   j      j
                                    t )Dt - S St                    =          it(j )                    - D (~
                                                                                                              bj  ~j     ~j
                                                                                                               t )Dt - S St
   t=1
                        1-                                              t=1
                                                                                                    1-
                                                                                                                              (16)
Solving equation (16) for j returns:
                                                                                                                    1
                                              1-
                                        ~j
                                                                                                                   1- 
                                       (ct)
                    
                        T
                        t=1   it(j )    1-
                                                   - D (~
                                                        bj  ~j       j   j     ~j      j
                                                         t )Dt - D (bt )Dt - S St - S St                          
                j =                                                           1-
                                                                                                                              (17)
                                                         T              (cj
                                                                          t)
                                                                                                                  
                                                         t=1   it(j )    1-


We use the model to simulate a large mass of individuals under a series of alternative public
insurance policies. Let N denote the number of individuals that we simulate, and let P be the
set of public insurance policies that we consider. For each simulated individual and policy p  P ,
we estimate j,p , the scaling factor for consumption that makes the individual indifferent between
living under the alternative pubic insurance policy and the baseline policy. To convert the units of
the scaling term j,p into the percentage of lifetime consumption the individual would be willing
to forgo (or must receive), hereafter referred to as lifetime consumption equivalents and denoted
~ j,p , we perform the following transformation:


                                                      ~ j,p = 100(j,p - 1)
                                                      

Let {{  ~ j,p }N }P denote the set of lifetime consumption equivalents from the simulation of alter-
               j =1 p=1
native public policies. From the distribution of lifetime consumption equivalents, we measure the
utilitarian welfare effect and median welfare effect for each policy p  P . The utilitarian welfare
effect for an alternative policy p  P , which is denoted W elf areU (p), is measured as:

                                                                               N
                                                                    1                 ~ j,p
                                                   W elf areU (p) =                   
                                                                    N          j =1


The optimal policy under the utilitarian welfare effect is the policy p  P that maximizes the
utilitarian welfare effect W elf areU (p).
  44
    Note the discount factor is specific to the agent j , since individuals in our economy are heterogeneous in their
discount factor.




                                                                  71
F.2         Transition Path Welfare Calculation
In the transition path experiment, we perform welfare calculations by estimating the share of
remaining lifetime consumption an individual would be willing to forgo (or must receive) to leave
the baseline economy and move to an economy where there is an unexpected and permanent policy
change. Let ({cj       j    j tmax
                  t , Dt , St }t=1 ) be the consumption, default, and credit search policy functions for
an individual j over their lifetime under the baseline public insurance policy. Let ({c  ~j   ~ j ~j tmax
                                                                                          t , Dt , St }t=1 )
be the consumption, default, and credit search policy functions for an individual j under an
alternative public insurance policy. Assume that for individual j , the policy change occurs at age
^j . Note that because the policy change is unexpected, individual j makes identical consumption,
t
default, and credit search decisions for the first t  ^j - 1 periods of their life. Thus to measure the
welfare effects of the policy, we only consider an individuals behavior in the remaining T - t    ^ periods
of their life.45 Let i(j ) denote the type of individual j . Formally, we estimate the scaling factor for
consumption j that makes individual j indifferent between living the remaining periods of their
life under either public insurance policy:


       T                 1-                                                  T                    1-
                    j cj
                       t  -1                                                                ~j
                                                                                            c t     -1
           it(j )            - D (bj   j      j
                                   t )Dt - S St                     =              it(j )              - D (~
                                                                                                            bj  ~j     ~j
                                                                                                             t )Dt - S St
     ^j
                       1-                                                     ^j
                                                                                                  1-
   t=t                                                                      t=t
                                                                                                                              (18)
       Solving equation (18) for j returns:
                                                                                                                         1
                                            1- 
                                          ~j
                                                                                                                        1- 
                                         (ct)
                   
                         T
                           ^j
                         t=t    it(j )    1-
                                                  -   D (~
                                                         bj  ~j
                                                          t )Dt         -   D (bj   j
                                                                                t )Dt       -        ~tj
                                                                                                   S S     -   S Stj   
               j =                                                              1-
                                                                                                                              (19)
                                                        T                    cj
                                                                            ( )                                        
                                                          ^j
                                                        t=t    it(j )         t
                                                                              1-


To convert the units of the scaling term j into the percentage of remaining lifetime consumption
the individual would be willing to forgo (or must receive), hereafter referred to as remaining
lifetime consumption equivalents and denoted   ~j , we perform the following transformation:

                                                      ~j = 100(j - 1)
                                                      

     As we discuss in greater detail in Section G, we simulate a large mass of individuals and un-
expectedly lower the public insurance to the unemployed. Let N denote the number of simulated
individuals who are alive at the time of the policy transition. We track the consumption, default,
and credit search behavior of individuals, and estimate the share of remaining lifetime consump-
tion that makes each agent indifferent between the policy transition and no policy transition. Let
{ ~j }N
      j =1 denote the set of lifetime consumption equivalents from the simulation of the transition ex-

  45
       Note we also only consider the welfare of individuals who are alive at the time of the policy transition.


                                                                  72
periment. The utilitarian welfare effect of the transition experiment, which is denoted W elf areT ,
is measured as:
                                                         N
                                                      1
                                       W elf areT =         ~j
                                                     N j =1


G        Transition Path Experiment
In this appendix, we discuss the details of the transition path experiment presented in Section
4.3. The transition dynamics are very simple since the model is Block Recursive, conditional on
 (see Appendix D). Given a path of  's, Block recursivity means that the distribution of agent's
across states does not enter the equilibrium prices (in this setting, the prices are only the market
tightnesses). In other words, only through the path of  's do policy functions and prices depends on
the distribution of individuals across states. Given a path of  's, we solve the individual problem
and simulate a mass of individuals along the transition path. We then compute the government
budget balance and iterate on  's until the government budget constraint holds at each point along
the transition path.
    Let S = (z,  ) denote the aggregate policy state, where z is the public insurance to the
unemployed and  is the tax rate. In the transition path experiment, the aggregate policy state
S follows the transition matrix in equation (20), with corresponding values for (z,  ) in Table
16. The realizations of the Markov chain are such that the economy transitions from the interim
stage to the new steady state after 20 quarters, as shown in Panel (b) of Figure 11. Individuals
rationally understand the law of motion for S , and all equilibrium prices depend on S . For
example, an employed individual takes S and the Markov transition matrix for S as given, where
the expectation operator now realizes the aggregate policy shocks:


     C                                               D                                                     D
    Wi,t (, b, h; b, r, S ) = max u(c) + i E (1 -  )Wi,t +1 (, b , h ; b, r, S ) +  max p(t+1 (~
                                                                                                , h , S ))Wi,t+1 (~
                                                                                                                   , b , h ; b, r, S )
                            b b                                                        ~

                                                           D
                                 + 1 - p(t+1 (~
                                               , h , S )) Ui,t+1 (b , h ; b, r, S )   t  T


 C
Wi,T +1 (, b, h; 0, 0, S ) = 0


 subject to the budget constraint,

                                             c + q (b , r)b  (1 -  )f (h) + b

and the transition matrix for the aggregate state S (20), and the law of motion for human capital
(14).




                                                                73
                         Table 16: Transfers and Taxes Along Transition Path

                                                 Transfer (z)     Replacement Rate Tax Rate ( )
         Initial Steady State                       0.327              41.2%          2.12%
         1st Year After Policy Change               0.307              38.3%          1.85%
         2nd Year After Policy Change               0.307              38.3%          1.81%
         3rd Year After Policy Change               0.307              38.3%          1.81%
         4th Year After Policy Change               0.307              38.3%          1.80%
         5th Year After Policy Change               0.307              38.3%          1.80%
         New Steady State                           0.307              38.3%          1.79%


                                                                                      
                                       1 0     0   0   0    0  0
                                       0 0.75 0.25 0   0    0  0
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                  
                                       0 0 0.75 0.25 0     0    0                     
                                                                                      
                             PS =      0 0     0 0.75 0.25 0   0                                                 (20)
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                  
                                       0 0     0   0 0.75 0.25 0                      
                                                                                      
                                       0 0     0   0   0 0.75 0.25
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                       0 0     0   0   0    0  1
    The transition path experiment begins in the steady state of the baseline economy with a 41.2%
replacement rate to the unemployed. An unexpected and permanent decline in the generosity of
public insurance to the unemployed then occurs, which lowers the replacement rate to 39.8%. For
the government budget to balance the tax rate is lowered as well. In each of the first five-years
after the policy change, the tax rate adjusts to balance the government's budget constraint. In all
remaining years after the policy change, the tax rate from the steady state of the economy with a
39.8% replacement rate balances the government's budget constraint.46 Along the transition path
individuals have rational expectations for the path of the tax rate and the public insurance policy.

Estimation Details We solve the transition path on a discrete grid using value function iter-
ation. The grid for assets, borrowing limits, persistent and transitory human capital, and wage
piece rates are identical to the grids used in the baseline estimation of the model (see Appendix
E for details). To tractably estimate the transition path annualized interest rates lie on a grid
from [10.5%, 22.5%] with 7 grid points rather than 15 as in the baseline estimation of the model.
  46
    The tax rate in the new steady state following the transition is 1.79%, while the tax rate in the new steady state
in the welfare experiment presented in Section 4 is 1.77%. The discrepancy is due to a slight government deficit in
years 6 through 9 following the introduction of the policy, which requires a higher tax rate in future periods. If we
allowed the tax rate to adjust in years 6 through 9, and then have the economy enter into the new steady state the
government budget would balance. However, adding additional years to the transition significantly expands the
state-space of the problem. Due to computational requirements of allowing the transition to occur over a longer
period of time, we impose that the transition period only last 5 years before entering the new steady state. Due to
the fast convergence properties of this class of models, this restriction is effectively non-binding.



                                                         74
The grid points are exponentially spaced with a curvature parameter of 1.5. In Table 17 we show
that steady state predictions of the model are virtually identical with 7 grid points for interest
rates and 15 grid points for interest rates. The aggregate policy state contains both the transfer
to unemployed workers z and the tax rate on labor income  . The aggregate policy state has 7
grid points, and the values of the aggregate policy state are given in Table 16. Individuals beliefs
about the path of the aggregate state are given by the transition matrix in equation 20.
    To perform the transition path experiment we simulate 125,000 individuals for 380 periods,
20 times, burning the first 120 periods. We report averages over the 20 simulations. The path
of the aggregate policy state in the simulation is such that we are in the initial steady state for
260 periods (including the burn), then we are in the "1st Year After Policy Change" state for
4-quarters where the values for the aggregate policy state parameters are given in Table 16. For
each year after the policy change K where K  {2, 3, 4, 5}, we are in the "K Years After Policy
Change" state for 4-quarters where the values for the aggregate policy state parameters are given
in Table 16. Finally, the aggregate policy state is in the "New Steady State" for the final 100
periods of the simulation.
    Solving the transition path of the economy proceeds in the following steps:

  1. Taxes Guess a sequence of taxes  = [o , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , new ] where o is the tax rate in the
     initial steady state, K is the tax rate K years after the policy change, and new is the tax
     rate in the new steady state following the transition.

  2. Model Estimation Solve the model following the steps presented in Appendix E using
     the taxes guessed in Step 1, the transfers to unemployed workers from Table 16, and the
     transition matrix for the aggregate policy state given by equation 20.

  3. Simulation and Budget Balance: Simulate a mass of individuals, perform the policy
     transition and check the government's budget constraint in each of the 7 aggregate policy
     states. Iterate until the government's budget is balanced in each aggregate policy state.




                                                75
                       Table 17: Comparison of Model Predictions

Moment                                                     Model with          Model with
                                                         7 Interest Rates   15 Interest Rates
Transfer to Income Loss                                        41.2%              41.2%
Unemployment Rate                                              5.3%               5.3%
Credit Finding Rate                                           64.1%               64.1%
Share of Individuals w/ Credit Access                         69.9%               69.9%
Bankruptcy Rate                                               0.141%             0.142%
Earnings Loss 5 Yr. After Layoff                               6.5%               6.6%
Earnings Gain With Age                                        0.92%               0.92%
Share of Indiv. w/ 9.5% Wage Decline                            8.6%              8.6%
Share of Indiv. w/ 9.5% Wage Increase                         17.2%               17.2%
P75-P25 Earnings Ratio Among Young Workers                     0.479              0.479
Consumption After Layoff                                       94.0%              94.0%
Unused Credit Limit to Income                                 23.6%               23.5%
P95 Real Credit Card Interest Rate                            15.9%               16.0%
Share of Individuals w/ Net Liquid Assets to Income < 1%      31.6%               31.6%




                                           76
