                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                PORTFOLIO CHOICE WITH SUSTAINABLE SPENDING:
                      A MODEL OF REACHING FOR YIELD

                                      John Y. Campbell
                                       Roman Sigalov

                                     Working Paper 27025
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27025


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                          April 2020, Revised December 2020




This paper originated in a May 2019 presentation by Campbell to the NBER Conference on
Long-Term Asset Management, available online at https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/campbell/
files/nber_ltamkeynoteslides.pdf. We are grateful to seminar participants at Harvard Business
School, the Virtual Finance Workshop, and UNC for comments and to Malcolm Baker, Eduardo
Davila, Xavier Gabaix, Robin Greenwood, Sam Hanson, Gur Huberman, Yueran Ma, Ian Martin,
Egil Matsen, Carolin Pflueger, Tarun Ramadorai, Adriano Rampini, Rob Sitkoff, Jeremy Stein,
Larry Summers, Luis Viceira, Wei Xiong, and Mao Ye for helpful conversations and
correspondence on this topic. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27025.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by John Y. Campbell and Roman Sigalov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Portfolio Choice with Sustainable Spending: A Model of Reaching for Yield
John Y. Campbell and Roman Sigalov
NBER Working Paper No. 27025
April 2020, Revised December 2020
JEL No. E43,G11

                                            ABSTRACT

We show that reaching for yield -- a tendency to take more risk when the real interest rate
declines while the risk premium remains constant -- results from imposing a sustainable spending
constraint on an otherwise standard infinitely lived investor with power utility. When the interest
rate is initially low, reaching for yield intensifies. The sustainable spending constraint also affects
the response of risktaking to a change in the risk premium, which can even change sign. In a
variant of the model where the sustainable spending constraint is formulated in nominal terms,
low inflation also encourages risktaking.


John Y. Campbell
Morton L. and Carole S.
Olshan Professor of Economics
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 213
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
john_campbell@harvard.edu

Roman Sigalov
rsigalov@g.harvard.edu




A appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27025
1         Introduction

How does the level of the safe real interest rate a¤ect investors' willingness to take risk?                        The
conventional answer in ...nance theory, derived by Merton (1969, 1971), is that it does not.                          A
long-lived investor with constant relative risk averse power utility, facing a constant risk premium,
allocates a constant share of wealth to a risky asset regardless of the level of the real interest rate.2

        Contrary to this conventional theory, the prolonged period of low interest rates in the last decade
has led some observers to believe that investors "reach for yield", taking more risk when the real
interest rate declines.      This has been a particular concern among central bankers who fear that
risk-taking may be an unintended consequence of loose monetary policy (Rajan 2006, 2013, Borio
and Zhu 2012, Stein 2013).3

        In this paper we derive reaching for yield in a Merton model with one additional element: a
constraint that the investor may only consume the expected return on wealth and may not plan to
reduce wealth over time. Our model applies most naturally to endowments and sovereign wealth
funds, but it may also describe trusts and even some individuals.

        As empirical motivation for our analysis, the top panel of Figure 1 plots the 20-year constant
maturity TIPS yield since 1997 when TIPS were ...rst issued. Endowments often use the TIPS yield
as a proxy for the safe real interest rate.4           During this period the TIPS yield has declined from
almost 4% to below 0% in 2020.
    2
      Merton's analysis, like this paper, is set in continuous time. Campbell (2018) provides a textbook exposition of
the result in discrete time and shows how it extends from power utility to the related model where an investor has
Epstein-Zin preferences. The result can be overturned by assuming preferences in which e¤ective risk aversion varies
with wealth, such as Sundaresan (1989) or Guasoni, Huberman, and Ren (2020), but these preferences primarily
generate strong e¤ects of risky returns on risktaking rather than an e¤ect of the riskless interest rate on risktaking.
    3
      As Stein (2013) puts it: "A prolonged period of low interest rates, of the sort we are experiencing today, can
create incentives for agents to take on greater duration or credit risks, or to employ additional ...nancial leverage, in
an e¤ort to reach for yield."
    4
      As Norges Bank Investment Management (2016) writes: "The yield on in      ation-indexed bonds is a good indicator
of the expected real return on virtually risk-free bonds."



                                                           1
                                          4
        20 Year Constant Maturity Yield




                                          3

                                          2

                                          1

                                          0

                                              2000             2005          2010            2015             2020

                   100
                               90
                               80
Risky Share




                               70
                               60
                               50
                               40
                                              2000              2005          2010           2015             2020
                                               Stanford, Target        Yale, Actual                 GIC, Actual
                                               UC, Actual              Alaska, Actual               Norway, Target
                                               UKansas, Actual         Future Fund, Actual          NACUBO

                                               Figure 1: Riskfree Rate and Asset Allocation




                                                                         2
   The bottom panel of the ...gure shows the risky portfolio share (the share invested in all assets
other than cash and ...xed-income securities) for a set of university endowments and sovereign wealth
funds that disclose this information on a regular basis. Individual endowments, those of Stanford,
Yale, the University of California, and the University of Kansas, are indicated with thin solid lines;
a value-weighted average asset allocation for endowments in the National Association of College and
University Business O¢ cers (NACUBO) database is indicated with a thick solid line; and individual
sovereign wealth funds, those of Alaska, Norway, the Australian Future Fund, and the Singapore
GIC, are indicated with dashed lines. Although there is variation across funds and the GIC is a
notable exception, Figure 1 shows a general upward trend in the risky share as the riskfree real
interest rate has declined. This lends some plausibility to the idea that endowments and sovereign
wealth funds reach for yield.

   The risky share illustrated in Figure 1 is only a crude measure of risktaking, since funds have
also changed their allocations to asset classes within the risky category including public and private
equity, absolute return funds, real estate, and commodities.       Other ...nancial market conditions
including risk premia have also varied during the sample period and may have inuenced risktaking.
Ideally we would like to construct the expected returns and risks of each endowment portfolio using
the endowment'
             s own assumptions.         Unfortunately these are not generally available, but in the
online appendix to this paper (Campbell and Sigalov 2020), we apply a single set of expected return
and risk assumptions used by Harvard University in 2004, taken from Campbell (2018, section 3.1.3).
We show that the implied risks of most of the endowments reported in Figure 1 have increased.
While the implied Sharpe ratios have also generally increased as endowments have diversi...ed more
e¤ectively across risky asset classes, the proportional increases in the risks are generally greater
than those in the Sharpe ratios. The Merton model would imply equal proportional increases in
Sharpe ratios and risks, so this limited piece of evidence is again consistent with reaching for yield.

   To model this behavior, we start from the classic Merton model and add one constraint: the
investor must consume in each period the expected return on the portfolio. This level of spending

                                                  3
ensures that both consumption and wealth follow martingales, so the investor cannot plan either
to run down wealth or to accumulate it.      For this reason we call the constraint a "sustainable
spending"constraint.

   The sustainable spending constraint breaks the separation between consumption/saving and
asset allocation decisions that underlies the classic Merton result. When the interest rate declines,
an investor with a constant rate of time preference wants to increase the expected growth rate of
marginal utility.   In the classic model, the investor achieves this by consuming more today and
less in the future, but the sustainable spending constraint makes this impossible.          Instead, the
sustainable-spending constrained investor reaches for yield, taking more risk as a way to increase
consumption today while paying the cost-- volatile future consumption-- only in the future.

   We ...nd that reaching for yield intensi...es when the interest rate is initially low.     This may
help to explain why the phenomenon is more widely discussed today than it was in the higher-rate
environment of the late 20th Century. The sustainable spending constraint also a¤ects the response
of risktaking to a change in the risk premium. This response declines as the interest rate declines
and even becomes negative at su¢ ciently low levels of interest rates.

   A subtle issue that we discuss in this paper is whether the expected return that governs sus-
tainable spending is the expected simple (arithmetic average) return or the expected log (geometric
average) return. In the former case, the levels of wealth and consumption are martingales while
in the latter case the logs of wealth and consumption are martingales. The former case may seem
more natural at ...rst, but it implies that wealth and consumption approach zero with ever-increasing
probability over time.   As Dybvig and Qin (2019) emphasize, this is inconsistent with the spirit
of the sustainable-spending constraint. Therefore, while we explore both cases in this paper, we
emphasize the results for the geometric average case.




                                                  4
Interpretation of the sustainable spending constraint One natural interpretation is that
the constraint reects a promise that institutions with endowments, such as universities, make
to donors.       A gift to the endowment implies a commitment by the university to undertake an
activity not just for a few years, but permanently.             Donors who wish to have a greater short-
term impact can make current-use gifts, but endowment gifts reect a donor'
                                                                         s desire for permanent
impact.      Spending more than the expected return would run down the endowment and support
only temporary spending, whereas spending less than the expected return would imply that the
gift has less immediate impact than is needed for sustainability. In addition, spending less than
the expected return would cause the endowment to grow on average, which can lead to unwelcome
attention and even unfavorable tax consequences in the long run.5

       The sustainable spending constraint can alternatively be interpreted as a stylized description of
the legal restrictions on endowments.         Under the Uniform Prudent Management of Institutional
Funds Act (UPMIFA), which governs endowment expenditures for nonpro...t and charitable orga-
nizations in all US states except Pennsylvania, endowment spending must be consistent with the
long-run preservation of capital but need not keep the endowment in any particular relation to the
original historic value of gifts as was required under earlier state laws.

       The principle that endowment spending should be sustainable received a classic formulation
from Tobin (1974), who wrote:


         "The trustees of an endowed institution are the guardians of the future against the
         claims of the present. Their task is to preserve equity among generations. The trustees
         of an endowed university like my own assume the institution to be immortal. They want
         to know, therefore, the rate of consumption from endowment which can be sustained
         inde...nitely."
   5
    The tax reform passed by Congress in 2017 includes an excise tax on private universities with over 500 tuition-
paying students and assets of over $500,000 per student.


                                                        5
      The principle is rea¢ rmed in contemporary university policies, for example Harvard'
                                                                                         s statement
that:


        "The University'
                       s spending practice has to balance two competing goals: the need to
        fund the operating budget with a stable and predictable distribution, and the obligation
                                                                                          6
        to maintain the long-term value of endowment assets after accounting for ination."


      The sustainable spending constraint also describes restrictions that have been imposed on some
sovereign wealth funds such as the Norwegian oil fund. Norges Bank Investment Management, the
fund'
    s manager, explains the restrictions in these words:


        "So that the fund bene...ts as many people as possible in the future too, politicians have
        agreed on a ...scal rule which ensures that we do not spend more than the expected
        return on the fund. On average, the government is to spend only the equivalent of the
        real return on the fund, which is estimated to be around 3% per year. In this way, oil
        revenue is phased only gradually into the economy. At the same time, only the return
                                                         7
        on the fund is spent, and not the fund'
                                              s capital."


      The sustainable spending constraint may also describe the legal restrictions on trustees in cases
where the principal of a trust is reserved for one bene...ciary but income is paid to another. Under the
1997 revision of the Uniform Principal and Income Act, trustees are no longer bound to distribute
only dividends or coupon payments to income bene...ciaries, but have the "power to adjust"income
distributions to reect the expected return on investments (Sitko¤ and Dukeminier 2017, pp. 669­
670). If a trustee invests in the interests of a long-lived income bene...ciary (that is, if the date of
  6
   https://www.harvard.edu/about-harvard/harvard-glance/endowment, accessed January 28, 2020.
  7
   https://www.nbim.no/en/the-fund/about-the-fund/, accessed January 26, 2020. The 3% ...gure is a current
number; 4% was assumed until the spring of 2017.



                                                    6
principal transfer is in the distant future), then the trustee'
                                                              s decisions may be well approximated
by the model developed here.

      Finally, the sustainable spending constraint might be interpreted more broadly as a parsimo-
nious way to describe the behavior of older households who live o¤ ...nancial wealth but fear the
consequences of running down that wealth, for example because they wish to preserve funds to
cover unexpected medical expenses or to leave a bequest. Such households may be willing to take
investment risk but may be unwilling to adopt a consumption plan that implies expected declines
in future wealth.



Related literature Some papers use the term "reaching for yield" in a di¤erent sense, to refer
to an unconditional propensity for ...nancial intermediaries to take risk (Becker and Ivashina 2015,
Choi and Kronlund 2017). In this paper we use the term exclusively to refer to the response of
risk-taking to the interest rate.

      Most of the literature on reaching for yield, in this sense, studies the responses to interest rates
of ...nancial intermediaries such as banks, insurance companies, money market funds, and pension
funds.8 To the extent that models of reaching for yield are o¤ered, they rely on institutional
frictions speci...c to these intermediaries such as bank liquidity management (Drechsler, Savov, and
Schnabl 2018, Acharya and Naqvi 2019), insurance company duration management (Ozdagli and
Wang 2019), a zero lower bound on the nominal return that banks and money funds can o¤er
depositors (Chodorow-Reich 2014, Di Maggio and Kacperczyk 2017), or the discounting of pension
fund liabilities when calculating funding status (Andonov, Bauer, and Cremers 2017, Lu et al 2019).
An exception to this focus on intermediaries is Lian, Ma, and Wang (2019) who document reaching
for yield among households and suggest a behavioral explanation.
  8
    See for example Maddaloni and Peydró (2011), Chodorow-Reich (2014), Jiménez et al (2014), Hanson and Stein
(2015), Andonov, Bauer, and Cremers (2017), Di Maggio and Kacperczyk (2017), Lu et al (2019), and Ozdagli and
Wang (2019).



                                                      7
       There is a related literature on "reaching for income" among investors who value current in-
come rather than total return (Hanson and Stein 2015). Daniel, Garlappi, and Xiao (2019) and
Hartzmark and Solomon (2019) document this household behavior when interest rates are low.

       A literature on endowments has focused primarily on spending rules, and speci...cally on smooth-
ing rules that govern the short-run response of spending to endowment returns (Dybvig 1995, Brown
et al 2014, Gilbert and Hrdlicka 2015).9 Dahiya and Yermack (2018) is an empirical study of en-
dowments'distributions and returns based on IRS ...lings. This paper ...nds that large endowments,
with assets of $100 million or more, distribute on average about 4.5% of market value, comparable
to the geometric expected return on a traditional endowment portfolio with a 60% portfolio share in
equities, although less than the realized returns many endowments have obtained during the strong
stock market of the past 20 years.10

       Two recent papers discuss sustainable spending constraints on endowments from a normative
perspective. Gilbert and Hrdlicka (2011) argue that even with a spending constraint of the sort
we model, risky endowment investing implies that "unfairness remains: the current generation has
taken for itself a large piece of the pie and handed the future generation a gamble." Accordingly
Gilbert and Hrdlicka advocate riskless endowment investing if intergenerational equity is a priority.
Dybvig and Qin (2019) instead argue for a geometric average rather than an arithmetic average
spending constraint, taking a risky investment strategy as given. Neither of these papers develops
the positive theory of reaching for yield that is our primary contribution.

       An important precursor to our work is a series of papers by Rampini and Viswanathan (2010,
2013, 2019). The ...rst two of these papers point out that when ...rms hedge risk, they must post
collateral. If ...rms also need collateral to ...nance pro...table investments, corporate risk management
   9
    Merton (1993) is an exception that emphasizes the use of an endowment to hedge a university' s income risk.
  10
    Smaller endowments, however, distribute at a lower rate and appear to plan for endowment growth. This
behavior is consistent with a one-sided sustainable spending constraint that prohibits only decumulation and not
accumulation of wealth, as discussed in section 3.1 below.



                                                       8
becomes an intertemporal decision. The third paper points out that when households buy insurance,
they must pay a premium up front. If households also face borrowing constraints, household risk
management becomes an intertemporal decision. In these models, corporations or households take
more risk when they face a tighter intertemporal constraint, just as investors do in our model.
The di¤erence is that our investors are constrained by a sustainable spending rule rather than by
a collateral requirement or borrowing limit, and the sustainable spending rule binds more tightly
when the safe real interest rate is low.



Organization of the paper In section 2 we set up a standard consumption and portfolio choice
problem for an in...nitely lived investor with power utility facing iid returns. We state the standard
solution without a sustainable spending constraint, and contrast it with the solutions we obtain
when we impose either an arithmetic or a geometric average sustainable-spending constraint. We
derive a closed-form solution for the arithmetic case, and properties of the solution for the geometric
case. We discuss the welfare costs of sustainable spending constraints at di¤erent levels of interest
rates.   To further build intuition, we describe our constrained solutions using a mean-standard
deviation diagram for the level and volatility of consumption.

   Section 3 explores several extensions of the basic model. We show what happens if the constraint
is one-sided, preventing wealth decumulation but not accumulation; if the investor receives a stream
of donations; if the sustainable-spending constraint is on nominal spending in an environment with
ination; or if the investor has Epstein-Zin preferences. Finally, we consider a simple extension of
the model that imposes a general equilibrium condition on the risky asset market, solving for the
risk premium that induces an investor with a sustainable spending constraint to hold a portfolio
that is fully invested in the risky asset.

   Sections 2 and 3 present comparative static results, comparing economies with di¤erent constant
levels of interest rates. In section 4, by contrast, we consider a dynamic model where the riskless


                                                  9
interest rate follows a persistent stochastic process while the risk premium remains constant. Section
5 concludes, and an online appendix (Campbell and Sigalov 2020) contains additional details of the
analysis.




2     Comparative Statics with Power Utility

2.1     The Standard Unconstrained Model

We begin by writing down the standard model of consumption and portfolio choice for an in...nitely
lived investor with power utility facing iid returns, as presented for example in Ingersoll (1987,
Chapter 13). The investor chooses consumption ct and the portfolio share in a risky asset                t   to
maximize the objective function                   Z    1              1
                                                                t    ct
                                         v = E0            e                  dt ,                           (1)
                                                   0                1
where       is the rate of time preference and        is the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion, subject to
the intertemporal budget constraint


                                          dwt = wt drp;t                  ct dt:                             (2)


The portfolio return drp;t is given by


                                       drp;t =    t drt    + (1             t )rf dt;                        (3)


where   t   is the portfolio share in a risky asset whose return drt is


                                         drt = (rf + )dt + dZt :                                             (4)




                                                           10
Here rf is the riskfree interest rate,      is the risk premium, and                       is the volatility of the risky asset
return. The Sharpe ratio of the risky asset is the ratio = . All these quantities are constant over
time. An iid environment combined with a scale-independent utility function imply that both the
consumption-wealth ratio       t    ct =wt and the portfolio share in the risky asset                          t   are constant over
time when chosen optimally.

   Combining these equations we can write the stochastic process for consumption as

                                   dct   dwt
                                       =     = (rf +           )dt +             dZt         dt:                                  (5)
                                    ct   wt

Using this process we can derive E0 c1
                                     t          as a function of the choice variables                          and    and the other
parameters of the model. This allows us to rewrite the objective function (1) as
                                                                                                                      !
                           1                                                 1
                         w0
             v (w0 ) =                                                           1                 1
                                                                                                                          :       (6)
                         1                 (1       ) rf +                       2
                                                                                     2 2
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                     (1   )2    2 2



We provide a detailed derivation in the online appendix. Note that for utility to be well de...ned
we need the denominator of the second ratio in equation (6) to be positive. In the unconstrained
problem this is always the case at the optimum, although it can fail when we impose a sustainable
spending constraint as we discuss in section 2.5.

   The standard unconstrained model does not impose any relationship between                                              and .   The
...rst-order condition for     gives the usual solution for the risky share,


                                                       =        2
                                                                    ;                                                             (7)


and the ...rst-order condition for     gives the solution

                                                      1                  1           2
                                       =        +            rf +                        :                                        (8)
                                                                        2


                                                          11
   Combining these two solutions, the stochastic process for both consumption and wealth is

                       dct   dwt      rf         1+        2               1
                           =     =           +                  dt +               dZt :               (9)
                        ct   wt                   2 2

Consumption and wealth grow at the same constant average rate that is determined by the riskfree
interest rate, the rate of time preference, risk aversion, and the Sharpe ratio on the risky asset. We
now consider what happens in a constrained problem where the investor is not free to choose the
average growth rate of wealth.



2.2    An Arithmetic Sustainable Spending Constraint

De...nition We ...rst consider an arithmetic sustainable spending constraint.              This constraint
requires that consumption and wealth must be expected to remain constant over time, in other
words that they follow a random walk without drift. Setting the drift in (5) to zero we obtain the
following constraint relating the consumption-wealth ratio          and the risky portfolio share :

                                                  dct   dwt
                                 = (rf +    ))        =     =          dZt :                          (10)
                                                  ct    wt


Maximization problem Substituting this constraint into the objective function (6) we obtain
the following maximization problem with a single choice variable, the risky share :

                                        1
                                      w0           (rf +       )1
                               max                  1                2 2
                                                                               :                      (11)
                                      1             2
                                                       (       1)


Closed-form solution The ...rst-order condition for the problem (11) delivers a closed-form so-
lution for :                                          p
                                                 rf + K
                                            =            ;                                            (12)
                                                  (1 + )


                                                  12
where
                                         2         1+             2
                                    K = rf +2                         :                              (13)


   This solution has several standard properties.        Portfolio volatility,      , depends on the risk
premium and volatility of the risky asset only through the Sharpe ratio ( = ). Also, the risky share
  declines with the volatility   of the risky asset and with risk aversion         when other parameters
                                                                          2
of the model are ...xed (although it is not inversely proportional to         or   as would be the case in
the standard model).

   The solution also has several nonstandard properties summarized in the following proposition.


Proposition 1 (Comparative Statics for the Arithmetic Average Model). In the arithmetic average
model, the risky share   has the following properties.


  1.    is a decreasing and convex function of the riskfree rate rf .

  2.    is an increasing function of the rate of time preference .

  3.    is an increasing function of the risk premium       when rf > 0, and a decreasing function of
        when rf < 0.


   Proof: See the online appendix, Campbell and Sigalov (2020).

   The ...rst property says that the investor reaches for yield, taking more risk when the riskfree
rate is low. Furthermore, the risky share is convex in the riskfree rate, implying that reaching for
yield is stronger when the interest rate is low. This result may help to explain why reaching for
yield is so actively discussed in today'
                                       s low-rate environment, and why this paper has been written
in 2020 even though the technology to write it was already standard decades ago.



                                                  13
       The second property says that a more impatient investor takes more risk. Intuitively, risktaking
increases current consumption and the volatility that this implies for future consumption is heavily
discounted by an impatient investor.

       The third property says that the riskfree rate inuences the response of risktaking to the risk
premium, which has the same sign as the riskfree rate. This response is constant and positive in
the standard model, but once a sustainable spending constraint is imposed an increase in the risk
premium has o¤setting income and substitution e¤ects on risktaking. The income e¤ect becomes
more powerful at low levels of the riskfree rate, and the two e¤ects o¤set one another when the
riskfree interest rate is zero. With rf = 0 the solution (12) becomes
                                                       s
                                                   1          2
                                               =                                                          (14)
                                                            (1 + )

for any positive risk premium        , which depends positively on the rate of time preference and
negatively on risk and risk aversion, but not on the level of .11



2.3       A Geometric Sustainable Spending Constraint

Motivation Although the arithmetic sustainable spending constraint is simple and intuitive, it
has an important disadvantage emphasized by Dybvig and Qin (2019). Application of Ito'
                                                                                     s Lemma
to equation (10) tells us that under an arithmetic sustainable spending constraint, both log con-
sumption and log wealth follow the process

                                                             1   2 2
                               d log(ct ) = d log(wt ) =               dt +   dZt ;                       (15)
                                                             2
  11
    With rf = 0 and = 0 the problem has no solution because no positive level of consumption is sustainable. We
discuss the conditions for existence of a solution in section 2.5.




                                                       14
which has a negative drift. The solution to this equation is

                                                             1    2 2
                                       wt = w0 exp                      t+   c Zt   :                             (16)
                                                             2


       When we take the limit of this expression as t ! 1, using the fact that Zt =t ! 0 almost surely,
we conclude that wt ! 0 almost surely; and since the consumption-wealth ratio is constant, ct ! 0
almost surely. Such a property is undesirable since it implies that spending will eventually approach
zero as the investor exhausts available wealth.               Intuitively, the right-skewed distributions of the
levels of wealth and consumption, with constant means and increasing variances as the horizon
increases, imply that almost all probability mass approaches zero while the constant expectations
of future wealth and consumption are sustained by a vanishingly small number of scenarios in which
wealth and consumption are extremely high.12



De...nition To address this concern we consider an alternative constraint: a geometric sustainable
spending constraint. This constraint requires that the logs of consumption and wealth must be
expected to remain constant over time, in other words that they follow a random walk without
drift. Applying Ito'
                   s lemma to (5), the law of motion for log consumption and log wealth is

                                                                    1    2 2
                      d log(ct ) = d log(wt ) =       rf +                      dt +    dZt       dt:             (17)
                                                                    2

Setting the drift in (17) to zero we obtain the geometric constraint:

                                            1   2 2
                            = rf +                    ) d log(ct ) = d log(wt ) =         dZt :                   (18)
                                            2
  12
     An alternative intuition is that with an arithmetic sustainable spending rule the levels of wealth and consumption
follow martingales bounded below by zero. Like any bounded martingales, they must converge almost surely, but
the only level to which they can converge is zero because this is the only level at which they have zero volatility.
Martin (2012) presents a related analysis.




                                                             15
   Under this constraint, the median values of future consumption and wealth equal their current
values, because log wealth and log consumption are conditionally normally distributed at all hori-
zons. This behavior seems more in accord with the spirit of a sustainable spending constraint. The
lower spending implied by a geometric constraint is also easier to reconcile with empirical evidence
on the distributions of large endowments reported by Dahiya and Yermack (2018).



Maximization problem Substituting the geometric constraint (18) into lifetime utility (6) we
obtain the following maximization problem:
                                                                                   !
                                           1                        1    2 2 1
                                         w0         rf +            2
                                 max                         1                         :                 (19)
                                         1                   2
                                                               (1       )2   2 2




Properties of the solution The ...rst-order condition for the problem (19) implies that the risky
share     is the solution to a cubic equation, and the closed-form expression for          is not particularly
insightful. However, even without solving the equation explicitly we can use the implicit function
theorem to prove the following proposition.


Proposition 2 (Comparative Statics for the Geometric Average Model). In the geometric average
model, the risky share     has the following properties:


        For   > 1,

         1.    is a decreasing and convex function of the riskfree rate rf .

         2.    is an increasing function of the rate of time preference .
                                 2
         3. De...ne rf =    =(         1): When rf > rf ,       is an increasing function of the risk premium
              and when rf < rf ,         is a decreasing function of .
                                                    2
         4. The growth-optimal risky share =            is an upper bound on .

                                                        16
                                                                                2
        For       = 1,    equals the growth-optimal risky share =                   for all values of rf and .

        For       < 1,

            1.     is an increasing function of the riskfree rate rf and is neither globally convex or concave.

            2.      is a decreasing function of the rate of time preference .

            3.      is an increasing function of the risk premium               for all values of rf .
                                                       2
            4. The growth-optimal risky share =            is a lower bound on .


   Proof: See the online appendix, Campbell and Sigalov (2020).

   Our interest is primarily in the case           > 1, which we regard as empirically more relevant. In
this case the ...rst two properties in Proposition 2-- reaching for yield that strengthens as the riskfree
rate declines-- are the same as those of the arithmetic model described in Proposition 1.

   The third property in Proposition 2 is similar to the third property in Proposition 1, but with
a geometric constraint the interest rate that causes a sign switch in the e¤ect of the risk premium
on risktaking is negative rather than zero as it is with an arithmetic constraint. When rf = rf =
        2
   =(            1), the risky share is                    s
                                                       1           2
                                                   =               2
                                                                            ;                                      (20)
                                                               (       1)

for any positive risk premium             , which depends positively on the rate of time preference and
negatively on risk and risk aversion, but not on the level of .

   The ...rst and third properties together imply that for any positive ,                         in equation (20) is an
upper bound on the risky share             at all levels of the riskfree rate above rf , and a lower bound on
  at all levels of the riskfree rate below rf .

   The fourth property in Proposition 2 is new to the geometric case, and reects the fact that
with a geometric constraint the growth-optimal portfolio maximizes current consumption, so low

                                                           17
interest rates and high impatience provide no incentive to seek a higher arithmetic return than that
o¤ered by the growth-optimal portfolio.

   To illustrate these properties, Figure 2 plots the geometrically constrained optimal risky share
as a function of the riskfree rate for three di¤erent values of the risk premium. The parameters
assumed are a risk premium of 6% in the base case (varying up to 7% or down to 5%), an 18%
standard deviation of the risky return, a 7.5% rate of time preference, and risk aversion of 3.
These parameters imply that in the base case the Sharpe ratio of the risky asset is 1/3 and the
unconstrained Merton solution for the risky portfolio share is            = 62%-- close to the 60% equity
allocation that has been traditional for many endowments.

   The constrained asset allocation curves plotted in Figure 2 are downward-sloping and convex,
illustrating the ...rst property in Proposition 2. In the base case, the constrained risky share equals
the unconstrained level when the riskfree interest rate is around 2%.               At this level of rf , the
geometric expected portfolio return is 5:1%, slightly above the average distribution rates reported
by Dahiya and Yermack (2018) for large endowments.

   The constrained asset allocation curves are atter when the risk premium is higher, and they
                                                                               2
cross at the point where the riskfree interest rate equals rf =           =(       1) =   7:5%=8 =    0:94%.
At this level of the interest rate the risky share is     = 76% from equation (20), independent of the
risk premium, while at higher values of the riskfree rate the risk premium has the usual positive
e¤ect on the risky share, and at lower (more negative) values of the riskfree rate the risk premium
has a negative e¤ect on the risky share. This illustrates the third property in Proposition 2.

   An alternative graphical presentation may also be helpful.             In the standard portfolio choice
                                              2
problem the optimal risky share is    = =         resulting in an expected (arithmetic average) portfolio
return of
                                                                  2
                                      Erp = rf +         = rf +   2
                                                                      :                                 (21)



                                                    18
                                          Risky Share 



                                            1.0



                                            0.8

        Out[2073]=

                                            0.6
                                                                                                  =0.07

                                                                                                  =0.06
                                            0.4
                                                                                                  =0.05

                                                                                             rf
                       -0.04      -0.02                  0.02             0.04       0.06


             Figure 2: Sensitivity of Optimal Risky Share to Riskfree Rate and Risk Premium

Here the derivative of the expected portfolio return with respect to the riskless interest rate is one.
If we plot Erp against rf we get a 45-degree line with a positive intercept.

       In the portfolio choice problem with an arithmetic or geometric sustainable spending constraint,
a lower riskfree rate leads to a higher risky share. This implies that the derivative of the expected
portfolio return with respect to the riskless interest rate is less than one. If we plot Erp against rf
for the constrained problem, the resulting curve will be atter than a 45-degree line.

       We illustrate this property in Figure 3 where we plot the expected portfolio return against the
riskfree rate rf for several di¤erent portfolios.13 The ...gure includes a 45-degree line going through
the origin, representing a portfolio with          = 0 that is fully invested in the riskfree asset. It also
                                                                  2        2
includes a 45-degree line with a positive intercept of                =        corresponding to the growth-optimal
portfolio that will be held by an investor with log utility. A conservative investor with                  > 1 and
  13
    All parameters are the same as in the base case of Figure 2 except that we consider risk aversion levels of 1 and
2 as well as 3.


                                                         19
                             Average Return rf +

                                   0.20
                                                    GO Portfolio Arithmetic
                                                    Average Return
                                   0.15                                                    =2

                                                                                           =3
                                   0.10

                                                            45o line
                                   0.05


                                                                                      rf
                -0.05                                     0.05                 0.10

                                 -0.05


Figure 3: Reaching for Yield. Portfolio Expected Return, the Riskfree Rate, and Risk Aversion.

a geometric sustainable spending constraint picks a portfolio that lies between these two lines.

   Figure 3 illustrates the optimally chosen expected return for geometrically constrained investors
with   = 2 (upper blue curve) and     = 3 (lower orange curve). The slope of these curves is less than
one, and for a more aggressive investor with     = 2 the slope actually becomes negative when the
riskfree rate becomes su¢ ciently low. In this region of the parameter space the tendency to reach
for yield is so strong that a small decrease in the risk free rate can actually increase the arithmetic
expected portfolio return (although it does not increase the geometric expected portfolio return and
therefore does not increase the investor'
                                        s current consumption).

   Proposition 2 also describes portfolio choice for the cases    = 1 and     < 1. When         = 1, the
investor holds the growth-optimal portfolio regardless of the level of the riskfree interest rate or
the investor'
            s degree of impatience. This portfolio would be optimal in the unconstrained model,
and it also maximizes current consumption. When         < 1, the model implies "reverse reaching for



                                                  20
yield"in which a low riskfree rate or a high degree of impatience induce the investor to reduce the
risky share from the higher level that would be preferred in the unconstrained model towards the
growth-optimal level that maximizes current consumption. In this case the function relating the
risky share to the riskfree rate is neither globally convex nor globally concave, and the risky share
is always an increasing function of the risk premium.



2.4       The Welfare Cost of Sustainable Spending

A sustainable spending constraint forces an investor to deviate from the optimal Merton rules for
consumption and portfolio allocation.                  In this section we quantify the utility loss from such a
deviation, solving for the share of wealth                   that the investor is willing to give up to remove the
constraint. In particular, we de...ne v ( ; ; rf ; w0 ) as in (6). Then                     is de...ned implicitly by

                                   UC       UC                             C       C
                               v        ;        ; rf ; (1     )w0 = v         ;       ; rf ; w0 ;                      (22)

          UC         UC                                                                                                   C
where          and        are the standard unconstrained solutions given in equations (7) and (8), and
      C
and       are the constrained solutions given in equations (12) and (10) for the arithmetic constraint,
or their equivalents for the geometric constraint.                  is a function of the model parameters and the
riskless interest rate that depends on the particular form of the sustainable spending constraint.

   There is a level of the riskfree interest rate at which the sustainable spending constraint does
not bind, because the unconstrained agent would freely choose a random walk for the level or log
of consumption and wealth. In the base case of Figure 2 with a geometric sustainable spending
constraint, this level of the riskfree interest rate is very close to 2%, as one can see from the fact
that the constrained risky share equals the unconstrained value of 62% when rf                                2%.   At this
point the welfare cost of the constraint                 = 0, but     increases as the riskfree interest rate moves
away from this point.


                                                               21
                                       Wealth-Equivalent Utility Loss
                                                                                           rf
                            - 0.06   - 0.04   - 0.02           0.02   0.04   0.06   0.08

                                                       - 0.2


                                                       - 0.4


                                                       - 0.6


                                                       - 0.8


                                                       - 1.0


   Figure 4: Wealth-Equivalent Welfare Cost of a Geometric Sustainable Spending Constraint

   Figure 4 illustrates these properties for the base case of Figure 2.                         The solid blue line plots
the welfare loss against the riskfree interest rate, changing the sign to indicate visually that the
constraint causes a welfare loss: thus            rather than         is plotted. There is a point close to rf = 2%
where the welfare cost of the constraint is zero, but as the riskfree rate falls the welfare loss mounts
rapidly. When the riskfree interest rate is low enough, the constrained solution fails to exist as we
discuss in the next section. At this point the utility cost of the constraint is in...nite and                    = 1. As
the riskfree interest rate increases above 2%, the welfare loss also increases but not as rapidly due
to the convexity of the risky share as a function of the riskfree interest rate.

   This calculation may help us to understand why endowments have accepted restrictions on
their exibility to adjust spending. When interest rates are modestly positive, for the parameter
values considered there is almost no welfare cost of a sustainable spending constraint since the
constraint is consistent with the endowment'
                                           s desired spending path.                             Thus, in the interest-rate
environment of the late 20th Century, endowments may have found it natural to reassure donors
about their spending intentions by agreeing to a sustainable spending constraint. They may not
have anticipated the current environment of persistently low interest rates in which the constraint
binds tightly and has serious welfare implications.




                                                               22
Welfare implications of reaching for yield We have shown that a sustainable spending con-
straint generates reaching for yield behavior. We now ask what is the welfare consequence of this
behavior. If we impose a further restriction that the investor'
                                                              s asset allocation is ...xed at the level
prescribed by the Merton rule, we can recalculate the welfare cost . This is shown in Figure 4 as
an orange dashed line.

   Naturally the additional restriction further lowers the investor'
                                                                   s utility, and we see that the
wealth-equivalent welfare cost of sustainable spending increases much more rapidly as the riskfree
interest rate declines. For rf =   1%, the wealth-equivalent welfare cost of the sustainable spending
constraint is 14% if reaching for yield is restricted but only 5% when reaching for yield is allowed;
for an even lower rf =    2% the welfare cost is 30% when reaching for yield is restricted and 10%
when it is allowed.

   This calculation may help us to understand why endowments have maintained control over their
asset allocation even while accepting constraints on their spending behavior. If endowments his-
torically believed that there was a small possibility of entering a persistently low-rate environment,
they might have retained the ability to reach for yield as a way to limit the welfare consequences
of persistently low interest rates given a sustainable spending constraint.



2.5    Mean-Standard Deviation Analysis for Consumption

To better understand in...nite-horizon portfolio choice with sustainable spending constraints, we now
characterize the problem as a tradeo¤ that the investor must make between the initial level and
the volatility of consumption. This is analogous to the classic tradeo¤ between the mean and the
volatility of portfolio return in single-period mean-variance analysis, but it di¤ers from the standard
unconstrained in...nite-horizon problem where the investor can freely choose both the initial level
and the volatility of consumption, which jointly determine the subsequent average growth rate of


                                                  23
consumption.

   Any constant risky share and consumption-wealth ratio in our unconstrained problem imply
that the investor'
                 s log consumption follows a Brownian motion with an arbitrary constant drift                                  c

and constant volatility     c:

                                             d log ct =      c dt   +     c dZt :                                           (23)

The level of consumption then follows the stochastic process

                                                             2
                                        dct                  c
                                            =       c   +            dt +         c dZt :                                   (24)
                                         ct                  2


   We can rewrite the closed-form expression for the agent'
                                                          s welfare in terms of these parameters:

                                        c1
                                         0                                    1
                           v (c0 ) =                                               1                 :                      (25)
                                       1                    (1        )   c        2
                                                                                     (1     )2   2
                                                                                                 c


This equation is another way of expressing value similar to equation (6), but written in terms of
the level of consumption and the drift and volatility of the log consumption process rather than in
terms of the level of wealth and the choice variables of the agent.

   For most of this section we will consider the empirically relevant case where the investor'
                                                                                             s
coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion         > 1. In this case the second ratio in (25) decreases with                         c

and increases with   c;   but it is multiplied by a negative number 1=(1                         ) to deliver a negative value
function that, as one would expect, increases with               c   and decreases with              c.   We briey discuss the
case where     < 1 at the end of the section.

   An important implication of equation (25) is that there is an upper bound on the volatility of
consumption that is consistent with ...nite utility of the in...nitely lived investor. When                          c   exceeds
this upper bound, the denominator of the second ratio in (25) becomes negative and the value
function is unde...ned.


                                                            24
   If we ...x the initial level of the value function at some constant v , then equation (25) can be
rewritten as an indi¤erence condition relating the initial level of consumption c0 and the volatility
of log consumption    c:

                                                                                                            1
                                                                              2                         1
                                                                         2    c
                           c0 =      +(   1)       c   (                1)            (1           )v           :                    (26)
                                                                             2

This equation tells us that c0 is increasing in both                c   and v : a larger initial level of consumption is
required to compensate the investor for higher volatility given constant value, or to deliver higher
value with constant volatility. Hence, if we plot indi¤erence curves in ( c ; c0 ) space, each curve is
upward sloping and the agent will pick the highest possible curve subject to a constraint that we
next derive from the portfolio choice problem.

   Sustainable spending rules determine the drift in log consumption,                                               c.   They also impose
constraints on the relationship between c0 and             c,   since an increase in consumption today can be
...nanced only by taking more portfolio risk which implies greater volatility in consumption growth.



Arithmetic indi¤erence condition and constraint An arithmetic sustainable spending rule
                                                                                           2
implies that the drift in the level of consumption is zero:                       c   +    c =2     = 0 in equation (24). In this
case the indi¤erence condition (26) becomes

                                                                                               1
                                                                2                          1
                                                                c
                                  c0 =         (       1)                (1           )v            :                                (27)
                                                                2


   Normalizing initial wealth w0 = 1, the arithmetic rule implies that the relationship between the
initial level of consumption and the volatility of consumption is


                                          c0 = r f +                         c;                                                      (28)



                                                       25
where rf is the riskless interest rate,     is the expected excess return on a risky asset, and                        is the
standard deviation of the risky asset return. Equation (28) follows from the familiar relationships
in a Merton model that     c   =      and the arithmetic expected portfolio return is rf +                         , where
is the portfolio share in a risky asset. It implies a linear tradeo¤ between the initial level and the
volatility of consumption with intercept rf and slope ( = ).



Geometric indi¤erence condition and constraint Under the geometric sustainable spending
rule, the indi¤erence condition (26) becomes

                                                                                             1
                                                              2                          1
                                                         2    c
                                   c0 =       (       1)               (1           )v           :                       (29)
                                                              2

Comparing the geometric indi¤erence condition (29) with the arithmetic indi¤erence condition (27),
                                                      2
the di¤erence is in the coe¢ cient multiplying        c =2.       Since (                1) > (      1)2 under our maintained
assumption that     > 1, for any given value v the indi¤erence curve for the arithmetic rule lies above
the indi¤erence curve for the geometric rule, except when                       c   = 0 where the two curves converge.

   Normalizing initial wealth w0 = 1, the geometric rule implies that the relationship between the
initial level of consumption and the volatility of consumption is

                                                                            1   2
                                          c0 = rf +                c            c;                                       (30)
                                                                            2

where the last term is the Jensen'
                                 s Inequality di¤erence between the arithmetic and geometric mean
of consumption growth. Equation (30) is a concave rather than a linear constraint. As volatility
increases, it has a diminishing e¤ect on the expected log portfolio return and therefore on the initial
level of consumption.

   The highest level of initial consumption is obtained when the investor holds the growth-optimal



                                                        26
portfolio with maximum log return. In this case               c   = = and

                                                            1       2
                                                c0 = rf +               :                                     (31)
                                                            2

As in the standard Merton problem, as               approaches one the optimal portfolio approaches the
growth-optimal portfolio and consumption will be given by equation (31).



Graphical analysis To understand the properties of indi¤erence curves with sustainable spending
constraints, we can di¤erentiate equations (27) or (29) with respect to the standard deviation of
consumption,       c,   to see that under either type of constraint, the slope of the indi¤erence curve is
positive and increasing in        c.    The slope is zero-- the indi¤erence curve is at-- at zero standard
deviation, reecting the fact that investors with twice di¤erentiable utility always take some amount
of any compensated risk. The slope approaches in...nity as the standard deviation approaches the
upper bound at which the value function no longer converges. Since (                    1) > (     1)2 under our
maintained assumption that             > 1, the slope is everywhere greater and the upper bound is smaller
for the arithmetic constraint than for the geometric constraint.

      These properties are illustrated in Figure 5. There we plot indi¤erence curves (27) and (29),
and spending constraints (28) and (30), for both types of constraint and a common level of value
v .14 The two indi¤erence curves have the same intercept with the vertical axis, but the arithmetic
indi¤erence curve is higher and steeper elsewhere and its asymptote lies to the left of that for the
geometric indi¤erence curve.

      Figure 5 also illustrates the fact that at the optimum for the geometric rule, that is for the
value v where the geometric indi¤erence curve is tangent to its concave portfolio constraint, the
arithmetic indi¤erence curve lies above its linear portfolio constraint. To obtain the optimal choice
under the arithmetic constraint we need to shift the indi¤erence curve down, corresponding to a
 14
      The parameters assumed are a 2% riskfree interest rate together with the base case parameters from Figure 2.


                                                         27
                        c0

                     0.12
                                                                    Geometric
                                                         Arithmetic Average
                     0.10
                                                         Average
                     0.08

                     0.06

                     0.04

                     0.02
                                                                                    c
                       0.00         0.05          0.10             0.15      0.20


         Figure 5: Comparing Arithmetic and Geometric Average Spending Constraints

lower value, in order to satisfy the portfolio constraint.         In other words optimized consumption
delivers lower lifetime utility under the arithmetic constraint than under the geometric constraint;
this may be an additional reason to prefer the geometric formulation of the sustainable spending
constraint as advocated by Dybvig and Qin (2019).



Existence of a solution Figure 5 allows us to understand the conditions for the existence of a
solution: a point where an indi¤erence curve is tangent to the spending constraint.            First, since
all indi¤erence curves must be in the positive quadrant, a necessary condition for a tangency point
to exist is that the spending constraint has a maximum above zero.              This condition is trivially
satis...ed by the arithmetic constraint, which is linear with a positive slope, but not by the concave
geometric constraint. If the riskfree rate is su¢ ciently negative, then even when the investor holds
the growth-optimal portfolio, the expected portfolio return may be negative and no sustainable
solution will exist for a geometric spending constraint. This problem arises if

                                                    1      2
                                           rf <                :                                      (32)
                                                    2


                                                   28
       Second, a solution may also fail to exist if the spending constraint becomes positive only at
levels of consumption volatility        c   that exceed the upper bound for the value function to be ...nite.
This problem can arise either for the arithmetic constraint or for the geometric constraint. In the
geometric case, from equation (29) the highest permissible level of consumption volatility is
                                                           s
                                                   ?                2
                                                   c   =                     ;                                        (33)
                                                               (1       )2

and from equation (30), if the riskfree rate is negative the portfolio constraint ...rst becomes positive
at the point
                                                           q
                                             ??                     2= 2
                                             c    = =                        + 2 rf :                                 (34)

                                                                                                         ?       ?
Existence of a solution is guaranteed when rf > 0, but when rf < 0 it requires that                      c   <   c.


       Figure 3 illustrates these two di¤erent conditions for existence of a solution to the portfolio
choice problem. For a relatively aggressive investor with risk aversion                   = 1:5, the ...rst condition
binds when the riskfree rate is very low.              Below the binding value of the riskfree rate, even the
growth-optimal portfolio does not provide positive consumption: in Figure 3 the upper blue curve
starts from the growth-optimal optimal portfolio line.15 For a more conservative investor with risk
aversion      = 3, on the other hand, the second condition binds: in Figure 3 the leftmost point of the
lower orange curve is to the right of the leftmost point of the upper curve. A conservative investor
with a geometric average spending constraint cannot tolerate as low a riskfree interest rate as can
a more aggressive investor with the same constraint.



Reaching for yield The graphical analysis can be used to understand why sustainable spending
rules generate reaching for yield. A change in the riskfree interest rate, with no change in the risk
premium, is a parallel shift up or down in the spending constraint. An increase in the riskfree rate
  15
    Since the ...gure plots the arithmetic average portfolio return, the line is positive at this point but the geometric
average portfolio return that enters the sustainable spending constraint is zero.


                                                           29
                                  c0
                              0.10


                              0.08
                                                                                                    rf =0.025
                              0.06
                 Out[2902]=
                                                                                                    rf =0.0
                              0.04


                              0.02                                                                  rf =-0.025


                                                                                                  c
                                        0.05         0.10             0.15                 0.20


Figure 6: Reaching for Yield. The E¤ect of the Riskfree Rate on Initial Consumption and Con-
sumption Volatility

is an upward shift that improves the opportunity set and increases the achievable value v , while a
decrease is a downward shift that reduces v .

      Equations (27) and (29) imply that for both the arithmetic and geometric cases, the slope of
the indi¤erence curve is increasing in v . Mathematically, this is because v enters multiplicatively
in these equations, increasing both the value and the slope of the indi¤erence curve for any value
of consumption volatility.

      The response of the slope of the indi¤erence curve to the level of value v implies that as the
spending constraint shifts up, the optimal standard deviation of consumption declines; while as the
spending constraint shifts down, the optimal standard deviation of consumption increases. This is
precisely reaching for yield. It is illustrated in Figure 6 for the geometric case.16

      Reaching for yield reects the fact that in the problem with a sustainable spending constraint
both consumption today and the stability of the consumption path are normal goods, so the investor
uses an improvement in investment opportunities to increase both of them, in other words to reduce
volatility as well as to increase current consumption.
 16
      All parameters are the same as in Figure 5 except that we consider riskfree rates of 2.5%, 0%, and         2:5%.


                                                            30




                                                             Printed by Wolfram Mathematica Student Edition
                              c0
                         0.060

                         0.055
                                                                        = 0.10
                         0.050                                  = 0.075

                         0.045                        = 0.05

                         0.040

                         0.035

                                                                                            c
                                   0.06     0.08      0.10      0.12      0.14       0.16


        Figure 7: The E¤ect of Impatience on Initial Consumption and Consumption Volatility

The e¤ect of impatience We can also analyze the e¤ect of impatience on the problem. Equa-
tions (27) and (29) imply that for both the arithmetic and geometric cases, the slope of the indif-
ference curve is decreasing in the time discount rate . A more impatient investor values current
consumption more relative to volatility that is realized in the future. Hence, the optimal solution
will involve higher current consumption and higher consumption volatility as illustrated in Figure
7 for the geometric case.17



The e¤ect of the risk premium In the standard Merton model a larger risk premium unam-
biguously raises the share of wealth allocated to risky assets. Propositions 1 and 2 show that this
is no longer the case in the model with a sustainable spending constraint. As illustrated in Figure
2, when the riskfree interest rate is su¢ ciently low, a larger risk premium may actually reduce the
risky share.

      The reason is that there are two e¤ects in play when the risk premium changes. An increase in
the risk premium both shifts the portfolio constraint up, and makes it steeper. The former e¤ect
 17
      All parameters are the same as in Figure 5 except that we consider time preference rates of 5%, 7.5%, and 10%.


                                                         31
                 c0                                                                                c0
             0.08
                                                                                                                                                 =0.08
                                                                                            0.08
                                                                                            0.07
             0.06
                                                                             =0.08                                                               =0.06
                                                                                            0.06

Out[2784]=   0.04                                                              Out[2745]=   0.05
                                                                                                                                                 =0.04
                                                                             =0.06          0.04

             0.02                                                                           0.03
                                                                             =0.04          0.02
                                                                           c                                                                   c
                             0.14       0.16      0.18              0.20                                0.05   0.10           0.15


                  Figure 8: The E¤ect of Risk Premium on Initial Consumption and Consumption Volatility

        reduces risktaking and the latter increases it. As the riskfree rate declines, the former reaching for
        yield e¤ect becomes more powerful and it dominates at su¢ ciently low levels of the riskfree rate.

                  Figure 8 has two panels illustrating the two possible situations.18 The left panel shows a case
        where rf is very low at                1:5%. Here an increase in value leads to a signi...cant steepening of the
        indi¤erence curves. This e¤ect dominates the steepening of the portfolio constraint and results in
        lower consumption volatility for larger values of the risk premium. The right panel shows the case
        where rf is 2%. Here an increase in value results in an almost parallel shift of the indi¤erence curves
        that is dominated by the steepening of the portfolio constraint.



        The case               < 1 When           < 1, the indi¤erence curve with a geometric sustainable spending
        constraint takes a di¤erent form that we present in Figure 9. With                                     < 1, at any ...xed level of
        lifetime value v the relationship between the initial level of consumption c0 and the volatility of
        log consumption             c   is negative. This means that the indi¤erence curve is downward sloping and
        is tangent to the geometric constraint at a point with higher risk than would be implied by the
        growth-optimal portfolio.                The ...gure illustrates the fourth property in Proposition 2, that the
        growth-optimal risky share is a lower bound on the constrained investor'
                                                                               s risky share.
             18
                  Risk aversion, the rate of time preference, and the volatility of the risky asset return are the same as in Figure 5.


                                                                                       32

                                                  Printed by Wolfram Mathematica Student Edition                      Printed by Wolfram Mathematica Student Edition
                          c0

                     0.14

                     0.12

                     0.10

                     0.08

                     0.06

                     0.04

                     0.02

                                                                                                           c
                                       0.2              0.4          0.6             0.8

                                Figure 9: Geometric Constraint for                        <1

                                                                                                  ?
   Figure 9 also helps us analyze existence of a solution. When                           c   =   c,   the level of consumption
volatility de...ned in equation (33), the indi¤erence curve for the                       < 1 case requires c0 = 0 for any
lifetime value v , and no solution exists for any higher level of volatility. When the riskfree rate is
                                                                                                                                  y
positive, the geometric constraint is positive for all levels of consumption volatility below                                     c,   and
when the riskfree rate is negative the geometric constraint is positive for all levels of consumption
                     ??         y                ??                                                    y       ??
volatility between   c    and   c,   where       c    is de...ned in equation (34) and                 c   >   c    is given by

                                                              q
                                             y                     2= 2
                                             c   = = +                     + 2rf :                                                     (35)


For a solution with a ...nite lifetime value v to exist we need the portfolio constraint to become
                                                                                     ?                                    y       ?
negative (cross the x-axis from above) at a point to the left of                     c.       This requires that          c   <   c.




                                                              33
3     Extensions of the Static Model

3.1    A One-Sided Sustainable Spending Constraint

The sustainable spending constraint we have considered so far prohibits both accumulation and
decumulation of wealth. An alternative type of constraint is one-sided, preventing decumulation
but not accumulation of wealth. In this case the investor is unconstrained when the riskfree interest
rate is high enough to induce wealth accumulation, but constrained at low levels of the riskfree rate
that incentivize decumulation.

    We show optimal risky shares for a one-sided constraint in Figure 10. All the parameters here
are the same as in Figure 2, so the three curves are the same at low levels of the riskfree rate but
atten out to the Merton solutions at higher levels of the riskfree rate.     The kinks occur at the
points where the constraint stops binding: about rf = 0% for a 7% risk premium, rf = 2% for the
base case of a 6% risk premium, and rf = 3:5% for a 5% risk premium.

    The possibility of one-sided constraints suggests an additional reason why reaching for yield has
become a more salient topic in the current low-interest-rate environment.       Some investors with
one-sided constraints may now be constrained and reaching for yield, when they were not at the
higher interest-rate levels of the late 20th Century.



3.2    Donations

We can extend our analysis to consider an investor who spends not only out of ...nancial wealth,
but also out of donations such as those alumni make to universities. For tractability, we assume
that the value of donations received is proportional to the existing level of wealth.

    Donations to endowments come in two main varieties. Current-use gifts can be spent in the

                                                  34
                                     Risky Share 



                                       1.0



                                       0.8
                                                                                          =0.07
     Out[462]=


                                       0.6                                                =0.06

                                                                                          =0.05

                                       0.4



                                                                                     rf
                   -0.04     -0.02                  0.02      0.04            0.06


Figure 10: Sensitivity of Optimal Risky Share to Riskfree Rate and Risk Premium for One-Sided
Constraint

period in which they are received, while endowment gifts must be added to ...nancial wealth and
generate a stream of subsequent spending subject to any sustainable-spending constraints.         We
assume that current-use gifts are a fraction gu of wealth wt , while endowment gifts are a fraction
ge . Then the intertemporal budget constraint becomes


                                dwt = wt drp;t + wt (gu + ge )dt     ct dt;                       (36)


and the arithmetic sustainable-spending constraint becomes


                           ct dt = wt (Et drp;t + gu ) = wt (rf + gu +        )dt:                (37)


Both types of gifts enter equation (36), but only current-use gifts enter equation (37). Similarly,
only current-use gifts enter the geometric sustainable-spending constraint.



                                                    35
   It is straightforward to show that current-use gifts are equivalent to an increase in the riskfree
interest rate, and therefore they discourage risktaking. Endowment gifts, on the other hand, are
equivalent to an increase in the rate of time preference, and therefore they encourage risktaking.
These results hold whether the sustainable spending constraint is arithmetic or geometric.



3.3     A Nominal Spending Constraint with Ination

So far we have considered a real model where consumption, asset returns, and sustainable spending
constraints are measured in real terms. We now extend our analysis to consider a nominal spending
constraint in a model with ination.

   Consider a price level pt that follows


                                               dpt = pt dt;                                     (38)


where    is the constant ination rate. The nominal rate becomes

                                                $
                                               rf = rf +                                        (39)


and the nominal return on the risky asset is

                                     $
                                   drt = (rf +        + )dt + dZt :                             (40)



Arithmetic Average Model Suppose that the investor has a nominal sustainable spending
constraint
                                            c$       $     $
                                             t dt = wt E[drp;t ];                               (41)




                                                     36
where c$              $
       t = ct pt and wt = wt pt , so that


                                                $
                                 ct dt = wt E[drp;t ] = wt (rf +              +        )dt:                   (42)


Nominal wealth then follows a martingale, while real wealth follows the process

                                  dwt  dw$
                                      = $t           dt =           dt +           dZt ;                      (43)
                                  wt   wt

and log consumption follows

                                                             2 2
                                 d log(ct ) =                           dt +           dZt :                  (44)
                                                             2


   We can now rewrite the indi¤erence condition and portfolio constraint as

                                                                                                    1
                                                                         2                      1
                                                                         c
                          c0 =          (       1)      (          1)             (1       )v                 (45)
                                                                        2

and
                                            c0 = rf +    +                   c:                               (46)


   Comparing these equations with the real versions (27) and (28), we can see that ination sub-
tracts (   1) from the rate of time preference and adds                  to the riskfree interest rate. Both e¤ects
reduce risktaking.   Hence, with a given real interest rate, a higher ination rate (equivalently, a
higher nominal interest rate) reduces risktaking.

   Even if we ...x the nominal interest rate, lowering rf to o¤set any change in , an increase in
ination is equivalent to a reduction in the rate of time preference and hence it lowers risktaking.




                                                        37
Geometric Average Model Very similar results hold in a model with a nominal geometric
average constraint. Here we have

                                                                          1    2 2
                                 ct dt = wt rf +         +                                dt             (47)
                                                                          2

and
                                                             2 2
                                 d log(ct ) =                             dt +           dZt :           (48)
                                                             2

   We can rewrite the indi¤erence condition and portfolio constraint as

                                                                                                     1
                                                                           2                     1
                                                                      2    c
                          c0 =          (       1)   (           1)                (1       )v           (49)
                                                                          2

and
                                                                               1    2
                                      c0 = r f +     +                c             c:                   (50)
                                                                               2
Once again, we see that higher ination is equivalent to a lower rate of time preference and a higher
riskfree interest rate, so it lowers risktaking.

   These results allow our model to explain why reaching for yield has been a particular concern
in recent years, when it was not during the 1970s. In that decade, the riskfree real interest rate
was low but ination was high, so investors with nominal sustainable spending constraints would
not have reached for yield.



3.4    Epstein-Zin Preferences

In this section we consider an investor who has Epstein-Zin preferences (Epstein and Zin 1989,
1991), speci...ed in continuous time following Du¢ e and Epstein (1992). These preferences allow
the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS), which we denote by , to di¤er from the reciprocal


                                                     38
of the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion . We show that the properties of the power utility case
with    > 1, given in Propositions 1 and 2, carry through regardless of the value of the EIS.

   Utility for an in...nitely lived investor with Epstein-Zin preferences is de...ned as the solution to
                                                        Z       1
                                              Vt = Et               f (cs ; Vs )ds;                                      (51)
                                                            t


where                                                                                                            !
                                                                               1
                                          1                         c1
                        f (c; V ) =               1                                    1        (1          )V       :   (52)
                                      1               ((1               )V )       1



The appendix writes out the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation and shows how to solve the
model; here we simply state the results for the standard unconstrained model and our model with
arithmetic and geometric sustainable spending constraints.



Unconstrained model In the standard unconstrained model, the portfolio rule is the same as
                             2
for power utility:     = =       . The consumption-wealth ratio is given by

                                                        1
                                 ct                                 1                   1           2
                                    =         1   +             1         rf +                          ;                (53)
                                 wt                                                    2

                                                                                                1
which coincides with the power utility formula (8) when                                 =           :



Arithmetic constraint In a model with an arithmetic sustainable spending constraint, the op-
timal risky share is                                                      p
                                                         rf +                  L
                                                      =                        1 ;                                       (54)
                                                        (1 +                    )
where
                                                                               1
                                           2                    1+                          2
                                      L = rf +2                                                 :                        (55)




                                                                39
This has all the same properties given in Proposition 1 for the power utility case. In addition, it
has the property that the risky share increases in the EIS     . The risky share approaches zero as
  approaches zero, regardless of the level of risk aversion.



Geometric constraint In a model with a geometric sustainable spending constraint, the appen-
dix shows that the risky share has all the same properties given in Proposition 2 for the power
utility case. In addition, it has the property that the risky share is increasing in the EIS .



3.5    Equilibrium in the Risky Asset Market

In this section we consider a simpli...ed form of general equilibrium. We assume that all demand for
the risky asset comes from a representative "SS" agent who is subject to a geometric sustainable
spending constraint.    The SS agent is endowed with wealth in the form of the risky asset, and is
the only agent in the economy who can hold that asset. These assumptions imply that the risky
share of the SS agent is   = 1, as the SS agent can only trade the risky asset with other SS agents
even if di¤erent types of agents are active in other ...nancial markets.

   Because the SS agent cannot buy or sell the asset in equilibrium, the SS agent'
                                                                                 s consumption
is ...nanced exclusively by the risky asset'
                                           s dividends. To make the sustainable consumption path
feasible, we assume that the risky asset'
                                        s dividends follow a logarithmic random walk.          There is
also a riskless asset with an exogenous riskfree rate rf set, for example, by the savings decisions of
other types of agents or by a central bank willing to exchange consumption between time periods.
In this economy the risk premium      adjusts to make the SS agent willing to keep all wealth in the
risky asset rather than borrowing or lending at the riskfree interest rate.

   Before we derive the relationship between the riskfree rate and the risk premium, we briey
discuss the existence of an equilibrium. First, there are the familiar conditions for the existence of a


                                                  40
solution to the partial equilibrium problem: holding all wealth in the risky asset should give the SS
agent positive consumption and ...nite lifetime value. Second, it must be the case that by adjusting
the risk premium it is feasible to make the SS agent hold all wealth in the risky asset. To understand
                                                                                                                         2
the latter condition consider Figure 2 and in particular the riskfree rate rf =                                     =(       1) at which
the optimal risky share is invariant to the risk premium. If                            -- the optimal partial equilibrium
risky share at rf given in equation (20)-- is below 1, then no matter how large the risk premium is,
for any riskfree rate rf > rf the optimal risky share will stay below 1 because higher riskfree rates
lower the desired risky share.      In general equilibrium this implies that the risk premium cannot
adjust to make the agent hold all his wealth in the risky asset. For rf < rf , the opposite holds, and
general equilibrium fails to exist if        exceeds 1.

   The following proposition states the relationship between the risk premium and the exogenous
riskfree rate for the case   > 1.


Proposition 3 (General Equilibrium in the Geometric Average Model with                                          > 1.) In the geomet-
ric average model with the risky share constrained to           = 1, and with                         > 1,


  1. Equilibrium exists when
                      2                         2
                                                                        1   2       2
                      6 Case 1:       rf >
                                               2
                                                    > rf and    >
                                                                        2
                                                                                (            1)
                      6                                                                                                             (56)
                      4                         2
                                                          1                                             2
                                                                    2               2                           2
                        Case 2:       rf <       < rf and               (       1) <              <         (       1)
                                               2          2                                            2

  2. The equilibrium risk premium

                                                1 2 2
                                        2       2
                                                   (          )                          1
                                  =             1 2 2           +           1       2( 2
                                                                                                       rf                           (57)
                                                2
                                                   (         1)             2
                                                                                                  1)

      is a linear increasing function of the riskfree interest rate rf in Case 1 and a linear decreasing
      function of rf in Case 2.

                                                        41
    Proposition 3 extends our earlier partial equilibrium intuition to general equilibrium in the risky
asset market. In partial equilibrium, the SS agent reaches for yield: as the riskfree interest rate
declines the agent wants to take more risk. In general equilibrium, however, the SS agent must hold
all wealth in the risky asset, and thus the risk premium adjusts to clear the risky asset market.
When rf > rf , a higher risk premium has the standard e¤ect of increasing the desired risky share.
Hence, in general equilibrium it moves in the same direction as the riskfree rate. When rf < rf , the
relationship reverses and in general equilibrium the risk premium moves in the opposite direction
from the riskfree interest rate.

    In the online appendix we state similar conditions for existence and derive the equilibrium risk
premium in the geometric model with       < 1 and in the arithmetic model. When equilibrium exists
in the arithmetic model, the risk premium is a linear increasing function of rf when rf > 0, and a
linear decreasing function of rf when rf < 0.




4     A Dynamic Model

Earlier sections of this paper have compared static equilibria with higher or lower real interest rates
that are assumed to be constant over time. It is natural to ask whether similar results apply in a
dynamic model where the riskfree interest rate moves over time.

    In a dynamic environment where investment opportunities change over time, the demand for a
risky asset depends on its intertemporal hedging properties (Merton 1973). As in Campbell and
Viceira (2001), we allow the riskfree interest rate to move but assume a constant risk premium.
Then, intertemporal hedging is driven by correlation between shocks to the return on the risky
asset and shocks to the riskfree interest rate.    We capture such correlation by allowing interest
rate innovations to load on two independent Brownian motions, one of which also drives the return
on the risky asset. To see how this works, assume two independent Brownian motions dZ1t and

                                                  42
                                                                                p
dZ2t . Then a third Brownian motion dZ3t = dZ1t +                                1            2 dZ     has instantaneous variance dt
                                                                                                  2t

and instantaneous correlation dt with dZ1t .

   The full problem of the agent now becomes
                                                            Z      1
                                                                           t
                                                  max E0               e       u(ct )dt                                                       (58)
                                                       t       0


                                                        1 2 2
                    subject to ct = wt rf t + t
                                                        2 t
                               0        1 0             1 0                                                        10           1
                                             1     2 2                                                                                        (59)
                                  dwt          w              w                                    0                    dZ1t
                               @        A = @2 t t A + @ t t                                      p                A@           A
                                  drf t         (rf t )        rf t                           rf t 1           2        dZ2t


HJB equation Under these assumptions the HJB equation is
                        (                                                                                                                               )
                               @v 1           2       2   @v            1 @ 2v 2                 2     2   1 @ 2v      2 2      @ 2v
 v (wt ; rf t ) = max u(ct ) +      wt                  +     (rf t ) +       w                          +              rf t +       wt          rf t       :
                               @w 2                       @rf           2 @w2 t                            2 @rf2
                                                                                                                               @w@rf
                                                                                                                                              (60)

   As previously, we conjecture that the value function takes the form

                                                                                  1
                                                                                wt
                                              v (wt ; rf t ) = A(rf t )                   ;                                                   (61)
                                                                                1

which di¤ers from the static model by having a time-varying coe¢ cient A(rf t ) that reects changing
investment opportunities. If we substitute this guess for the value function into the HJB equation,
wealth cancels thus verifying the conjectured form of the value function. We collect terms to obtain

                                                  1    2 2 1
                    1            rf t +                                   1                       2 2                       1
     A(rf t )           = max                     2
                                                                   + A(r) (1         )                   + A0 (rf t )               (rf t )
                1                         1                               2                                             1                     (62)
                                                                     1             1
                                                                   + A00 (rf t )                     2 2
                                                                                                      rf t         0
                                                                                                             + A (rf t )        rf t :
                                                                     2           1



                                                                   43
First-order condition The ...rst order condition for this problem has an additional term com-
pared to the static model:

                              1    2 2               2                             2
                rf t +                      (            ) = A(rf t )(        1)       A0 (rf t ) rf t   :         (63)
                              2

The ...rst-order condition shows that           depends on the correlation between the unexpected risky
asset return and the risk free rate . A lower correlation                  decreases the right-hand side of equation
(63) since A0 (rf t ) < 0. The left-hand side is decreasing in , so the optimal risky share                    is larger
for a smaller correlation .



The drift of log consumption In the static model the geometric average sustainable spending
rule implies that the logs of both wealth and consumption are martingales. In the dynamic model,
log wealth remains a martingale but log consumption is not in general. To see this, consider the
log change in consumption

                                                             1
                         d log ct = d log wt rf t + (rf t )        (rf t )2 2
                                                             2
                                                                         1                                         (64)
                                  = d log wt +d log rf t + (rf t )          (rf t )2      2
                                                                                               :
                                    | {z }                               2
                                    mean zero


In general the second term has nonzero drift and we cannot characterize it analytically. Therefore,
we rely on numerical methods to describe this and other properties of the solution.                          The online
appendix provides more details on the numerical implementation.



Analysis of the numerical solution In Figure 11, we present a numerical solution for the
dynamic model and illustrate its sensitivity to di¤erent parameter values. We set

                                                               1   2 2
                                                  (rf t ) =         rf t                                           (65)
                                                               2

                                                          44
               0.7                                                                      1.00

               0.6

               0.5                                                                      0.75




                                                                          Risky Share
 Risky Share




               0.4
                                                                                        0.50
               0.3

                          Corr = 0.99                                                              RRA = 2
               0.2
                          Corr = 0.0                                                    0.25       RRA = 3
                          Corr = -0.99                                                             RRA = 4
               0.1

                                                                                        0.00
                0.00        0.02         0.04        0.06   0.08   0.10                    0.00     0.02       0.04        0.06   0.08   0.10
                                          Risk Free Rate                                                        Risk Free Rate
               0.8


                                                                                        0.6
               0.6
 Risky Share




                                                                          Risky Share


                                                                                        0.4
               0.4


                          Discount Rate = 5.0%                                                    RP = 2.0%
                                                                                        0.2
               0.2        Discount Rate = 7.5%                                                    RP = 6.0%
                          Discount Rate = 10.0%                                                   RP = 10.0%


               0.0                                                                      0.0
                 0.00       0.02         0.04        0.06   0.08   0.10                   0.00     0.02        0.04        0.06   0.08   0.10
                                          Risk Free Rate                                                        Risk Free Rate


                        Figure 11: Sensitivity of Optimal Risky Share to Parameters in Dynamic Model

in order to make log(rf t ) a random walk. This process is natural for our application since it implies
that log consumption for an agent that takes zero risk (                                          = 0) follows a random walk similarly
to the static case.                      Log consumption for the agent who invests optimally is not quite a random
walk, but predictable changes in consumption are small. More generally, a persistent process for
the riskfree rate is required to avoid transient movements in consumption and asset allocation that
would be generated by a sustainable spending constraint interacting with transitory shocks to the
expected return.

               All four panels of Figure 11 have the riskfree interest rate on the horizontal axis, and the risky
share on the vertical axis. All the panels show decreasing convex curves, consistent with the static


                                                                      45
analysis of reaching for yield. The panels di¤er in the parameters assumed. In every panel the
base case, shown as a middle orange curve, has a zero correlation between the riskfree rate and the
risky asset return, risk aversion of 3, a time discount rate of 7.5%, a risk premium of 6%, and a
risky standard deviation of 18% implying a Sharpe ratio of 1/3 and Merton risky share of 0.62. We
set the volatility of risk free rate   = 1%.

    The top left panel varies the correlation to 0:99 or    0:99.    A negative correlation increases
the demand for the risky asset while a positive correlation reduces it, consistent with the logic of
Merton (1973, 1993) and Campbell and Viceira (2001). Quantitatively, we ...nd that this hedging
demand is very similar in magnitude to that in the standard Merton model for all values of the
riskfree interest rate. The top right panel varies risk aversion up to 4 or down to 2, with intuitive
e¤ects on risktaking. The bottom left panel varies the rate of time preference up to 10% or down to
5%, and as in the static model a more impatient investor takes more risk. The bottom right panel
varies the risk premium up to 10% or down to 2%. Since in this model the riskfree interest rate is
always positive, the e¤ect of the risk premium on risktaking is always positive, but the magnitude
of the e¤ect is smaller when the interest rate reaches very low levels. These ...ndings con...rm the
main results of our static analysis for a plausible dynamic model.




5     Conclusion

In this paper we have shown that a constraint on an investor'
                                                            s ability to save or dissave can break the
standard result that risktaking depends only on risk aversion, risk, and the risk premium available
in ...nancial markets. An investor with a sustainable spending constraint reaches for yield, taking
more risk as the riskfree interest rate declines, even if all the standard determinants of risktaking
are constant. Furthermore, the tendency to reach for yield is stronger when the real interest rate
is low than when it is high.     This may be one reason why reaching for yield has been so widely


                                                 46
discussed in the low-interest-rate environment of the early 21st Century.

   Reaching for yield also changes the investor'
                                               s response to a change in the risk premium. An
increase in the risk premium stimulates risktaking through the conventional channel, a substitution
e¤ect towards risky investing.   However it also weakens reaching for yield, an o¤setting income
e¤ect that reduces risktaking.   The o¤setting e¤ect becomes stronger when the riskfree interest
rate is low, and can even dominate at su¢ ciently low levels of the interest rate.

   For any given preference parameters, there is a level of the riskfree interest rate at which a
sustainable spending constraint does not bind because the unconstrained investor does not wish to
accumulate or decumulate wealth. The welfare cost of a sustainable spending constraint is very
low when the riskfree rate is near this level, but increases rapidly as the riskfree rate declines and
more slowly as the riskfree rate increases. A one-sided constraint, preventing wealth decumulation
but allowing wealth accumulation, binds only for rates below this level; this provides another reason
why reaching for yield may be more important today than in earlier decades where interest rates
were higher.

   We have extended our model to consider what happens when the investor receives a stream of
donations, ...nding that current-use gifts moderate risktaking while endowment gifts increase it. We
have also considered an alternative model in which the sustainable spending constraint is speci...ed
in nominal terms. In this case low ination stimulates risktaking even at a constant real interest
rate; this may help to explain why reaching for yield was less of a concern during the 1970s, when
the real interest rate was low but ination was high.

   Most of our analysis is static, comparing equilibria with permanently di¤erent levels of the
riskfree interest rate. However we show that our results carry over to the numerical solution of a
dynamic model with a highly persistent riskfree rate whose log follows a random walk.

   Although our results depend on the functional forms we have assumed-- both the power form for


                                                 47
utility and the arithmetic or geometric forms for the sustainable spending constraints-- we believe
the insights of this paper are more general.    Most obviously, the paper shows that the analysis
extends straightforwardly to the case of Epstein-Zin preferences.      It should also be possible to
enrich our model to allow for a exible constraint that penalizes but does not prohibit saving or
dissaving, or a smoothing rule that allows spending to adjust gradually towards a sustainable target.
The general lesson is that the classic separation between the riskfree interest rate and risktaking is
critically dependent on the assumption that investors can freely adjust their spending plans.




                                                 48
  References


Acharya, Viral, and Hassan Naqvi, 2019, "On Reaching for Yield and the Coexistence of Bubbles
    and Negative Bubbles" , Journal of Financial Intermediation 38, 1­10.

Andonov, Aleksandar, Rob M.M.J. Bauer, and K.J. Martijn Cremers, 2017, "Pension Fund Asset
   Allocation and Liability Discount Rates", Review of Financial Studies 30, 2555­2595.

Becker, Bo and Victoria Ivashina, 2015, "Reaching for Yield in the Bond Market", Journal of
    Finance 70, 1863­1901.

Borio, Claudio and Haibin Zhu, 2012, "Capital Regulation, Risk-Taking, and Monetary Policy: A
    Missing Link in the Transmission Mechanism?"  , Journal of Financial Stability 8, 236­251.

Brown, Je¤rey R., Stephen G. Dimmock, Jun-Koo Kang, and Scott J. Weisbenner, 2014, "How
    University Endowments Respond to Financial Market Shocks: Evidence and Implications",
    American Economic Review 104, 931­62.

Campbell, John Y., 2018, Financial Decisions and Markets: A Course in Asset Pricing, Princeton
   University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Campbell, John Y. and Roman Sigalov, 2020, "Appendix to Portfolio Choice with Sustainable
   Spending: A Model of Reaching for Yield", https://scholar.harvard.edu/campbell/publications.

Campbell, John Y. and Luis M. Viceira, 2001, "Who Should Buy Long-Term Bonds?", American
   Economic Review 91, 99­ 127.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, 2014, "E¤ects of Unconventional Monetary Policy on Financial Institu-
   tions", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Spring), 155­204.

Choi, Jaewon, and Mathias Kronlund, 2017, "Reaching for Yield in Corporate Bond Mutual
    Funds", Review of Financial Studies 31, 1930­1965.

Dahiya, Sandeep and David Yermack, 2018, "Investment Returns and Distribution Policies of
    Non-Pro...t Endowment Funds", NBER Working Paper 25323.

Daniel, Kent, Lorenzo Garlappi, and Kairong Xiao, 2019, "Monetary Policy and Reaching for
    Income" , unpublished paper, Columbia University and University of British Columbia.

Di Maggio, Marco, and Marcin Kacperczyk, 2017, "The Unintended Consequences of the Zero
    Lower Bound Policy", Journal of Financial Economics 123, 59­80.

Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl, 2018, "A Model of Monetary Policy and Risk
    Premia"  , Journal of Finance 73, 317­373.

                                             49
Du¢ e, Darrell and Larry G. Epstein, 1992, "Stochastic Di¤erential Utility", Econometrica 60,
    353­394.

Dybvig, Philip H., 1995, "Dusenberry'
                                    s Ratcheting of Consumption: Optimal Dynamic Consump-
   tion and Investment Given Intolerance for Any Decline in Standard of Living", Review of
   Economic Studies 62, 287­   313.

Dybvig, Philip H. and Zhenjiang Qin, 2019, "How to Squander Your Endowment: Pitfalls and
   Remedies"  , unpublished paper, Washington University in St. Louis and University of Macao.

Epstein, Larry G. and Stanley E. Zin, 1989, "Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal
    Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework"   , Econometrica 57,
    937­ 969.

Epstein, Larry G. and Stanley E. Zin, 1991, "Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal
    Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: An Empirical Analysis"  , Journal of Political
    Economy 99, 263­ 286.

Gilbert, Thomas and Christopher Hrdlicka, 2011, "Are Universities Fair? Risking the Endowment
    for Future Generations", unpublished paper, University of Washington.

Gilbert, Thomas and Christopher Hrdlicka, 2015, "Why Are University Endowments Large and
    Risky?" , Review of Financial Studies 28, 2643­2686.

Guasoni, Paolo, Gur Huberman, and Dan Ren, 2020, "Shortfall Aversion", Mathematical Finance
   30, 869­ 920

Hanson, Samuel G. and Jeremy C. Stein, 2015, "Monetary Policy and Long-Term Real Rates",
   Journal of Financial Economics 115, 429­448.

Hartzmark, Samuel M. and David H. Solomon, 2019, "The Dividend Disconnect", Journal of
    Finance 74, 2153­2199.

Ingersoll, Jonathan E., Jr., 1987, Theory of Financial Decision Making, Rowman & Little...eld,
    Totowa, NJ.

Jiménez, Gabriel, Steven Ongena, José-Luis Peydró, and Jesús Saurina, 2014, "Hazardous Times
    for Monetary Policy: What Do Twenty-Three Million Bank Loans Say About the E¤ects of
    Monetary Policy on Credit Risk-Taking?" , Econometrica 82, 463­505.

Lian, Chen, Yueran Ma, and Carmen Wang, 2019, "Low Interest Rates and Risk-Taking: Evidence
    from Individual Investment Decisions", Review of Financial Studies 32, 2107­2148.



                                             50
Lu, Lina, Matthew Pritsker, Andrei Zlate, Ken Anadu, and James Bohn, 2019, "Reach for Yield by
    U.S. Public Pension Funds"  , unpublished paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and Board
    of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Maddaloni, Angela, and José-Luis Peydró, 2011, "Bank Risk-Taking, Securitization, Supervision,
   and Low Interest Rates: Evidence from the Euro-Area and the US Lending Standards" , Review
   of Financial Studies 24, 2121­2165.

Martin, Ian W.R., 2012, "On the Valuation of Long-Dated Assets", Journal of Political Economy
    120, 346­358.

Merton, Robert C., 1969, "Lifetime Portfolio Selection Under Uncertainty: The Continuous-Time
    Case", Review of Economics and Statistics 51, 247­  257.

Merton, Robert C., 1971, "Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a Continuous-Time
    Model", Journal of Economic Theory 3, 373­413.

Merton, Robert C., 1973, "An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model", Econometrica 41,
    867­887.

Merton, Robert C., 1993, "Optimal Investment Strategies for University Endowment Funds"   , in
    Charles T. Clotfelter and Michael Rothschild, eds. Studies of Supply and Demand in Higher
    Education, University of Chicago Press, 211­242.

Norges Bank Investment Management, 2016, "The Equity Share in the Benchmark Index for the
    Government Pension Fund Global"   , letter to the Norwegian Ministry of Finance. Available
    online at https://www.nbim.no/en/publications/submissions-to-ministry/2016/the-equity-share-
    in-the-benchmark-index-for-the-government-pension-fund-global/.

Ozdagli, Ali and Zixuan Wang, 2019, "Interest Rates and Insurance Company Investment Behav-
   ior" , unpublished paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and Harvard Business School.

Rajan, Raghuram, 2006, "Has Finance Made the World Riskier?", European Financial Manage-
    ment 12, 499­533.

Rajan, Raghuram, 2013, "A Step in the Dark: Unconventional Monetary Policy After the Crisis",
    Andrew Crockett Memorial Lecture, Bank for International Settlements. Available online at
    https://www.bis.org/events/agm2013/sp130623.htm.

Rampini, Adriano A. and S. Viswanathan, 2010, "Collateral, Risk Management, and the Distrib-
   ution of Debt Capacity" , Journal of Finance 65, 2293­2322.

Rampini, Adriano A. and S. Viswanathan, 2013, "Collateral and Capital Structure", Journal of
   Financial Economics 109, 466­492.

                                             51
Rampini, Adriano A. and S. Viswanathan, 2019, "Financing Insurance", unpublished paper, Duke
   University.

Sitko¤, Robert H. and Jesse Dukeminier, 2017, Wills, Trusts, and Estates, 10th edition, Wolters
     Kluwer, New York, NY.

Stein, Jeremy, 2013, "Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy Re-
     sponses", Research Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Available online at
     https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/stein20130207a.htm.

Sundaresan, Suresh M., 1989, "Intertemporally Dependent Preferences and the Volatility of Con-
    sumption and Wealth"  , Review of Financial Studies 2, 73­89.

Tobin, James, 1974, "What is Permanent Endowment Income?", American Economic Review
    Papers and Proceedings 64, 427­432.




                                             52
