                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  SAVING FOR MULTIPLE FINANCIAL NEEDS:
          EVIDENCE FROM LOCKBOXES AND MOBILE MONEY IN MALAWI

                                       Shilpa Aggarwal
                                    Valentina Brailovskaya
                                     Jonathan Robinson

                                     Working Paper 27035
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27035


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2020




We are extremely grateful to Calvin Mhango and Gabriella Fleischman for overseeing the project
and to Marble Karuu and David Park for research assistance. We thank Carly Farver for her
continuous support, and IPA Malawi for implementing the research protocol in Malawi. We
thank Naresh Kumar and Raychel Schwartz for supporting data collection for the long-term
follow-up. We thank the Financial Inclusion Program at IPA, ISB, and UCSC for financial
support. We thank Amit Khandelwal, Jessie Li and two anonymous referees for helpful
comments in shaping this paper. We thank seminar participants at the 4th Annual Researcher
Gathering on Financial Inclusion and Social Protection, the 2018 Williams CDE conference,
UCSC, and IDinsight for valuable feedback. This research protocol was approved by the the
National Commission for Science and Technology in Malawi and the IRBs of UCSC and the ISB.
This trial is registered in the American Economic Association's registry for randomized
controlled trials (AEARCTR-0002449). A pre-analysis plan is available on the AEA registry
website. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Shilpa Aggarwal, Valentina Brailovskaya, and Jonathan Robinson. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Saving for Multiple Financial Needs: Evidence from Lockboxes and Mobile Money in Malawi
Shilpa Aggarwal, Valentina Brailovskaya, and Jonathan Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 27035
April 2020
JEL No. D14,O12,O16

                                           ABSTRACT

We test whether the provision of multiple labeled savings accounts affects savings and
downstream outcomes in an experiment with 761 microentrepreneurs in urban Malawi. Treatment
respondents received one or multiple savings accounts, in the form of lockboxes or mobile
money. We find that while providing additional boxes increased savings by 40%, technical issues
marred the efficacy of a second mobile money account. Both types of accounts had impacts on
downstream outcomes, including farming decisions and credit extended to customers. We do not
detect differential downstream effects by the number of accounts.


Shilpa Aggarwal                                   Jonathan Robinson
Indian School of Business                         Department of Economics
Gachibowli, Hyderabad 500032                      University of California, Santa Cruz
India                                             457 Engineering 2
shilpa_aggarwal@isb.edu                           Santa Cruz, CA 95064
                                                  and NBER
Valentina Brailovskaya                            jmrtwo@ucsc.edu
IDInsight
valentina.brailovskaya@idinsight.org




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/2449
Saving for Multiple Financial Needs: Evidence from Lockboxes and
                                    Mobile Money in Malawi
            Shilpa Aggarwal             Valentina Brailovskaya               Jonathan Robinson§

                                                April 9, 2020



                                                   Abstract

          We test whether the provision of multiple labeled savings accounts affects savings and down-
      stream outcomes in an experiment with 761 microentrepreneurs in urban Malawi. Treatment
      respondents received one or multiple savings accounts, in the form of lockboxes or mobile money.
      We find that while providing additional boxes increased savings by 40%, technical issues marred
      the efficacy of a second mobile money account. Both types of accounts had impacts on down-
      stream outcomes, including farming decisions and credit extended to customers. We do not
      detect differential downstream effects by the number of accounts.
          JEL Codes: D14, L26, O12, O16
          Keywords: savings, mobile money, lockboxes, liquidity, labeling, mental accounting, goal-
      setting, microenterprises,




  
      We are extremely grateful to Calvin Mhango and Gabriella Fleischman for overseeing the project and to Marble
Karuu and David Park for research assistance. We thank Carly Farver for her continuous support, and IPA Malawi
for implementing the research protocol in Malawi. We thank Naresh Kumar and Raychel Schwartz for supporting
data collection for the long-term follow-up. We thank the Financial Inclusion Program at IPA, ISB, and UCSC for
financial support. We thank Amit Khandelwal, Jessie Li and two anonymous referees for helpful comments in shaping
this paper. We thank seminar participants at the 4th Annual Researcher Gathering on Financial Inclusion and Social
Protection, the 2018 Williams CDE conference, UCSC, and IDinsight for valuable feedback. This research protocol
was approved by the the National Commission for Science and Technology in Malawi and the IRBs of UCSC and
the ISB. This trial is registered in the American Economic Association's registry for randomized controlled trials
(AEARCTR-0002449). A pre-analysis plan is available on the AEA registry website. All errors are our own.
    
      Indian School of Business, email: shilpa aggarwal@isb.edu
    
      IDinsight, email: valentina.brailovskaya@idinsight.org
    §
      University of California, Santa Cruz and NBER, email: jmrtwo@ucsc.edu
1        Introduction
Most people have multiple concurrent financial goals. For example, it is common for households
to be saving up for large indivisible investments such as buying a house or paying for higher
education, while also setting aside smaller amounts for day-to-day expenses or for dealing with
unforeseen emergencies. How do people save towards multiple goals simultaneously? One potential
strategy is to create separate labeled accounts. Research in behavioral economics suggests that
once these accounts are created, withdrawals for any purpose other than the labeled one impose a
utility cost on the account-holder (Ainslie 2001; Benabou and Tirole 2004; Koch and Nafziger 2016;
Thaler 1990; 1999). Previous studies have shown that creating a single labeled account increases
the probability of reaching the labeled goal by making money less fungible across uses (i.e. Brune et
al., 2014; Dupas and Robinson 2013a; Karlan and Linden, 2014), and this finding likely generalizes
to having more than one labeled account.
        As a practical matter, however, it is not clear how one can accomplish the cognitively challenging
task of keeping track of distinct sums of money that have been mentally allocated towards different
purposes.1 We conjecture that the effectiveness of mental accounts will likely be enhanced when
accounts are accompanied by the physical separation of money. The practice of physically separating
pots of money meant for distinct uses has precedent,2 although it is not known if this method
actually leads to an increase in deposits.
        In this paper, we report results from an experiment with 761 micro-entrepreneurs in the city
of Blantyre, Malawi, who were randomized into one of several different treatments designed to
measure the savings efficacy of single versus multiple labeled accounts, which we provided either
via mobile money or through lockboxes. The average respondent had 2.4 savings goals at baseline,
so providing multiple labeled accounts could be beneficial in this population. One treatment group
was offered simple metal lockboxes in which to save up for their goals, while a second group was
offered mobile money. Both of the treatment groups were further randomized into receiving either
one or more of the savings device in question (the multiple box group were offered up to 3 boxes,
while the multiple mobile money were offered 2 mobile money accounts). A control group was not
offered any accounts. Beyond measuring just savings effects, one of the main contributions of the
paper is to carefully examine effects on a range of downstream outcomes. All respondents (including
control) were given cell phones, and half of the sample was called once or twice per week to measure
several outcomes at high frequency, including savings decisions, labor supply, income, expenditures,
and transfers. In order to supplement the high frequency data and to collect information on the
full sample, we also conducted two rounds of monitoring surveys with all respondents.
    1
     Research on the cognitive costs of scarcity (i.e., Carvalho, Meier and Wang, 2016; Mani et al., 2013; Shah,
Mullainathan, and Shafir, 2012) suggests that this task might be even harder for the poor.
   2
     For example, see this oft-quoted anecdote cited in previous work (i.e. Zelizer 1994; Soman and Cheema 2011),
from Alice Bradley (1923): "Take for instance Mrs. M's system as she told it to Women's Home Companion in the
early 1920's: "I collected eight little cans, all the same size, and pasted on them the following words, in big letters:
groceries, carfare, gas, laundry, rent, tithe, savings, miscellaneous.... [W]e speak of those cans now, as the grocery
can, carfare can, etc."




                                                           1
       During the study period (of about 9 months), about 73% used mobile money at least once, 60%
used it 5 times, and average deposits were about $9 per month. Usage of the lockbox was even
higher: at least 95% used their box at least once, 91% used it at least 5 times, and total deposits
averaged about $27 per month.3 We find strong evidence that providing a second account increased
savings for lockboxes, by about 40%. We find no effect for mobile money, but this is likely due
to design problems with the technology. In particular, the telco can offer only one account per
SIM card, and so users had to switch between SIM cards to use multiple accounts, and this proved
too burdensome despite having access to a dual SIM phone. This evidence is consistent with the
hypothesis that having a second, labeled account is helpful to achieve savings goals (when using
the account is simple enough).
       Second, we find strong evidence that the saving accounts (both boxes and mobile money) had
effects on a host of downstream outcomes. For outcomes pre-specified in a pre-analysis plan, we
find suggestive evidence that treatment respondents reduced labor supply in their main business,
and strong evidence that they increased the time spent working on their farms. This finding is
related to several recent papers that find labor supply effects of an easing of credit constraints,
such as Fink, Jack, and Masiye (2018), who find that providing credit to smallholder farmers
decreases off-farm labor and increases own-farm labor. Our finding that saving accounts cause a
reallocation of labor supply is related to Callen et al. (2014), who find that Sri Lankan households
who were given access to deposit collection increase their hours in wage work but decrease hours
in self-employment. We also find an increase in credit extended to customers, and some increase in
certain expenditures categories, particularly education. Based on the labor supply results, we also
analyze other non-prespecified outcomes related to farming (land acquisitions and the use of farm
inputs) and find positive point estimates on all coefficients, with statistically significant effects on
buying and renting land for the lockbox treatment.
       We make three main contributions to the literature. First, our experimental design isolates
the effect of an additional labeled savings place.4 While there have been many recent papers
which have studied the effect of providing un(der)banked households with savings devices, there
are a variety of pathways by which accounts may increase savings, including that savings accounts
provide security, limit liquidity, increase the salience of saving money or because savings accounts
encourage the activation of mental accounts for particular goals. Isolating a single channel in this
context is challenging. In this experiment, we offer an incremental savings option which is identical
to the first, and thus the design isolates the effect of an additional, physically separate savings
location, since other pathways such as security or salience are equalized.5
   3
     The figures for the box were measured earlier, about 5 months after account opening.
   4
     There is a small literature on a related issue about partitioning consumption items between physically separated
places. Soman and Cheema (2011) conduct experiments in which experimental subjects were paid in different numbers
of accounts (i.e. money split into multiple envelopes or chocolates split into separate packages), and find that
immediate consumption is decreasing in the number of accounts.
   5
     Several other studies offer different accounts to different treatment groups (i.e. Brune et al. 2014; Dupas and
Robinson 2013b), or (more rarely) offering a basic account and an incremental account with different features, such
as a commitment account (John 2018). Other studies offer accounts to respondents who already have basic accounts
at a bank (such as Ashraf, Karlan and Yin 2006), which arguably isolates the incremental effect of the new account,




                                                         2
    Second, we contribute to a nascent literature on the impacts of mobile money. Given the
extensive uptake and usage of mobile money in several sub-Saharan African countries, there has
been a large amount of research and policy interest in the topic. However, the popularity of mobile
money makes identification challenging because of the difficulty of maintaining a control group.
Consequently, the seminal studies in this research area are identified from plausibly exogenous
regional differences in mobile money rollout (Jack and Suri 2014; Suri and Jack 2016). More
recently, several researchers have implemented RCTs, usually by partnering directly with the telcos.
These include Batista and Vicente (2020), who randomize mobile money access at the community
level; Lee et al. (forthcoming), who offer mobile banking to rural-urban migrants in Bangladesh (to
both the urban migrant and to the sending rural household); Wieser et al. (2019), who randomize
the roll-out of mobile money agents in rural Northern Uganda, and our own companion paper
(Aggarwal, Brailovskaya, and Robinson 2020), which studies the impact of mobile money (pooled
across both subtreatments).6 Our study adds to this literature by randomizing basic access at the
individual level in a country where mobile money infrastructure already existed but where takeup
was still modest, and by measuring a number of outcomes via our survey modules. Moreover, while
the vast majority of the existing literature focuses on the impact of mobile money on resilience
(via a reduction in the transaction costs of transfers), the effects in our study appear to be driven
primarily by savings. In fact, we observe little effect on interpersonal transfers from the mobile
money treatment and only two-thirds of the mobile money respondents ever made an interpersonal
transfer, while more than 80% reported using mobile money for long-term savings . This result is
likely attributable to the fact that the treatment was at the individual level and so did not change
mobile money access for the risk-sharing networks of treated respondents; we believe that effects
would likely be present in a larger expansion of the network. Nevertheless, by muting the channel of
interpersonal transfers, our study shows that mobile money can be effective in mobilizing savings.
These effects will likely only be larger as telcos develop more sophisticated financial products.
    Third, our experiment is well powered to find effects on downstream outcomes. While there have
been a number of recent studies of savings (including several that look at boxes or mobile money
specifically),7 only a few of them find effects on downstream outcomes such as business investment
and personal expenditures (Dupas and Robinson 2013a), health investment (Dupas and Robinson
2013b), educational expenditures (Prina 2015; Habyarimana and Jack 2018), labor supply (Callen
et al. 2014), self-reported financial well-being (Kast and Pomeranz, 2014; Prina, 2015), risk coping
(Jones and Gong 2018), and debt (Kast and Pomeranz 2014; Aker et al. 2019). However, most
even though the account itself is not experimental.
   6
     There have been a number of interventions which layer other financial interventions on top of basic mobile money,
such as labeled accounts (Aker et al. 2016, Jones and Gong 2019, Lipscomb and Schecter 2018), automatic deposits
(Blumenstock et al. 2018), usage-based rewards (Bharadwaj and Suri 2020), or interest-bearing accounts (Batista
and Vicente 2019). de Mel at al. (2019) layer mobile money on top of basic bank accounts to enhance the ease of
making deposits, but their intervention is hampered by very low take-up. Suri (2017) provides an overview.
   7
     A partial listing of papers that include locked savings boxes include Ashraf, Karlan and Yin (2006), Karlan and
Linden (2014), Dupas, Keats and Robinson (2019), Francis (2018), Herskowitz (2018), Karlan and Zinman (2018),
and Aker et al. (2018), among others. Those looking at mobile money as a savings device include Blumenstock et al.
(2016), Habyarimana and Jack (2018), Jones and Gong (2018), and Lipscomb and Schechter (2018).




                                                          3
of these studies find outcomes on only one of several potential outcomes, while other studies find
no effects at all.8 An obvious reason why effects may be hard to detect is that statistical power is
hampered by low take-up.9 For example, a tabulation in Dupas et al. (2018) finds that in many
studies only 20-30% of people ever use accounts, and much lower percentages (rarely larger than
20%) "actively" use accounts (usually defined as making more than a few deposits). But in this
study, usage is dramatically higher: within the study period, at least 94% of people used the box
at least once and at least 91% used it at least 5 times; for mobile money, the figures are 73% and
59%.
        The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the experiment and the data.
Section 3 presents results and Section 4 discusses threats to validity. Section 5 concludes.


2        Experimental Design and Data
2.1       Context and sampling
The experiment took place with a representative sample of small entrepreneurs operating in Blan-
tyre, the second largest city in Malawi. While Blantyre is an urban center with a population just
over 1 million, the outskirts of the city contain farmland. Blantyre contains 26 wards and 392 enu-
meration areas (EAs). To construct a sample with coverage across the city, we aimed to randomly
select three EAs in each ward, ultimately selecting 77 (one ward did not have 3 EAs).
        Market structure is heterogeneous across EAs ­ the number of businesses ranged from 0 to
1,649 (mean 104, median 48).10 Because of the high number of businesses in some EAs, it was
not logistically possible to census every business in those EAs. We therefore decided to divide EAs
between those with more than 100 and those with less than 100 businesses. In the smaller EAs, we
censused all businesses; in the larger EAs, we counted all businesses but only censused a randomly
selected subset of approximately 40% of businesses.11 We counted a total of 9,848 businesses and
classified 8,078 (82.1%) of these as small businesses.12 We attempted to conduct a census survey
with 3,857 businesses and completed surveys with 2,842 (74%).13
        After the census, we imposed additional exclusion criteria. First, we excluded any business with
more than 2 employees (6% of the census list). Second, we excluded businesses in which the business
owner was a mobile money agent (3%) to prevent confounding the mobile money treatment. Third,
    8
     See Table 3 in Prina (2015) and Figure 5 in Dupas et al. (2018) for a summary of the effects found in these
studies.
   9
     This problem is often exacerbated by the fact that different people choose to spend money on different things,
leading treatment effects to become diffused.
  10
     Two EAs contained no small businesses. One was an industrial area and the other was farmland.
  11
     Since we counted all businesses, we have sampling weights for all EAs.
  12
     We excluded several classes of businesses in this exercise since they were unlikely to qualify as a small business.
This included gas stations, clinics, hospitals, banks, microfinance institutions, manufacturing plants, warehouses,
wholesalers and supermarkets.
  13
     Of the 1,012 (26%) businesses that were not censused, 552 (14%) refused to participate (either before or after we
were able to explain the study), 346 (9%) were permanently closed, 114 (3%) were not reached (either because the
shop was closed after 3 visits or the owner was under 18 years old).




                                                           4
we excluded businesses in which the owner was not actively involved in running operations (defined
as working there at least 5 days per week) since such owners would not be able to reliably answer
business-related questions (9%). Fourth, we excluded businesses that were planning to shut down
within 6 months (before the project was slated to end ­ 16%).14
    Once we had a sample of businesses that met our criteria, we imposed two other exclusion
criteria, using data that had been collected either at the census or prior to the baseline survey.
First, we removed all polygamous households, which amounted to 5% of the sample. Second, since
we initially planned to collect surveys with paper-and-pencil logbooks (we eventually changed to
phone surveys), we excluded business owners who were illiterate (about 20% of the sample) and
those whose eyesight prevented them from reading a printed page (about 10% of the sample).
    These exclusion criteria left us with approximately 1,640 eligible businesses from which we drew
our final sample, stratified by financial access (defined by having either a mobile money or bank
account) and self-reported distance to the nearest mobile money agent (defined as above or below
the sample median). In drawing the sample, we chose to oversample businesses connected to the
electricity grid: while 26% of eligible businesses were connected to the grid, we sampled 35%.15
We replaced respondents who could not be found (about 6.5%) or refused to participate (another
6.5%) with randomly chosen backups, ultimately yielding a sample of 801 businesses, which we
randomized into the various treatment arms.16

2.2     Experimental design
The experimental design is summarized in Web Appendix Figure A2 and the timeline of project
activities is shown in Web Appendix Figure A3. As discussed below, the experimental design
cross-cut the provision of savings accounts with the frequency of surveying.

2.2.1     Savings account treatment

We offered two types of savings products: metal lockboxes and mobile money accounts. The
lockboxes were similar to those offered in prior studies - they had a deposit slit in the top, and a
latch that could be locked. The boxes were produced by a local artisan and cost about $3.40 (at
wholesale prices). Respondents were also given a lock and key, worth about $1. While a sizeable
minority of people (22%) had lockboxes at baseline, these were of lower quality than the project
boxes as they were typically made of wood or cardboard, and either could not be locked or had
to be broken to be opened. Finally, as in Dupas and Robinson (2013b), respondents were given a
passbook to record withdrawals and deposits, so that they could track the balance without having
  14
     This high turnover rate is indicative of the level of churn in these types of businesses. Some businesses are seasonal
and business closure is common.
  15
     This decision was made to improve the power of the related paper, Brailovskaya (2018), which utilizes some of
the data in this experiment to calculate the effect of power outages on business outcomes.
  16
     See Web Appendix Figure A1 for the geographic distribution and spread of the various treatment arms across
the city of Blantyre.




                                                            5
to open their box(es). Respondents were also encouraged to use the project account(s) to save
towards their savings goal.
       Those in the mobile money treatment received mobile money accounts with Airtel Malawi, the
leading telecom company in Malawi (holding a market share just over 50%). The accounts were
identical to those already commercially available, with several important differences. First, we
reimbursed withdrawal fees for the duration of the project.17 Second, in pilot work, we found that
knowledge of mobile money was limited. Some respondents were not fully aware of fees or lacked
basic knowledge about how to access and use mobile money. To address this issue, we developed
training modules on how to use the accounts, which were administered at the time of account-
opening.18 Third, as with the boxes, we encouraged people to use the accounts to save towards
their goals. While we view each of these elements as relatively light-touch actions that could easily
be implemented by the telco absent our involvement, the combined mobile money intervention does
differ from status-quo commercial mobile money available at the time in Malawi.
       One of the key features of the project is to measure the effects of having an incremental account.
Therefore, all respondents in the savings device treatments were further randomized into receiving
one or multiple of the savings device in question. For the box respondents, those in the single
account treatment group were offered only one box, while those in the multiple account group were
offered 3 lockboxes. However, people were allowed to take less than 3 boxes if they wanted, and
in fact some people did this ­ 24% took only 1 box, 33% took 2 boxes, and 42% took 3 boxes (1%
did not take any boxes).19 To differentiate the boxes, they were painted different colors ­ everyone
received a silver box, while the second and third boxes were painted black and brown respectively.
For those in the multiple box groups, the project passbooks allowed for separate tracking of deposits
and withdrawals for each box.
       In the mobile money treatment, respondents in a single mobile money group were offered only
1 account, while those in multiple account group received were given a choice to get up to 2 mobile
money accounts. Each account had a separate SIM card and associated phone number due to the
fact that the existing mobile money product offered exactly one account within a single phone
number. To encourage people to use these with minimal hassle, the respondents were provided
a dual-sim phone, discussed below. As with the boxes, the mobile money accounts were labeled
as silver or black on the mobile money interface of respondents' phones, but during surveying we
referred to those accounts by the last 4 digits of the account phone number..
       During baseline, we asked all respondents about their current savings goals. At the time when
accounts were opened (which was about 2 months after baseline), those in the treatment groups
were encouraged to use the project account(s) to save towards their savings goal. Specifically,
  17
     Fees were reimbursed weekly by making transfers equivalent to the fee amount to each account through a batch
process. Therefore, respondents had to incur fees and then wait to be reimbursed, and so our treatment is not
identical to a policy in which withdrawals were actually free. The average fee for transactions observed in our sample
would have been about 5%.
  18
     This module, along with surveys, can be found on the authors' websites.
  19
     It it surprising that some people chose to take less than 3 (since they were free). We can only conjecture that
people might have felt guilty about taking boxes that they did not intend to use.




                                                          6
we asked respondents to write their savings goal on a piece of paper, which was then attached
to the lid on the inside of their project boxes for the box treatment, while those in the mobile
money treatment, were asked to keep it with them. Summary statistics of goals are reported in
Web Appendix Table A1. Column 1 shows goals elicited at baseline for the entire sample, while
the next 4 columns show goals elicited at account opening. Goals are heterogeneous: at baseline,
sizeable fractions listed business reinvestment, general consumption, and emergencies, while others
listed a variety of other goals including land, durable goods, education, and other goals. Given
the heterogeneity in goals, it is likely that accounts would have impacts on a variety of different
outcomes.

2.2.2     Phone surveys

A primary goal of this project was to measure the effect of savings devices at high frequency. To do
this, we opted to measure outcomes using high-frequency phone surveys (described in more detail
in section 2.3). To implement this effectively, we gave everyone in our sample a basic feature phone,
but with dual SIM capability (worth about $12). Even though 95% of the sample already had a
phone at baseline, we decided to give out new phones because we were concerned that the phones
people already owned were of low quality and might break or need to be replaced prior to the
end of the experiment. Moreover, in order to successfully implement the multiple mobile money
accounts treatment, we needed people to have phones to have two slots for SIM cards, which are
not commonly used.
   Since it is possible that the high-frequency survey itself is a treatment (for example, by focusing
attention on measured outcomes), we randomly split the study sample into two groups: one was
administered the high-frequency phone survey (which we call the "HFPS") while the other was
not. To measure the effect of surveying itself, we administered two monitoring surveys to the
entire sample, so that we could compare responses between those given high frequency surveys
and those who were not. In Section 4, we utilize the HFPS randomization to examine the effect of
regular surveying on outcomes measured in the monitoring surveys but ultimately find no discernible
impact.

2.3     Data
We utilize information from administrative data as well as a number of different types of surveys to
conduct our analysis. At the start of the project, we conducted a baseline survey, which contained a
standard set of questions on household and demographic characteristics, business outcomes, savings,
cash flows, and related measures. At the time of account opening, we also administered a short
"intake survey" which included versions of many of the questions that would later constitute our
main surveys, recalled over the 3 previous days. These pre-treatment values are used as control
variables, making all regressions ANCOVA (Bruhn and McKenzie 2009).
   We have two main sources of data to measure treatment effects: high-frequency phone surveys
(HFPS) and two monitoring surveys (all surveys are on the authors' webpages). The HFPS mea-



                                                  7
sured business outcomes and labor supply at the daily level, and household expenditures, transfers,
savings, credit, shocks and related outcomes at the weekly level. The HFPS was conducted in two
waves, one in September-October 2017 (covering 8 weeks) and another in February-March 2018
(covering 6 weeks). In Wave 1, respondents were called twice per week, with the 2 calls being 3-4
days apart. In one of the weekly interviews, the respondent was administered a "short" survey which
took about 15 minutes and which asked about business outcomes over the past 3 days (day by day).
The other "long" survey took about 40 minutes and included all the questions in the short call, but
also added a recall module for other outcomes that were expected to be rarer or more memorable
and thus could be reliably remembered over a week. These included shocks such as household
illness and funerals, deposits and withdrawals from various saving source, and transfers given and
received. The long survey also included questions about expenditures over the past 7 days. For
example, for deposits, a short survey which was administered on say, a Wednesday, would ask the
respondent the amount of deposits they made in each savings place on each of the preceding 3 days,
i.e., on Sunday, Monday and Tuesday; while a long survey done on that day would ask the same set
of questions for each of the preceding 4 days.20 Long-survey-only questions, such as expenditure on
food, were asked for each of the preceding 7 days. Due to budgetary constraints, respondents were
called only once per week in Wave 2 and were administered only the "long" version of the survey.
       Respondents were randomized into which days they were to be called, and this day remained
unchanged throughout the project.21 Respondents were able to pick the time of day when they
wished to be called. To encourage compliance, respondents were given US $2 in airtime for each
week of the survey and were also enrolled into a lottery in which there was a 1/4 chance of winning
an additional US $3. Airtime was sent directly to the respondents' phones after each phone call
was completed.22 We control for lottery payments in all HFPS regressions. If a respondent did not
answer the phone, she was called at least twice more that day (3 times total). If the respondent was
still unreachable, a make-up call was scheduled for the following day. During this call, we asked for
information for the preceding 4 days in order to reconstruct the lost day.
       The other surveys used to calculate treatment effects are called the "monitoring surveys." These
were conducted twice, after each round of the HFPS, in January 2018 and March 2018. These were
also done over the phone, but (as discussed in section 2.2) included the entire sample. These surveys
took approximately 75 minutes to complete, and included a host of questions similar or identical
to the HFPS, though over a longer recall period ­ for example, outcomes like labor supply were
measured at the daily level over a week-long look back period, while deposits and withdrawals were
measured at a monthly level for a 2-3 months-long lookback period. Some outcomes which were
rarer (such as credit) were measured cumulatively for the entire period between survey rounds. The
surveys also included a number of other questions, such as questions about self-reported financial
  20
     The specific question for savings was "How much did put in a {source} for saving purposes on {day}?
  21
     Respondents were allowed to change the day of the survey at the outset of the project but only 1 of 401 respondents
ultimately changed the day.
  22
     Respondents were enrolled in the lottery even if they were not reached for a specific call, but they did not receive
the US $2 payment for survey completion.




                                                           8
security, land purchases, and tuition payments. In addition, the second monitoring survey (the
endline survey) included some debriefing questions about people's experience with the boxes and
mobile money accounts, pressures to share money and experiences with the surveys themselves.
Respondents were compensated $2 USD via airtime per survey round.
       As an independent verification of lockbox usage, we conducted an unannounced in-person "lock-
box check" at the respondents' businesses with a random sub-sample of respondents in the box
groups in December 2017. During this visit, we first asked a number of questions about usage of
the project boxes, including cumulative deposits and withdrawals since the start of the project as
well as the current balance. After the survey, enumerators requested to visually inspect the box (as
in Dupas and Robinson 2013b) in order to verify the balance. Seventy-nine percent of respondents
who we interviewed were willing and able to open at least one of the boxes.23
       Finally, we implemented a long term follow-up survey in September 2019, about 18 months after
the conclusion of the study, to track long-term usage of the accounts. We contacted a randomly
selected subsample of 200 participants drawn from the treatment groups only (the control group
was not included) for a short phone survey to measure if they were still using the accounts.
       In addition to all these surveys, we have access to administrative data on all the transactions
made on the mobile money accounts opened as part of the project from the telco for the duration
of the project (July 2017 - April 2018) as well as for 15 months after (until July 2019).

2.4      Attrition
Attrition from our full sample of 801 respondents is shown in Web Appendix Table A2. Columns
1-4 show attrition during the HFPS, with the odd columns showing whether a respondent appears
at least once and the even columns showing the percentage of calls that were successfully completed.
In round 1, 99% of respondents completed at least one survey and 89% of calls were made; in round
2, survey completion fell to 84% and 74%, respectively. While not unexpected, lower compliance in
round 2 points to the problem of conducting phone surveys in general, as people lose their phones,
change phone numbers, or become fatigued with the surveys. We do not find any differences in
attrition across the various treatment groups and the coefficients on the treatment indicators are
not significant for any of the surveys. However, HFPS respondents were 7 percentage points less
likely to complete a first monitoring survey, which might be because HFPS respondents were more
likely to be fatigued by the surveying process. Survey completion for the second monitoring survey
is balanced across HFPS and non-HFPS respondents. In total, 761 of 801 sampled respondents
ultimately appear in our analysis sample.
  23
     Of the remaining 21%, 5.4% could not open the box because they did not have the key with them, 9.4% refused
to open the box or travel home to show the box to the field officer, 2.4% did not have access to the boxes at box
checks, 3.3% respondents with boxes were not checked because the respondent could not travel home with the field
officer on the day of the survey.




                                                       9
2.5      Summary statistics and randomization check
Summary statistics and a check of randomization balance (restricted to the analysis sample of
761) are presented in Table 1 (from the baseline survey) and Web Appendix Table A3 (from the
intake survey). From Table 1 Panel A, 46% of the sample is male and the average respondent is
34 years old and has 9 years of education. Ninety-three percent of respondents have an iron roof
on their homes and the average value of assets owned by respondents households is $873. Panel B
shows statistics on business outcomes. Sixty-eight percent of the businesses are in retail, with the
remainder predominantly in services, which includes occupations such as barbershops, tailoring,
and welding. These businesses are very small: average weekly profits are about $19 per week and
the average firm has only $293 in equipment and inventory. Nevertheless, these respondents are
better off than the average Malawian.24
       Panel C shows statistics on savings. Average savings across all sources was $120 at baseline,
split across an average of 2.5 savings places. We also observe that people already engage in physical
separation of cash for different goals: the average respondent has 2.4 goals and saves up for these
goals in different places. In particular, 78% of people have separate saving places for different goals,
and only 35% save for more than 1 goal in a single savings place. The most common saving place is
keeping cash at home, reported by 82% of respondents. Saving groups (VSLAs and ROSCAs) are
used by 52% of the business owners, and 47% report using mobile money accounts to save. Thirty
percent of the sample have access to a bank account and 22% save in saving boxes. Note that a
sizable minority of the sample already saves in lockboxes; as we see by the take-up rates, however,
the project lockboxes were seen as being of higher quality and were preferred to the original boxes.
Sixty two percent of the sample have access to a mobile money account, defined as either owning
one or using someone else's. About half of the the respondents have their own accounts at baseline.
       In columns 2-4, we present p-values from F-tests of joint equality between the two box treatments
and control, the two mobile money treatments and control, and all five groups together. In columns
6-8, we replicate this for those in the HFPS groups only. There is some evidence of imbalance on
a few characteristics in the monitoring survey sample, while the HFPS sample is largely balanced.
Specifically, for the monitoring survey sample, of the 21 variables in the table, the p-value for
the joint test across all groups is below 0.1 for 2 variables in the monitoring sample (age and a
dummy for saving in a bank account) and one in the HFPS (owning a cell phone). We find some
evidence of imbalance within the subtreatments. For the box treatments, we find p-values below
0.1 between the box and control group for having a mobile money account and saving in a box
(the probability of savings in a box is 0.22 in control, 0.23 in the one box group, and 0.12 in the
multiple box group). For the mobile money treatments, we find p-values below 0.1 for age, whether
the household farms, value of assets, and a dummy for whether the household saves in a bank
account. To be in compliance with the pre-analysis plan, we do not include baseline controls in the
regressions, however, all regressions are ANCOVA, controlling for baseline values measured in the
  24
   According to the World Bank, GNI per capita was $340 in 2017 in Malawi. In the 2016 Malawi Integrated
Household Survey, only about half the households reported having iron sheets as the material of their roof.




                                                    10
intake survey. .25 Ultimately, the results themselves provide some level of confidence ­ the pattern
of results is similar between the HFPS (which appears largely balanced) and monitoring surveys
(which may have a few differences between groups).


3     Results
3.1    Take-up
Our primary measure of usage is the value of deposits, a flow figure, instead of a stock measure like
the balance. While either measure will provide a sense of account usage (and indeed results are
similar using other measures of usage including withdrawals and balance), we prefer deposits be-
cause accumulating a balance, in and of itself, was not the intended use of these accounts. Rather,
we envisioned that the accounts could be used to save up for larger purchases, and therefore, we
expected people to withdraw money eventually. Our expectation is that benefits should primarily
accrue only after these withdrawals were made and were followed by the intended purchases, im-
plying that the balance itself is not very informative ­ observing a low balance may be because
usage was low, or simply because a withdrawal was made recently. For this reason, much of the
prior literature has also focused on deposits.26
    Figure 1 shows CDFs of deposits into the single and multiple devices. While administrative data
would be the preferred data source for this analysis, we lack such data for the lockboxes, and we
therefore show results for different data sources in different Panels. In each Panel, we show results
separately for boxes and mobile money. Panels A and B show data from the surveys (Panel A is the
monitoring survey and Panel B is the HFPS). In both Panels, we observe higher deposits among the
multiple box group than the single box group, but no difference in deposits between those receiving
one mobile money account and those receiving multiple. In Panel C2, we use administrative data
from the telco for mobile money users, and find no difference in usage (in fact, multiple mobile
money appears to be lower, at least in the left tail).
    Table 2 presents summary statistics. Panel A uses records from account opening. As expected,
nearly all respondents who were offered an account chose to open one. Of those offered multiple
boxes, only 76% took more than 1 box and only 42% took 3 (despite the fact that the boxes were
free). However, for mobile money, take-up of a second account was much lower (only 29%), which
helps to explain the results in Figure 1 which show no effect of multiple accounts. The telco was
only able to link one account to each SIM card, and so using multiple accounts required people to
switch between accounts. Even though people had access to dual-SIM phones, many respondents
reported feeling that it was cumbersome to use more than one account, and so used only one. We
therefore do not expect to find differential effects of these two treatment groups on downstream
  25
     We also examine balance on the variables measured in the intake survey in Web Appendix Table A3. The majority
of the characteristics suggest comparability of groups.
  26
     For example, Dupas and Robinson (2013) and Dupas, Keats and Robinson (2019) report results for the value of
deposits, while papers like Prina (2015) and Dupas et al. (2018) show both stocks and flows.




                                                       11
outcomes, and the multiple mobile money treatment can be thought of as similar or identical to
the single mobile money treatment.
    Panel B1 displays measurement of cumulative usage from the date of receiving the box until the
in-person lockbox check in December 2017, about 5 months later. As discussed above, at this visit
we verified balances but had to rely on self-reports for deposit and withdrawal activity. Self-reported
usage of boxes was nearly universal: 94-97% of people used a box at least once, and 91-92% used
the box at least 5 times. This level of take-up is far higher than in many prior studies, including
several in Malawi with banks (Dupas et al. 2018; Brune et al. 2014) or VSLAs (i.e. Ksoll et al.
2016). Our preferred measure of usage, the value of deposits, is also substantial: mean deposits
were $23 per month in the single box group and $31 in the multiple box group (about 34% higher
than the single box group).
    Panel B2 show cumulative usage from administrative data from the telco. The evidence suggests
lower usage than the boxes, though figures are still substantial. About 67-79% of respondents made
at least one mobile money deposit, and between 49% and 70% made more than 5. The average
value of deposits was about $9 per month.
    In Table 3, we regress the value of deposits (measured in different data sources) on an indicator
for receiving multiple accounts (as well as other important background covariates). Across the three
measures, we consistently observe that deposits in the multiple account group were no different in
the case of mobile money, but were statistically significantly higher for boxes, with a magnitude
of 24% in the lockbox check, 48% in the HFPS and 25% in the monitoring surveys. While the
difference in point estimates across measures is not particularly meaningful (since deposits were
measured over different windows and may reflect seasonal changes in savings behaviors), these
results all point to higher savings from the introduction of an additional box.27 These regressions
also confirm that for the mobile money groups, receiving a second account did not cause an increase
in usage.

3.2    Treatment effects
The main analysis for this paper is organized around a pre-analysis plan.28 In the plan, we pre-
specified the following outcomes: savings, credit, labor supply, household expenditures, and business
outcomes (however, the plan does not specifically explicate how these variables are to be defined).
For both the HFPS and monitoring surveys, we report results from three intent-to-treat speci-
fications. Our two main specification were pre-specified, and are given by Equations (1) and (2)
below.29 In Equation (1), we analyze the effects of each of our 4 main treatments (one box, multiple
   27
      Among background covariates, we find some evidence that people with higher baseline savings or that had bank
or mobile money accounts saved more. We find some evidence that people who are more "taxed" by their networks
(i.e., people who at baseline reported giving transfers but not receiving them) and people with more assets use boxes
more; women use their boxes less. We find that distance to mobile money agents is associated with lower mobile
money deposits, which is in line with the hypothesis that transaction costs discourage usage. We don't find any
meaningful heterogeneity by other demographic characteristics.
   28
      The PAP can be found at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/2449.
   29
      Note that our specifications are similar but not identical to those written in the PAP. In particular, we add 3
fixed effects that were not pre-specified. They are (1) whether the respondent won the airtime lottery, (2) whether



                                                         12
box, one mobile money, multiple mobile money) separately:


                  1       mult
   Yist = 1 + 2 LBi + 3 LBi    + 4 M Mi1 + 4 M M mult
                                                 i    +  Lt + µs + t + HF + Xi +                           ist   (1)

    In our second specification, we pool the single and multiple account treatments together, to
study the effects of having any box or any mobile money:


                    Yist = 1 + 2 LBi + 3 M Mi + Lt + µs + t + HF + Xi +                      ist                 (2)

    Finally, for the sake of completeness, we also report results from a specification that pools all
treatments together, i.e., it gives us the effect of having any account:


                           Yist = 1 + 2 Ti + Lt + µs + t + HF + Xi +                  ist                        (3)

    In Equations (1) and (2), LBi and M Mi are dummies for the lockbox or mobile money treat-
ment, while superscripts 1 and mult in Equation (1) denote the single and multiple account treat-
ments respectively. Ti in Equation (3) is a dummy for being in any treatment.
    In all of the above equations, Yist is an outcome for individual i at time t in strata s, Lt is an
indicator of airtime lottery wins (measured either daily or weekly), depending on the measurement
window of the outcome variable, and µs is a strata fixed effect. t is a fixed effect for the date of the
interview in the case of monitoring survey regressions, and for the date of the outcome in question
for HFPS regressions. HF is a fixed effect for whether the respondent was sampled for the HFPS
surveys, and is therefore estimated only for the monitoring survey regressions. Xi denotes the
individual mean of the dependent variable (over the day covered by the intake survey), making the
specification ANCOVA. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level, and the regressions
are estimated with population weights.
    All HFPS regressions are at the day-level, i.e., we utilize the 3-4 day look-back period in the
surveys to convert the data into a daily panel. Monitoring survey outcomes vary in how they
are defined across outcomes. We provide detailed explanations for each outcome in the notes for
relevant tables. We present two versions of all main tables, one for the HFPS and one for the
monitoring surveys. In these tables, we report results from Equations (1), (2) and (3) in separate
panels - A, B, and C. All monetary values are winsorized at 5% and expressed in USD.30
    The separate panels provide separate, but equally important, information. Panel A is used to
test whether the second account had an effect, by performing a test of equality between one and
multiple accounts. This is particularly useful for savings outcomes (Table 4). However, because each
treatment arm is of modest size, the pooled regressions in Panels B and C provide more power for
the respondent was sampled for the HFPS (for monitoring survey outcomes only), and (3) the date of the survey
(monitoring survey) or outcome (HFPS). The results are not sensitive to these controls but including these fixed
effects seem preferable due to questions about whether the lottery or HFPS has an effect, and to control for possible
time trends.
   30
      The exchange rate was about 700 MWK to $1 US during the sample period.




                                                         13
testing the separate question of whether accounts affected downstream outcomes (whether multiple
or single). The main tables are limited to only outcomes that were pre-specified. We present
naive p -values in the main tables, and sharpened q -values in Web Appendix Tables A5 and A6
(following the procedure in Anderson 2008).31 In addition to pre-specified variables, we collected
other outcomes of interest. We perform regressions for some of these outcomes as well, in the
Appendix.

3.3    Savings
We present effects of treatment accounts on savings in Tables 4 (the HFPS) and 5 (the monitoring
surveys), where are dependent variable is daily deposits. In both Tables, Column 1 shows effects
on savings in the project accounts, which are unsurprisingly statistically significant in both surveys
since the control group had zero savings in those accounts by design. In Columns 2-5, we estimate
the effect of treatment on savings in all boxes (or mobile money), including non-experimental
accounts.
    We discuss the lockbox first. In both surveys, we find that providing a single lockbox significantly
increases total box savings, that providing multiple lockboxes increases box savings by more, and
that the difference between treatment groups is significant. The effects are sizeable: single and
multiple boxes increase box savings by $0.45 and $1.28 respectively in the HFPS (which is sizeable,
even relative to total deposits of $2.43 per day ­ Column 9). In the monitoring surveys, the figures
are $0.48 and $0.78 respectively, on a base of $1.53. To provide some evidence on crowdout, we
show effects on other savings places in Columns 6-8 (as well as Columns 3 and 5). As expected, in
both surveys, we observe a statistically significant decline in cash at home for the lockbox group ­
in the status quo, many people keep cash at home in a secret location, and in the treatment group
they moved some of this money into the box. We also observe declines in some other categories
such as mobile money and savings groups.
    Column 9 shows total deposits, in all places. For the single box group, the treatment effect
on total deposits is statistically insignificant in both surveys (and actually negative in the HFPS).
For the multiple box group, the treatment effect is $0.95 in the HFPS and $0.59 in the monitoring
surveys (significant at 5% and 10%, respectively). In both surveys, we reject equality of the treat-
ments. The total deposits for multiple box groups are large and statistically significant from zero
.
    Turning to mobile money, we find clear evidence of usage but at a lower level than for the
boxes. Total mobile money deposits increase by $0.14-$0.22 in the HFPS and $0.10-$0.13 in the
monitoring surveys. We find weak evidence of an increase in total deposits. Because the second
mobile money account was not used much, our preferred test is the test of joint significance, which
  31
     We correct p -values across all pre-specified outcomes. There are 19 such outcomes (all listed in the tables). We
also adjust for the number of regressors. At one extreme, since there are 4 individual treatment arms, there are 76
hypotheses for the individual regressors. At the other, there is only test per regression for the pooled regressions.
Finally, there are 2 tests per regressions for regressions in which we pool observations within box and mobile money
treatments.




                                                         14
does not reject in the HFPS but which is significant at 5% in the monitoring survey.32
       To summarize, we find clear evidence that people used the experimental accounts, and that
people used multiple boxes more than a single box, but we also find evidence that much of this new
savings came from crowd out of other sources. Ultimately we do not find statistically significant
effects on total deposits for most treatment groups (other than for the multiple box group). Despite
this, however, it is still possible that the accounts could have effects. First, it is possible that we
are underpowered to observe effects on total savings, especially in each sub-treatment, due in part
to the noisiness of savings (the standard deviation in both surveys is larger than the mean for total
savings as well as for each individual savings place). Because savings is so noisy, it is common in this
literature to not find effects on total deposits, even in cases where there is evidence of downstream
effects. Thus, the ultimate indicator of usage remains downstream outcomes. Second, even if total
deposits did not increase, it is possible that moving money from an insecure place like cash at home
to the experimental accounts would be beneficial. To investigate these, we turn to downstream
effects.33

3.4      Labor supply, business outcomes and credit
In Tables 6 (HFPS) and 7 (monitoring surveys), we examine pre-specified outcomes related to labor
supply, business success, and credit. Labor supply is disaggregated between the main business,
secondary occupations, and farming, and is shown in Columns 1-6. In both Tables, we observe
negative point estimates on labor supply in the main business, though the effect is stronger in the
HFPS (where pooled regressions for mobile money and all accounts suggest consistent decrease
in hours worked=). We find strong evidence that hours in farming increased ­ joint significance
tests are significant in both panels (implying that the reduction in the main business was put into
farming). We also observe positive treatment effects for labor supply in a secondary occupation,
but these are not precisely estimated.
       Consistent with the decline in labor supply, we observe negative coefficients on business profits
and revenue (Columns 7-8). This effect is particularly strong for profits in the HFPS (where point
estimates are 10-15% of the control mean), though is only significant for mobile money.
       The labor supply and business results suggest an increase in investment in farming, and a
  32
      In Web Appendix B, we measure savings effects on other measures of usage. These are withdrawals (Tables
B1 and B2), balance (Table B3), and net deposits (Tables B4 and B5). As discussed above, we expected effects on
both deposits and withdrawals, and we find statistically significant effects for total withdrawals in the monitoring
surveys (though not the HFPS) for all treatments. The effect on balances and net withdrawals is less clear. We find
positive point estimates on balances for all treatments, and when pooling coefficients these effects are significant. The
estimated coefficient on net deposits, however, is close to zero and not significant (which is consistent with respondents
withdrawing money over the time period of the data collection).
   33
      We show heterogeneity analysis by 3 pre-specified covariates in Appendix C, Tables C1 and C2. These are
(1) pressure to share resources (i.e., if they are "taxed", which we define as giving but not receiving transfers); (2)
gender; and (3) displaying hyperbolic preferences in incentivized time preference questions using the convex budget
set methodology of Andreoni and Sprenger (2012). Point estimates are generally in line with our priors ­ people who
are taxed and women save somewhat more, while hyperbolic people save less. However, many of these coefficients
and F-tests are insignificant so we do not make too much of them here. Because we observe modest heterogeneity in
effects on savings, we do not present results on other downstream outcomes.




                                                           15
reallocation of labor away from the main business, which would be consistent with the marginal
return to farming exceeding that of the main business. While we can only speculate as to why this
might be, a possibility might be that returns to farming are risky or will only be realized in the
future, and so respondents concentrate labor supply in daily business which provides immediate
cash at relatively low-risk. Boxes or mobile money may help people build up a buffer that allows
them to mitigate this behavior. This finding is related to several recent papers that find labor
supply effects of an easing of financial constraints, such as Fink, Jack, and Masiye (2018), who find
that providing credit to smallholder farmers decreases off-farm labor and increases own-farm labor.
Our finding that saving accounts cause a reallocation of labor supply is related to Callen et al.
(2019), who find that Sri Lankan households who were given access to deposit collection increase
their hours in wage work but decrease hours in self-employment.34
    Finally, we find evidence of an increase in credit to customers (measured only in the monitoring
surveys ­ Table 7, Column 11), but no change in loans taken out by respondents (Columns 9-10 in
Tables 6 and 7). For credit to customers, we find statistically significant effects for three treatments,
with effect sizes ranging from $0.13-$0.17, equivalent to 57-73% given the control mean of $0.23.
This result suggests that increased liquidity may have been passed on to customers, which may be
a way of expanding business in a highly competitive environment. Casaburi and Reed (2019) show
a similar finding, though in the different setting of traders buying cocoa from farmers in Sierra
Leone.

3.5    Expenditures
Tables 8 and 9 show effects on a variety of expenditure categories. All outcomes are expressed in
daily terms. Since there are several treatments and several types of expenditures, we start with total
expenditures (the last column in each table). In both surveys, we find positive, large coefficients.
While these coefficients are not statistically significant, the results are suggestive (the p-value for
the pooled regression is about 0.15 for the monitoring surveys and 0.26 for the HFPS) We also
examine spending on individual spending categories in the remaining columns. While many of
these coefficients are positive, the only significant category is school spending in the HFPS.35
   34
      Given that we detect strong effects on labor supply in farming, we examine a few other farming-related outcomes
in Appendix Table A7. This analysis is restricted to 3 outcomes which were measured in only the monitoring surveys:
renting land, buying land, and expenditures on farm inputs. Point estimates for all treatments are positive, though
significant only for the box treatments. The effects are large: respondents in the box groups are about 4 percentage
points more likely to buy land (against a control mean of 2%) and about 9 percentage points more likely to rent
(against a control mean of 5%). For farming inputs, we find effects of the order of 25% of the control mean.
   35
      The coefficient on expenditures is slightly different (for mobile money) than that reported in our companion
paper Aggarwal et al. (2020), where the coefficient on pooled mobile money was reported as 0.64 with a p-value less
than 0.1. The reason for this difference is that the other paper included a small set of baseline controls whereas this
version includes no controls. The qualitative results are very similar, however.




                                                          16
3.6      Effect of accounts on ability to cope with shocks
One of our pre-specified outcomes was to test whether accounts made people less susceptible to
shocks. This is closely related to an extensive prior literature on the effect of mobile money, and
savings accounts generally, on inter-personal transfers and risk-coping ability. Prior research on
mobile money has shown evidence of strong effects on inter-personal transfers (Jack and Suri 2014;
Suri and Jack 2017; Suri 2017; Munyegera and Matsumoto 2016; Riley 2018; Flory 2018; Lee et
al. forthcoming ), and has shown that mobile money makes people better able to cope with shocks
(Jack and Suri 2014). For savings accounts more generally, a prior literature on savings has tested
whether savings accounts increase transfers or whether (as discussed in papers like Ligon et al.
2000) they crowd out informal insurance networks. While a lab-based experiment in this context
found no effects (Chandrasekhar, Kinnan and Larreguy 2018), empirical evidence has been mixed:
papers like Comola and Prina (2018); Dupas et al. (2019); and Flory (2018) show evidence of an
increase in inter-personal transfers, while other papers such as Dizon, Gong and Jones (2018) show
a decrease.
       Appendix Tables A8 and A9 show effects of the boxes on inter-personal transfers and loans
(please note that these outcomes were not pre-specified). Columns 1-4 show effects on the likelihood
of receiving / giving a transfer and their respective (unconditional) amounts. In Table A8 (the
HFPS), transfers are measured over the previous week, while in Table A9 (monitoring surveys),
they are measured over the past month. While several coefficients are positive, the effects are largely
statistically insignificant, other than an increase in the likelihood of giving a transfer for the pooled
mobile money treatment (which is consistent with the prior literature on mobile money). Notably,
the effect sizes are modest across the board. A simple tabulation of usage data from the telco (in
Appendix Table A10) is consistent with this pattern. While the average respondent deposited close
to $120 over the study period, they only sent about $14 and received about $12. Panel B of the
table indicates that, by contrast, people used the accounts for savings more than transfers.
       We then turn to our pre-specified analysis in which we regress outcomes on shocks. In this
analysis, we focus on health shocks, because these are relatively common shocks that typically
require cash to be treated. In addition, we collected information on whether these shocks were
treated immediately and if they were treated fully (following questions adapted from Dupas and
Robinson 2013b). These regressions are fixed effects specifications of the given outcome on health
shocks and the interaction between health shocks and treatment. Web Appendix Table A11 shows
effects on our main outcomes, while Web Appendix Table A12 shows effects on promptly and fully
treating the illness.36 Web Appendix Table A11, Panel A shows effects for the respondent him or
herself and Panel B shows effects for other household members. In the control group, respondents
spend about $1.80 more in medical expenses when they are sick themselves and about $2.50 more
when faced with a household health shock. This is not a trivial sum, but it is not huge either (since
daily profits are about $3 per day). It does suggest however, that these households have some inbuilt
  36
    Web Appendix Table A13 shows effects on the prevalence of sickness, and shows that people in the treatment
groups were no less (or more) likely to report being sick in the past week




                                                     17
capacity to withstand at least minor shocks. While these shocks are somewhat modest, we find
evidence that people do not fully treat illness. Web Appendix Table A12 shows results for whether
illness was promptly and completely treated. We find evidence that the majority of illnesses are
treated fully and promptly, but not all of them ­ 17% of illnesses are not treated fully and 22% are
not treated immediately in the control group. However, we find no evidence of improved coping in
the treatment groups. While this result is in some contrast to much of the existing literature which
does find improved resiliency as a result of mobile money, it could be that effects on these types of
more common health shocks is smaller than on bigger events.

3.7   Long-term usage
There may be concerns that the observed results are short-term in nature, and that usage of
accounts may peter out over the long-term as the novelty factor of the accounts wears off. In order
to address this concern, we collected a long-term usage survey in September 2019 (26 months after
the accounts were first opened; 18 months after the endline survey; and 16 months after the final
fee reimbursements were made for the mobile money group). We supplemented the information
collected through this survey with long-term usage data (up until August 2019) from the telco.
Results are summarized in Table 10 (Panel A for the survey and Panel B for the telco data).
    For the lockbox treatment, 70% of those in the single box group and about 60% in the multiple
box group reported still using the account; with 60% and 44% in each of these groups respectively
reporting having made a deposit in the past month. The deposit amounts are sizeable at $14 for
the single box group and $19 in the multiple box group in the past month. These deposits are
equivalent to just over 60% of the monthly average reported during the study period.
    For mobile money, as during the study period, usage is lower than that for the boxes, but
meaningful nevertheless. Across the single and multiple account treatments, 40% reported still
using the account and 30% reported having made a deposit in the past month. The reported
deposits in the past month are $9, a number similar to what was reported as the monthly average
of deposits during the study period. The telco data corroborates this pattern of sustained usage,
with 50% of the respondents having made at least one deposit after the study concluded and the
fee waiver expired.


4     Threats to validity
A possible concern with our analysis is that our program effects are almost entirely based on survey
responses. This is unavoidable in this context, since these small businesses do not have digital
records of activity (like barcode scanners) and (worldwide) most businesses this small do not keep
detailed financial records, (i.e., McKenzie and Woodruff 2017). Moreover, we are interested in some
outcomes (like expenditures) which can typically only be captured in a survey.
    Thus, while this research would likely be impossible without relying on surveys, their use does




                                                 18
raise some questions which we address in this section.37 We dedicate a separate empirical Appendix
V to present all our analyses in this respect.
    One type of concern would be experimenter demand effects or social desirability bias ­ i.e. that
respondents felt pressure to answer questions in a certain way, because they believed that those
responses would be viewed more favorably either in the context of the experiment or because they
constitute appropriate behavior in general. Our read of the literature is that existing research
suggests that such effects are modest in many settings (i.e. de Quidt, Haushofer and Roth 2018;
Mummolo and Peterson 2018; Dhar, Jain and Jayachandran 2018); moreover, in this experiment,
such effects would have to be differentially present in the treatment and control groups. Even
signing social desirability bias would be difficult for some outcomes, since the effects on some key
outcomes (such as the decline in labor supply or the increase in holiday spending) would have been
unlikely to be perceived as desired outcomes.
    For a few savings-related outcomes, it is possible for us to explore the possibility of experimenter
demand effects, because we have objective measures of actual usage. In particular, for the lockbox
groups, we physically verified balances at the lockbox check; for the mobile money groups, we can
observe true usage in the telco's administrative data. We start with reporting integrity checks for
the mobile money group, which are presented in Appendix Table V1. Here, we check correlations
between the survey and the administrative data for a binary measure of making a deposit over
any given period as well as for the amount deposited. The panels are organized in order of time
period ­ Panel A is at the day level, Panel B at the week level, and Panel C is cumulative over
the time period. In each regression, the coefficients are highly statistically significant but point
estimates are smaller than one. Point estimates are also monotonically increasing in the time
period ­ the coefficient on total deposits is 0.45 at the day level, 0.65 at the month week level, and
0.82 cumulatively. We interpret these results as suggestive that respondents might have mixed up
the exact dates of transactions, but generally truthfully reported on their savings behavior.
    For the lockboxes, at the lockbox check visit, we first asked respondents questions about usage
of the lockbox, and then asked to visually inspect the box right away. In case the box was stored
at the respondent's home, we requested them to travel with us immediately to their home to show
us the box (so that there was no opportunity to manipulate the amount in the box). There is
undeniable selection into participating in this check ­ for example, respondents who lived far away
or who had a high opportunity cost of time would be less likely to be able to travel to their home.
In total, out of those who agreed to participate in a survey (without anticipating a lockbox check),
79% of people agreed to show us the box.38 For those who opened the box, we run regressions
   37
      A potential concern about using survey-based data, especially when those surveys are long and collected over the
phone (like in this case) is that they may lead to respondent fatigue and as a result, the data may be noisy. While this
is a legitimate concern, we note that survey fatigue should not be differential by treatment and therefore, should not
impact internal validity. Moreover, while potentially noisy data would have lowered precision, our estimates should
still be unbiased. As a general point, we also note that phone-based data collection, while common already, may
increasingly become the norm, such as in the case of the COVID-19 crisis, or more generally, when data needs to be
collected at a high frequency (like in our case).
   38
      The differences in self-reported balances between those who showed lockboxes and who who did not was about
-$11 ($30 for those who showed the box vs. $41 for those who did not). The p-value of this difference is 0.37.




                                                          19
(without constant terms) of the amount in the box on the amount reported in the survey in Web
Appendix Table V2. Pooling all boxes and individuals together, we find a coefficient very close to 1
(1.05), suggesting that reporting is, on the whole, accurate.39 Panels B and C run these regressions
separately for the groups offered one box and multiple boxes. We find a pooled coefficient of 0.88
for one box and 1.10 in multiple boxes, meaning that for any given amount reported in the survey,
people in the multiple box group actually had more in the box, potentially suggestive of difficulty
remembering balances across multiple saving source. Thus, while we would view any differences
in reporting behavior across treatment groups to be minimal, if anything they would work against
finding larger survey measures of savings of multiple boxes.            40

         We plot the amount in the box against the amount reported in Web Appendix Figure V1. Panel
A shows all values, while Panel B focuses only below the 75th percentile (since there are some very
large values). As can be seen, the relationship is strong, but many values do not lie on the 45 degree
line. We find that 50% report the exact sum in the box, 37% over-report, and 14% under-report.
Thus, there is some evidence of over-reporting, but there does not seem to be evidence that this
would have substantially biased our results.
         A separate concern with our study is that the HFPS itself changed behavior or reporting. We
examine this in Web Appendix Table V3 where we examine whether estimated treatment effects on
the monitoring surveys differ between HFPS respondents and non-respondents (which we examine
by regressing our main outcomes on the HFPS, the treatment indicators, and interactions between
treatment and the HFPS. In all specifications, a joint test of the significance of the interaction
terms yields a p-value far over 0.05.41


5         Discussion and Conclusion
People throughout the world save up simultaneously for multiple goals of varying amounts and
duration. A simple strategy for saving concurrently towards several goals might be to create
multiple physically separated accounts, but this may be challenging in developing countries like
Malawi where two thirds of the adult population lacks even a single bank account (see the 2017
Findex ­ Demirg¨
               u¸c-Kunt et al. 2018). In this paper, we experimentally vary the number of accounts
that respondents are given, and we find that entrepreneurs who receive multiple lockboxes saved
    39
      Columns 2-4 show similar coefficients in regressions box-by-box.
    40
      There may also be concerns about there being incremental experimenter demand effects for people given multiple
accounts (i.e. respondents may have felt compelled to report positive usage for each account separately). This is not
likely ­ the multiple mobile money treatment was not effective in the administrative data, and indeed we observe no
incremental reported effect of the second account.
   41
      There may also be concerns that effects may partly be driven by the lottery payments that were made to
respondents during our surveys. To explore this, we interact each of our treatments with a dummy for having
received a lottery payment, and run fixed effect regressions (with fixed effects at the individual level). We code the
lottery win as being relevant if it was won in the previous period. Results are presented in Web Appendix Table
C3. We find modest effects of the lottery in the control group: we see no effect on labor supply, though we observe
evidence of an increase in revenues. We see some evidence of a differential labor supply response in the treatment
group, but the sign of the treatment effect is not consistent. We conclude that there is little evidence of consistent
differential effects by treatment status.




                                                         20
about 30% more than those given only one. By contrast, providing a second mobile money account
had no effect, because of technical challenges. These results strongly suggest that a simple policy
of providing multiple accounts with labeled goals may cost-effectively increase savings, as long as
the accounts are simple to use.
   In addition, we find robust evidence that getting access to savings accounts had strong im-
pacts on downstream outcomes. In particular, we observe that entrepreneurs who received savings
accounts invested more in farming (possibly by substituting labor supply away from their small
business), increased expenditures, and gave out more credit to customers. However, we do not find
differential impacts of an additional box on downstream outcome (the effect of an additional mobile
money account is expected to be minimal based on take-up). While this could be for power reasons,
it is also possible that the first box was often used for immediate expenses while the second box
was for longer-term goals, and so effects would take longer to manifest. This is purely speculative
however.
   Our results lend support to the optimism around mobile money, and provide new evidence that
mobile money can be effective as a tool for mobilizing savings (above and beyond its value as a
transfer system). However, our work does leave some important questions open for future research.
In our experiment, we waived withdrawal fees, provided training, and encouraged people to save for
their goals. Each of these components was light-touch, and we conjecture that they had a modest
effect on usage; however, the evidence on this is not conclusive. For the withdrawal fees, we examine
how usage changed in the period after fees were reimbursed (May 2018) in Web Appendix Figure
A5. We observe a decline in activity shortly after fees were removed, but a resumption of activity
in the following months. Future work could more deeply explore the role of fees in explaining usage.
The training we provided was very basic and consisted mostly of basic literacy on how to use mobile
money. This is something agents are already supposed to be doing, but in practice this training is
not provided. Finally, we conjecture that simply encouraging people to save for their goals would
not have been effective in isolation, but perhaps the combined effect of encouragement and mobile
money was more effective than mobile money alone. Future work might explore these channels
more deeply.




                                                 21
References
 [1] Agarwal, Sumit, Shashwat Alok, Pulak Ghosh, Soumya Ghosh, Tomasz Piskorski, and Amit
        Seru (2017). "Banking the Unbanked: What Do 255 Million New Bank Accounts Reveal
        about Financial Access?" Unpublished.
 [2] Aggarwal, Shilpa, Valentina Brailovskaya and Jonathan Robinson (2020). "Cashing In (and
        Out): Experimental Evidence on the Effects of Mobile Money in Malawi." Forthcoming,
        AEA Papers and Proceedings.
 [3] Aker, Jenny C, Melita Sawyer, Markus Goldstein, Michael O'Sullivan and Margaret McConnell
        (2019). "Just a Bit of Cushion: The Role of a Simple Savings Device in Meeting Planned
        and Unplanned Expenses in Rural Niger." Forthcoming, World Development.
 [4] Ainslie, George (2001). Breakdown of Will. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 [5] Andreoni, James, and Charles Sprenger (2012). "Estimating time preferences from convex
        budgets." American Economic Review 102 (7): 3333-56.
 [6] Anderson, Michael L. (2008). "Multiple inference and gender differences in the effects of early
        intervention: A reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training
        Projects." Journal of the American Statistical Association 103 (484): 1481-1495.
 [7] Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin (2006). "Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence
        from a Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines." Quarterly Journal of Economics
        121 (2): 673­97.
 [8] Benabou, Roland and Jean Tirole (2004). "Willpower and Personal Rules." Journal of Political
        Economy 112 (4): 848-886.
 [9] Benjamini, Yoav, Abba M. Krieger, and Daniel Yekutieli (2006). "Adaptive linear step-up
        procedures that control the false discovery rate." Biometrika 93 (3): 491-507.
[10] Beshears, John, James Choi, Christopher Harris, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and
        Jung Sakong (2015). "Self Control and Commitment: Can Decreasing the Liquidity of a
        Savings Account Increase Deposits?" NBER Working Paper No. 21474.
[11] Blumenstock, Joshua, Michael Callen, and Tarek Ghani (2018). "Why Do Defaults Affect
        Behavior? Experimental Evidence from Afghanistan." American Economic Review 108
        (10): 2868-2901.
[12] Bradley, Alice (1923). Fifty family budgets. New York: Woman's Home Companion.
[13] Brailovskaya, Valentina (2018). "Unreliable Electricity: Effects of Power Outages on Small
        Businesses in Urban Malawi." Unpublished.
[14] Bruhn, Miriam and David McKenzie (2009). "In pursuit of balance: Randomization in practice
        in development field experiments." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (4):
        200-232.



                                                22
[15] Brune, Lasse, Xavier Gin´
                             e, and Jessica Goldberg, and Dean Yang (2014). "Facilitating Savings
        for Agriculture: Field Experimental Evidence from Malawi." Economic Development and
        Cultural Change 64 (2): 187-220.
[16] Buehren, Niklas, Markus Goldstein, Leora Klapper, Tricia Koroknay-Palicz, and Simone
        Schaner (2018). "The Limits of Commitment: Who Benefits from Illiquid Savings Prod-
        ucts?" Unpublished.
[17] Callen, Michael Suresh De Mel, Craig McIntosh and Christopher Woodruff (2019). "What are
        the Headwaters of Formal Savings? Experimental Evidence from Sri Lanka." Review of
        Economic Studies 86 (6): 2491-2529.
[18] Carroll, Gabriel, James Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick (2009).
       "Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions." Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4): 1639 -
        1674.
[19] Carvalho, Leandro S., Stephan Meier, and Stephanie W. Wang (2016). "Poverty and Economic
        Decision-Making: Evidence from Changes in Financial Resources at Payday." American
        Economic Review,106 (2): 260-84.
[20] Casaburi, Lorenzo and Tristan Reed (2019). "Interlinked Transactions and Competition: Ex-
        perimental Evidence from Cocoa Markets." Unpublished.
[21] Chandrasekhar, Arun, Cynthia Kinnan, and Horacio Larreguy (2018). "Social Networks as
        Contract Enforcement: Evidence from a Lab Experiment in the Field." American Economic
        Journal: Applied Economics 10 (4): 43-78.
[22] Comola, Margherita and Silvia Prina (2015). "Treatment Effect Accounting for Network
        Changes: Evidence from a Randomized Intervention." Forthcoming, Review of Economics
        and Statistics.
[23] de Mel, Suresh, Craig McIntosh, Ketki Sheth, and Christopher Woodruff (2019). "Can Mobile-
        Linked Bank Accounts Bolster Savings? Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in
        Sri Lanka." NBER Working Paper 25354.
[24] de Quidt, Jonathan, Johannes Haushofer and Christopher Roth (2018). "Measuring and Bound-
        ing Experimenter Demand." American Economic Review 108 (11): 3266-3302.
[25] Demirg¨
           u¸c-Kunt, Asli, Leora Klapper, Dorothe Singer, Saniya Ansar, and Jake Hess (2018). The
        Global Findex Database 2017: Measuring Financial Inclusion and the Fintech Revolution.
        https://globalfindex.worldbank.org.
[26] Dizon, Felipe, Erick Gong and Kelly Jones (2018). "Does Financial Inclusion Exclude? The
        Effect of Access to Savings on Informal Risk-Sharing in Kenya." Unpublished.
[27] Dhar, Diva, Tarun Jain and Seema Jayachandran (2018). "Reshaping Adolescents' Gender
        Attitudes: Evidence from a School-Based Experiment in India." NBER Working Paper
        25331.



                                               23
[28] Dupas, Pascaline and Jonathan Robinson (2013a). "Savings Constraints and Microenterprise
        Development: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya." American Economic Journal:
        Applied Economics 5 (1): 163-192.
[29] Dupas, Pascaline and Jonathan Robinson (2013b). "Why Don't the Poor Save More? Evidence
        from Health Savings Experiments." American Economic Review 103 (4): 1138-1171.
[30] Dupas, Pascaline, Sarah Green, Anthony Keats, and Jonathan Robinson (2016). "Challenges
        in Banking the Rural Poor: Evidence from Kenya's Western Province." NBER Volume
        African Successes: Modernization and Development, Volume 3, Sebastian Edwards, Simon
        Johnson, and David N. Weil, editors, University of Chicago Press.
[31] Dupas, Pascaline, Anthony Keats and Jonathan Robinson (2019). "The Effect of Savings Ac-
        counts on Interpersonal Financial Relationships: Evidence from a Field Experiment in
        Rural Kenya." Economic Journal 129 (617): 273-310.
[32] Dupas, Pascaline, Dean Karlan, Jonathan Robinson and Diego Ubfal (2018). "Banking the Un-
        banked? Evidence from three countries." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
        10 (2): 257-297.
[33] Fink, Gunther, B. Kelsey Jack and Felix Masiye (2018). "Seasonal Liquidity, Rural Labor
        Markets and Agricultural Production." NBER Working Paper 24564.
[34] Flory, Jeffrey (2018). "Formal Finance and Informal Safety Nets of the Poor: Evidence from a
        Savings Field Experiment." Journal of Development Economics 135: 517-533.
[35] Francis, Eilin (2018). "Paying to Repay? Experimental Evidence on Repayment Commitment."
        Unpublished.
[36] Garlick, Rob, Kate Orkin, and Simon Quinn (2019). "Call Me Maybe: Experimental Evidence
        on Using Mobile Phones to Survey Microenterprises." Working Paper.
[37] GSMA (2017). State of the Industry Report on Mobile Money, 2016. GSMA, London, UK.
[38] Habyarimana, James and William Jack (2018). "High Hopes: Experimental Evidence on Saving
        and the Transition to High School in Kenya." Unpublished.
[39] Herskowitz, Sylvan (2018). "Gambling, Saving, and Lumpy Expenditures: Sports Betting in
        Uganda." Unpublished.
[40] Jack, William and Tavneet Suri (2014). "Risk sharing and transactions costs: Evidence from
        Kenya's mobile money revolution." American Economic Review 104 (1): 183-223.
[41] Jakiela, Pamela, and Owen Ozier (2016). "Does Africa Need a Rotten Kin Theorem? Experi-
        mental Evidence from Village Economies." Review of Economic Studies 83 (1): 231-268.
[42] John, Anett (2018). "When Commitment Fails ­ Evidence from a Field Experiment." Forth-
        coming, Management Science.
[43] Karlan, Dean and Leigh Linden (2016). "Loose Knots: Strong versus Weak Commitments to
        Save for Education in Uganda." NBER Working Paper 19863.



                                               24
[44] Karlan, Dean and Jonathan Zinman (2018). "Price and control elasticities of demand for sav-
       ings." Journal of Development Economics 130: 145-159.
[45] Kast, Felipe, and Dina Pomeranz (2018). "Saving More to Borrow Less: Experimental Evidence
       from Access to Formal Savings Accounts in Chile." NBER Working Paper 20239.
[46] Kast, Felipe, Stephan Meier, and Dina Pomeranz (2018). "Saving more in groups: Field ex-
       perimental evidence from Chile." Journal of Development Economics 133: 275-294.
[47] Koch, Alexander and Julia Nafziger (2016). "Goals and Bracketing under Mental Accounting."
       Journal of Economic Theory 162: 305-351.
[48] Kochar, Anjini (2018). "Branchless banking: Evaluating the Doorstep Delivery of Financial
       Services in Rural India." Journal of Development Economics 135: 160-175.
[49] Ksoll, Christopher, Helene Bie Lilleør, Jonas Helth Lønborg, and Ole Dahl Rasmussen (2016).
       "Impact of Village Savings and Loan Associations: Evidence from a cluster randomized
       trial." Journal of Development Economics 120: 70-85.
[50] Ligon, Ethan, Jonathan P. Thomas, and Tim Worrall (2000). "Mutual Insurance, Individual
       Savings, and Limited Commitment." Review of Economic Dynamics 3 (2): 216-246.
[51] Madrian, Brigitte and Dennis Shea (2001). "The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Par-
       ticipation and Savings Behavior." Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (4): 1149­1187.
[52] Mani, Anandi, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, and Jiyaying Zhao (2017). "Poverty Im-
       pedes Cognitive Function," Science 341: 976­980.
[53] McKenzie, David and Chris Woodruff (2017). "Business Practices in Small Firms in Developing
       Countries." Management Science 63(9): 2967-81.
[54] Mummolo, Jonathan, and Erik Peterson (2018). "Demand effects in survey experiments: An
       empirical assessment." American Political Science Review 113 (2): 1-13
[55] Platteau, Jean-Philippe (2000). Institutions, Social Norms, and Economic Development. Am-
       sterdam: Harwood Academic Publishers
[56] Prina, Silvia (2015). "Banking the Poor via Savings Accounts: Evidence from a Field Experi-
       ment." Journal of Development Economics 115: 16-31.
[57] Schaner, Simone (2018). "The Persistent Power of Behavioral Change: Long-Run Impacts of
       Temporary Savings Subsidies for the Poor." American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
       nomics 10 (3): 67-100.
[58] Shah, Anuj, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Eldar Shafir (2012). "Some Consequences of Having
       Too Little," Science 338: 682­685.
[59] Soman, Dilp and Amar Cheema (2011). "Earmarking and partitioning: increasing saving by
       low-income households." Journal of Marketing Research 48 (SPL): S14-S22.
[60] Somville, Vincent and Lore Vandewalle, "Saving by Default: Evidence from a Field Experiment
       in Rural india," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 10(3): 39-66.



                                               25
[61] Suri, Tavneet (2017). "Mobile Money." Annual Review of Economics 9: 497-520.
[62] Suri, Tavneet and William Jack (2016). "The Long-run Poverty and Gender Impacts of Mobile
       Money." Science 354 (6317): 1288-1292.
[63] Thaler, Richard (1990). "Anomalies: Saving, Fungibility, and Mental Accounts." Journal of
       Economic Perspectives 4 (1): 193-205.
[64] Thaler, Richard (1999). "Mental Accounting Matters." Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
       12: 183-206.
[65] Zelizer, Viviana A. (1994). "The Creation of Domestic Currencies," American Economic Review
       (Papers and Proceedings) 84 (2): 138-142.




                                                26
                                         Figure 1. Cumulative distributions of deposits

                                           Panel A. High Frequency Phone Surveys
                          A1. Boxes                                                       A2. Mobile Money




                                                 Panel B. Monitoring Surveys
                          B1. Boxes                                                       B2. Mobile Money




                                               Panel C. Objective Measures
              C1. Boxes (Visual Balance Check)                    C2. Mobile Money (Administrative Data on Deposits)




Notes: In Panel A, data is from the high frequency phone surveys; in Panel B, data is from monitoring surveys. Monetary values
are in USD and CDF shows only below 95th percentile (since there are several large values).

                                                              27
Table 1. Summary Statistics and Randomization Check
                                         (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)        (5)           (6)          (7)            (8)
                                                          Full Sample                                       HFPS sample only
                                                      pvalue for F-test of joint equality                  pvalue for F-test of joint equality

                                        Control      1 Box =   1 MM =                        Control      1 Box =   1 MM =
                                         Mean                                     Joint       Mean                                     Joint
                                                    Multi Box Multi MM                                   Multi Box Multi MM
                                                                                 equality                                             equality
                                                       =0        =0                                         =0        =0

Panel A. Demographic information and asset ownership
Age                                  34.42       0.30              0.017**       0.062*      33.68          0.20         0.11          0.24
                                    (10.16)                                                  (9.27)
Married                              0.81        0.35               0.29          0.55       0.79           0.46         0.42          0.58
                                     (0.40)                                                  (0.41)
Male                                 0.46        0.63               0.90          0.84       0.57           0.70         0.21          0.48

Household Farms                          0.71          0.97        0.039**        0.10        0.68          0.19         0.64          0.41

Years of Education                      9.05           0.97         0.32          0.59         9.15         0.91         0.69          0.92
                                       (2.83)                                                 (2.97)
Land Owned (Acres)                     0.66            0.75         0.87          0.86        0.59          0.35         0.44          0.29
                                       (1.18)                                                 (0.93)
Value of Durable Assets and Livestock 872.60           0.36         0.06*         0.14       976.10         0.24         0.33          0.28
                                      (1547)                                                 (1620)
House has iron roof                    0.93            0.26         0.79          0.22        0.92          0.20         0.47          0.10

Owns a cell phone                        0.94          0.28         0.71          0.46        0.92          0.69         0.14         0.078*

Has mobile money account                 0.56         0.048**       0.64          0.19        0.53          0.29         0.47          0.63

Distance to closest mobile               11.32         0.62         0.44          0.69        9.78          0.64         0.40          0.73
 money agent (minutes)                  (14.25)                                               (9.29)
Panel B: Business
=1 if Retail                             0.68          0.82         0.39          0.49        0.66          0.37         0.58          0.65

Average Weekly Revenue                    66.37        0.50         0.82          0.78        67.28         0.42         0.69          0.59
                                         (99.00)                                            (107.30)
Average Weekly Profit                     18.77        0.94         0.81          0.97        17.98         0.59         0.88          0.88
                                         (23.20)                                             (23.33)
Value of equipment and inventory        199.10         0.92         0.32          0.22      151.40          0.15         0.86          0.44
                                        (401.20)                                            (247.60)
Panel C: Savings
Total cash savings (balance)            119.80         0.96         0.17          0.47      120.40          0.52         0.31          0.54
                                        (196.70)                                            (222.00)
Saves in:
 Mobile money                            0.32          0.38         0.65          0.70        0.32          0.81         0.80          0.89

 Bank account                            0.30          0.36        0.044**       0.059*       0.32          0.62         0.28          0.45

 VSLA / ROSCA                            0.52          0.55         0.97          0.86        0.48          0.59         0.98          0.88

 Secret place at home                    0.82          0.57         0.75          0.79        0.80          0.96         0.89          0.97

 Savings box                             0.22         0.085*        0.58          0.28        0.29          0.14         0.16          0.28

Observations                                 761                                                   392
Notes: Means are population weighted. Randomization check is performed only for businesses that appear in the analysis sample (i.e. completed
a monitoring survey or at least one phone survey). Monetary values are winsorized at 1% and expressed in USD. In Columns 1 and 4, standard
deviations in parentheses; in the other columns, standard errors in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%
respectively.



                                                                      28
Table 2. Take-up of project accounts
                                                               (1)        (2)            (3)      (4)
                                                                 Box groups              Mobile money
                                                                        Multiple         One       Multiple
                                                             One box
                                                                         boxes         account     accounts
Panel A. Initial take-up June 2017
 Took at least one account                                     0.99       0.99          1.00         0.98
 If offered multiple accounts: took more than 1 account          -        0.76            -          0.29
 If offered multiple boxes: took 3 boxes                         -        0.42            -            -
 Observations                                                  160        161           160          160

Panel B1. Lockbox check visit in December 2017
 Reported at least 1 deposit since receiving box(es)           0.94        0.97
 Reported at least 5 deposits since receiving box(es)          0.91        0.92
 Total value of deposits (monthly average)                    23.39       31.30
                                                             (30.58)     (36.18)
 Number of deposits (monthly average)                          9.83       14.20
                                                             (10.74)     (13.45)
 Total value of withdrawals (monthly average)                 16.46       23.96
                                                             (24.95)     (31.37)
 Number of withdrawals (monthly average)                       1.48        2.61
                                                              (3.52)      (4.32)
 Balance                                                      15.87       14.70
                                                             (34.26)     (30.97)
 Observations                                                  121         120

Panel B2. Telecom administrative data (July 2017 - April 2018)
 Made at least 1 deposit                                                                 0.79        0.67
 Made at least 5 deposits                                                                0.70        0.49
 Total value of deposits (monthly average)                                               8.72        9.34
                                                                                       (12.25)     (15.56)
 Number of deposits (monthly average)                                                    1.11        1.06
                                                                                        (1.36)      (1.42)
 Total value of withdrawals (monthly average)                                            9.09       10.34
                                                                                       (13.55)     (18.13)
 Number of withdrawals (monthly average)                                                 1.18        1.19
                                                                                        (1.49)      (1.75)
 Average Daily Balance                                                                   3.21       2.79
                                                                                        (5.42)      (5.40)
 Observations                                                                             160         160
Notes: See text for discussion of data sources. Means are presented, with standard deviations in
parentheses.




                                                     29
Table 3. Determinants of Account Usage
                                           (1)           (2)             (3)              (4)            (5)          (6)
                                                      Lockbox                                      Mobile money
                                                                   Cumulative deposits measured in:
                                        In-person                                     Telecom
                                                        HFPS         Monitoring                        HFPS       Monitoring
                                     lockbox check                                  administrative
                                                       surveys        surveys                         surveys      surveys
                                       (Dec 2017)                                       data
Multiple accounts                        37.25*        52.15**         23.45**           9.57           -6.27         0.23
                                         (20.54)       (21.11)         (11.19)          (15.36)        (6.89)        (4.30)
Other Covariates
Distance to nearest agent (hours)           12.72        -15.54          -3.31          -65.16*        -16.18        -14.09
                                          (25.01)       (22.64)        (15.07)          (35.04)       (12.78)        (9.81)
Female                                   -96.15**        -33.26         -29.99            30.69         -4.68         -4.73
                                          (45.57)       (46.36)        (24.70)          (33.83)       (14.98)        (9.47)
Married                                    -54.28        -28.47         -17.83           10.87           3.67         -2.05
                                          (38.59)       (38.96)        (20.80)          (28.78)       (12.51)        (8.06)
Female * married                            47.05          2.02           4.24           -42.73         -3.14         -2.65
                                          (50.55)       (52.29)        (27.43)          (39.44)       (17.77)       (11.04)
Age (tens of years)                        11.87          -6.19          3.19           -16.96*          -4.8         0.06
                                          (12.01)       (12.41)         (6.55)           (8.84)        (4.12)        (2.47)
Years of education                           6.53         -1.29          -0.33            -2.19         -0.84         -0.11
                                           (4.30)        (4.26)         (2.28)           (3.20)        (1.58)        (0.90)
Has kids under 18                          28.14          25.5          12.26            41.03            0.7         4.77
                                          (36.68)       (37.30)        (20.21)          (26.47)       (11.54)        (7.41)
Had savings box at baseline                 -1.84          -4.8         -17.35         -43.21**       -19.54*          -7.9
                                          (29.08)       (28.07)        (14.86)          (21.82)       (10.72)        (6.11)
Had bank account at baseline               21.79         28.97         29.48**           28.52          -4.54         -3.14
                                          (25.93)       (25.84)        (13.91)          (19.32)        (8.60)        (5.41)
Had mobile money account                  37.83*         28.64         30.65**         46.50***          4.88          4.69
  at baseline                             (21.65)       (22.27)        (11.84)          (16.03)        (7.04)        (4.49)
Inverse hyperbolic sine of                  6.33        13.39*           4.43             5.49         3.88*        3.96***
  baseline monetary savings                (6.38)        (7.10)         (3.62)           (4.36)        (2.11)        (1.22)
Log assets                               22.45**          7.51           5.15             7.57          1.89          2.43
                                           (8.75)        (8.23)         (4.78)           (6.27)        (2.97)        (1.76)
"Taxed" (i.e. gives money but does       56.06**          16.8          18.94              -9.2         7.78          2.12
  not receive)                            (22.37)       (22.35)        (11.95)          (16.35)        (7.37)        (4.58)

Observations                                238            159            317              319             159            319
Mean (1 account group)                     116.9          70.11           68.7             87.75           32.5          23.91
Std. dev. (1 account group)               152.90         108.30          83.47           122.70           45.58         35.50
Notes: Values are in USD and winsorized at 5%. Columns 1-3 are for the lockbox groups only and Columns 4-6 are for the mobile
money groups only. See text for discussion of data sources. Deposits are winsorized at 5%. Standard errors in parentheses.
*, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.




                                                              30
Table 4. Treatment effects on deposits (high frequency phone surveys)
                                         (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)           (7)          (8)             (9)
                                                                                 First Stage                                Deposits into other savings sources
                                   Deposits into
                                                     =1 if deposited               =1 if deposited                                                                    Total
                                   experimental                      Total lockbox                   Total mobile            Cash at        Bank       Savings               5
                                             1          into any                   into any mobile                                                                   Deposits
                                     account                    2      deposits
                                                                                2
                                                                                                  3 money deposits
                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                              home        accounts     groups
                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                        lockbox                    money account
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox                           0.75***           0.49***         0.45***            -0.06           -0.11*            -0.66***       -0.01       -0.16*          -0.32
                                       (0.13)            (0.05)          (0.14)           (0.04)           (0.06)             (0.17)       (0.10)       (0.09)         (0.36)
Multiple lockboxes                    1.59***           0.62***         1.28***            -0.05            -0.10            -0.53***       0.03         -0.07         0.95*
                                       (0.29)            (0.05)          (0.28)           (0.04)           (0.07)             (0.18)       (0.13)       (0.08)         (0.49)
One mobile money account              0.35***             -0.04           -0.10          0.18***           0.22**              0.29         -0.13        -0.09          0.24
                                       (0.09)            (0.05)          (0.11)           (0.05)           (0.08)             (0.32)       (0.10)       (0.07)         (0.40)
Multiple mobile money accounts        0.30***             -0.04           -0.16          0.14***           0.14*              -0.29*        -0.06        -0.08          -0.46
                                       (0.09)            (0.06)          (0.10)           (0.05)           (0.08)             (0.18)       (0.09)       (0.07)         (0.32)
p-values
 One lockbox = multiple lockbox      0.006***           0.014**         0.004***            0.63            0.83              0.31          0.80         0.35         0.012**
 One m.m. = multiple m.m.              0.68              0.94             0.61              0.49            0.39             0.028**        0.58         0.95         0.065*

Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes                            1.16***         0.55***                0.84***            -0.05            -0.10*           -0.60***       0.01         -0.11          0.29
                                   (0.17)         (0.05)                 (0.17)           (0.03)            (0.06)            (0.16)       (0.09)       (0.07)         (0.36)
Mobile Money                     0.32***           -0.04                  -0.14          0.16***           0.18***             0.03         -0.10        -0.09          -0.09
                                   (0.08)         (0.05)                 (0.09)           (0.04)            (0.07)            (0.23)       (0.07)       (0.06)         (0.32)

Panel C. Pooled Treatment
Any Accoumt                           0.74***           0.26***         0.35***              0.05            0.04              -0.29        -0.04        -0.10          0.11
                                       (0.10)            (0.05)          (0.11)             (0.04)          (0.06)            (0.18)       (0.06)       (0.06)         (0.29)

Observations                             4534              4534            4534              4534            4534              4534         4534          4534          4534
Number of Businesses                      391               391             391               391             391               391          391           391           391
Control Mean                             0.00               0.25            0.35             0.20            0.24               1.04         0.29         0.45          2.43
Control SD                               0.00               0.43            0.82             0.40            0.68               1.80         2.76         0.82          3.93
Notes: All results are converted to daily averages. Deposits were measured over the past 7 days. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during
the intake survey (where applicable), date fixed effects, assignment to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). All monetary variables
are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%.
Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.
1
 Experimental account is the mobile money or box, depending on the treatment group, and is mechanically 0 for the control group.
2
 Includes non-project lockbox
3
 Includes non-project mobile money accounts
4
 Savings groups include VSLAs and ROSCAs.
5
 Total deposits is the sum of the other columns, as well as other less common types of savings (such as safekeeping with shopkeepers or friends).


                                                                                       31
Table 5. Treatment effects on deposits (monitoring surveys)
                                          (1)               (2)             (3)                  (4)           (5)             (6)           (7)          (8)            (9)
                                                                                   First Stage                               Deposits into other savings sources
                                     Deposits into
                                                            =1 if                    =1 if deposited into Total mobile                                                 Total
                                     experimental                      Total lockbox                                         Cash at        Bank        Savings
                                                        deposited into               any mobile money       money                                                     Deposits5
                                       account1                          deposits2                                            home        accounts      groups4
                                                        any lockbox2                       account2        deposits2

Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox                             0.63***            0.63***       0.48***             -0.10*            -0.05         -0.23***       -0.05        -0.10          -0.07
                                         (0.06)             (0.05)        (0.08)             (0.05)           (0.04)           (0.06)      (0.07)       (0.10)         (0.20)
Multiple lockboxes                      0.93***            0.60***       0.78***              -0.06            -0.03         -0.27***      0.21*        -0.20*         0.59**
                                         (0.09)             (0.05)        (0.11)             (0.06)           (0.04)           (0.06)      (0.12)       (0.11)         (0.24)
One mobile money account                0.26***              -0.03         0.04             0.24***          0.13***            0.00      0.33***        -0.13          0.32
                                         (0.04)             (0.05)        (0.07)             (0.06)           (0.05)           (0.07)      (0.12)       (0.11)         (0.22)
Multiple mobile money accounts          0.20***              0.00          -0.05            0.22***           0.10**            -0.07       0.05         -0.12          0.06
                                         (0.04)             (0.06)        (0.06)             (0.06)           (0.05)           (0.07)      (0.08)       (0.11)         (0.21)
p-values
 One lockbox = multiple lockbox        0.004***             0.45         0.011**             0.42             0.70             0.22       0.019**        0.33         0.003***
 One m.m. = multiple m.m.                0.26               0.54          0.15               0.75             0.56             0.24       0.008***       0.90           0.18
Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes                              0.77***          0.62***              0.63***              -0.08            -0.04         -0.25***       0.07          -0.15         0.25
                                     (0.06)          (0.04)               (0.08)             (0.05)           (0.04)           (0.06)      (0.08)        (0.10)        (0.19)
Mobile Money                       0.23***            -0.02                0.00             0.23***          0.12***           (0.03)      0.20**         -0.12         0.20
                                     (0.03)          (0.05)               (0.06)             (0.05)           (0.04)           (0.07)      (0.09)        (0.10)        (0.19)
Panel C. Pooled Treatment
Any Accoumt                             0.50***            0.29***       0.31***             0.07              0.04          -0.14**       0.14*          -0.13         0.22
                                         (0.04)             (0.05)        (0.06)            (0.05)            (0.04)          (0.06)       (0.07)        (0.09)        (0.17)
Observations                               1323               1323           1323               1323            1323           1323         1323         1323           1323
Number of Businesses                        723                723            723                723             723            723          723          723            723
Control Mean                                0.00               0.30           0.25              0.36             0.18           0.30         0.23         0.54           1.53
Control SD                                  0.00               0.46           0.62              0.48             0.38           0.55         0.98         0.93           1.80
Notes: All results are converted to daily averages. Deposits were measured over the past 2 months in the monitoring surveys. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the
dependent variable during the intake survey (where applicable), date of the survey fixed effects, assignment to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text
for details). All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%.
Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.
1
  Experimental account is the mobile money or box, depending on the treatment group, and is mechanically 0 for the control group.
2
  Includes non-project lockbox and/or mobile money accounts.
3
  Savings groups include VSLAs and ROSCAs.
4
  Total deposits is the sum of the other columns, as well as other less common types of savings (such as safekeeping with shopkeepers or friends).

                                                                                       32
Table 6. Treatment effects on labor supply and business outcomes (high frequency phone surveys)
                                         (1)      (2)            (3)         (4)         (5)      (6)              (7)         (8)             (9)        (10)
                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                  Labor Supply                                    Business outcomes            Credit Taken
                                        Main Business         Other occupations            Farming
                                                                                                                                           Took out
                                        =1 if                                           =1 if                      Profits   Revenues                    Value
                                                Hours      =1 if worked Hours                   Hours                                        loan
                                      worked                                          farmed
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox                           -0.08** -0.83**          -0.02        -0.90       0.02     0.20*              -0.37       -0.54         -0.03        0.41
                                       (0.03)   (0.42)        (0.04)       (0.92)      (0.02)   (0.11)             (0.33)      (0.96)        (0.05)      (0.45)
Multiple lockboxes                      0.00     0.13          0.05         2.53      0.08*** 0.51***               -0.30       -0.64         0.00        -0.07
                                       (0.03)   (0.36)        (0.05)       (2.05)      (0.03)   (0.19)             (0.39)      (1.12)        (0.05)      (0.36)
One mobile money account                -0.05    -0.55          0.03        -1.23     0.09*** 0.56***               -0.42       -0.13         0.04        0.13
                                       (0.03)   (0.42)        (0.04)       (0.82)      (0.03)   (0.17)             (0.34)      (1.07)        (0.05)      (0.33)
Multiple mobile money accounts          -0.06    0.09          0.00         -0.46       0.00     0.13              -0.58*       0.34          -0.05       -0.23
                                       (0.04)   (0.58)        (0.04)       (0.82)      (0.02)   (0.11)             (0.33)      (1.15)        (0.05)      (0.34)

Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes                              -0.04    -0.37                0.02           0.84      0.05*** 0.35***           -0.34       -0.59         -0.02       0.17
                                  (0.03)   (0.33)               (0.04)        (1.29)       (0.02)  (0.12)          (0.30)      (0.85)        (0.04)      (0.33)
Mobile Money                      -0.06*    -0.28                0.02          -0.88       0.05** 0.36***          -0.49*        0.08          0.00       -0.03
                                  (0.03)   (0.40)               (0.03)        (0.76)       (0.02)  (0.12)          (0.29)      (0.91)        (0.04)      (0.29)

Panel C. Pooled Treatment
Any Accoumt                            -0.05*     -0.32          0.02          -0.04      0.05*** 0.36***          -0.41        -0.26         -0.01       0.07
                                       (0.03)    (0.31)         (0.03)        (0.89)       (0.02)  (0.10)          (0.26)      (0.75)        (0.04)      (0.27)

Observations                            31472     31471           4605          4605         4541       4541        26086       26256         4544       4632
Number of Businesses                      392       392            391           391          391       391          392         392           391        391
Control Mean                              0.81     8.21           0.18           1.78         0.06      0.20         3.37       11.86          0.33       0.97
Control SD                                0.39     4.67           0.38           7.23         0.23      1.20         3.59       15.78          0.47       4.24
Notes: The main business outcomes (in Columns 1-2 and 7-8) were measured at the daily level. Labor supply in secondary occupations, farming, credit
(Columns 3-4, 5-6 and 9-10) are presented over a week since this is how it was measured in the surveys and it is the only way to present the extensive margin.
There are fewer observations for profits/revenues (compared to main business) because this was only asked for the past 4 days in the second round of HFPS
(labor supply was asked for a 7 day recall). All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey (where applicable),
date fixed effects, assignment to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). All monetary variables are expressed in USD
and are winsorized at 5%.
Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.
1
  Credit include digital loans and loans from VSLAs, ROSCAs, banks, microfinance institutions, and moneylenders.



                                                                               33
Table 7. Treatment effects on labor supply and business outcomes (monitoring surveys)
                                       (1)      (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)      (6)          (7)         (8)             (9)       (10)            (11)
                                                                Labor Supply                                 Business outcomes            Credit Taken 1
                                      Main Business         Other occupations             Farming                                                               Credit to
                                                                                                                                       Took out                 Customers
                                      =1 if                                           =1 if                  Profits   Revenues                     Value
                                              Hours      =1 if worked Hours                    Hours                                     loan
                                    worked                                          farmed
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox                          -0.04     -0.26         -0.02        -0.62        0.05     0.81         -0.42       -2.21*           0.01       1.29          0.14*
                                     (0.03)   (0.40)         (0.03)      (0.79)      (0.05)    (0.59)        (0.37)      (1.30)          (0.05)     (1.14)         (0.08)
Multiple lockboxes                   -0.01     -0.29        0.09**        1.51        0.09     1.64**        -0.16        -0.95          -0.03      1.43           0.17*
                                     (0.03)   (0.41)         (0.04)      (1.23)      (0.06)    (0.69)        (0.36)      (1.19)          (0.06)     (1.81)         (0.09)
One mobile money account             -0.06    -0.83*          0.04        1.20        0.11* 1.92***          -0.44        -1.84          0.02       1.40           0.13*
                                     (0.04)   (0.48)         (0.04)      (1.05)      (0.06)    (0.66)        (0.35)      (1.23)          (0.05)     (1.31)         (0.07)
Multiple mobile money accounts       -0.03     -0.49          0.02        0.55        -0.03     0.89         -0.47        -1.31          0.00       -0.10          0.10
                                     (0.04)   (0.40)         (0.03)      (0.80)      (0.05)    (0.72)        (0.35)      (1.26)          (0.05)     (1.22)         (0.08)

Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes                           -0.03     -0.27              0.03         0.42         0.07      1.21**      -0.29       -1.60            0.01       1.29          0.14*
                                (0.03)   (0.35)             (0.03)       (0.85)       (0.05)     (0.51)      (0.31)      (1.08)          (0.05)     (1.14)         (0.08)
Mobile Money                    -0.05    -0.67*              0.03         0.88        0.04      1.44***      -0.46       -1.62            0.01      0.71           0.11*
                                (0.03)   (0.37)             (0.03)       (0.73)       (0.05)     (0.55)      (0.31)      (1.09)          (0.05)     (1.09)         (0.06)

Panel C. Pooled Treatment
Any Accoumt                         -0.04     -0.47          0.03         0.65         0.06     1.33***      -0.38       -1.61            0.00       1.03         0.13**
                                    (0.03)    (0.32)        (0.03)       (0.63)       (0.04)     (0.46)      (0.29)      (1.01)          (0.04)     (0.99)        (0.06)

Observations                           9261       9261          1321         1321          1323       1321       1308        1317             1323       1323            1317
Number of Businesses                    723        723           723          723           723        723        721         722              723        723             719
Control Mean                           0.74       7.35          0.13         1.82          0.24       2.05       3.02       10.07              0.67       5.57           0.23
Control SD                             0.44       5.08          0.33         8.34          0.43       5.76       3.37       13.51              0.47      10.71           0.54
Notes: Labor supply in the main business (columns 1-2) was measured at the daily level (for 4 days prior to the survey date), other variables were measured over the past
week. Labor supply in secondary occupations, farming, credit (Columns 3-4, 5-6 and 9-10) are presented over a week since this is how it was measured in the surveys and it is
the only way to present the extensive margin. Profits and revenues (columns 7-8) are measured at the weekly level, but are converted to daily averages. Credit to customers
(column 11) is measured over a month but converted to daily averages. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey (where
applicable), date of the survey fixed effects, assignment to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). All monetary variables are
expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%.
Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.
1
  Credit include digital loans and loans from VSLAs, ROSCAs, banks, microfinance institutions, and moneylenders.




                                                                                    34
Table 8. Treatment effects on expenditures (high frequency phone surveys)
                                         (1)         (2)        (3)             (4)         (5)
                                        Staple         Personal   Household School
                                                                                           Total
                                        foods          expenses   expenses expenses
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox                               0.07           0.05       0.05     0.13***       0.38
                                         (0.12)         (0.07)     (0.08)     (0.05)      (0.36)
Multiple lockboxes                        0.05           0.00       0.11     0.16***       0.53
                                         (0.13)         (0.08)     (0.10)     (0.06)      (0.43)
One mobile money account                  0.03           0.03      0.17*     0.13**        0.57
                                         (0.14)         (0.08)     (0.10)     (0.06)      (0.44)
Multiple mobile money accounts            -0.03          -0.04      -0.05      0.01        -0.22
                                         (0.12)         (0.07)     (0.07)     (0.04)      (0.34)

Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes                                0.06     0.03                  0.08     0.14***       0.45
                                    (0.11)   (0.06)                (0.07)     (0.04)      (0.32)
Mobile Money                         0.00     0.00                  0.07      0.08*        0.21
                                    (0.12)   (0.06)                (0.07)     (0.04)      (0.34)

Panel C. Pooled Treatment
Any Account                               0.03           0.01       0.07     0.11***       0.33
                                         (0.10)         (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.04)      (0.29)

Observations                               4530        4544        4544         4544       4544
Number of Businesses                        391         391        391           391        391
Control Mean                               1.47        0.50        0.54         0.22        3.93
Control SD                                 0.90        0.59        0.91         0.58        2.87
Note: Expenditures are measured over the 7 days prior to the survey and are expressed in daily
values. Total expenditures include the other columns in addition to other categories not shown
here. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake
survey (where applicable), date fixed effects, assignment to high frequency group and are
probability weighted (see in the text for details). All monetary variables are expressed in USD
and are winsorized at 5%.
Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance
at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.




                                                  35
Table 9. Treatment effects on expenditures (monitoring surveys)
                                         (1)        (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)
                                       Staple    Personal    Household      School       Holiday      Total
                                       foods     expenses    expenses      Expenses     Spending
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox                             0.13        0.11       0.35**        0.00         0.01         0.65
                                       (0.14)      (0.10)      (0.18)       (0.07)       (0.01)       (0.48)
Multiple lockboxes                      0.19        0.09        0.14        (0.03)        0.01         0.50
                                       (0.16)      (0.10)      (0.18)       (0.07)       (0.01)       (0.51)
One mobile money account                0.25        0.15        0.26         0.04        0.02*        0.93*
                                       (0.16)      (0.11)      (0.18)       (0.07)       (0.01)       (0.51)
Multiple mobile money accounts          -0.03       0.13        0.09         -0.04        0.01         0.16
                                       (0.14)      (0.10)      (0.17)       (0.07)       (0.01)       (0.51)

Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes                                0.15     0.10              0.25        -0.02         0.01         0.58
                                    (0.13)   (0.09)            (0.16)       (0.06)       (0.01)       (0.43)
Mobile Money                         0.12     0.14              0.19         0.00         0.01         0.58
                                    (0.13)   (0.09)            (0.16)       (0.06)       (0.01)       (0.45)

Panel C. Pooled Treatment
Any Account                             0.14        0.12        0.22        -0.01         0.01         0.58
                                       (0.12)      (0.08)      (0.15)       (0.06)       (0.01)       (0.40)

Observations                              1319         1322        1322         1323          1323       1323
Number of Businesses                       723          723        723           723          723         723
Control Mean                              1.88         0.72        0.98         0.41          0.06       5.34
Control SD                                1.28         0.87        1.46         0.62          0.09       3.73
Note: Expenditures in columns 1-3 are measured over the 7 days prior to the survey and are expressed in daily
values. Education and holiday spending (columns 4-5) are measured over a few months prior to the survey
and converted to daily values for comparability. Total expenses include the other columns in addition to
categories shown here. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the
intake survey (where applicable), date of the survey fixed effects, assignment to high frequency group and are
probability weighted (see in the text for details). All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are
winsorized at 5%.
Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%,
and 1% respectively.




                                                      36
Table 10. Long-term usage of accounts
                                                              (1)        (2)            (3)      (4)
                                                                Box groups              Mobile money
                                                                       Multiple        One       Multiple
                                                            One box
                                                                        boxes        account     accounts
Panel A. Survey conducted in September 2019
 Still uses the account                                       0.69        0.56         0.39       0.44
 Reported at least 1 deposit in the last 1 month              0.60        0.44         0.28       0.29
 Value of deposits in the past 1 month                       14.40       18.87         9.27       9.02
                                                            (27.85)     (39.89)       (23.21)    (23.34)
 Reported at least 1 withdrawal in the last 1 month           0.37        0.33         0.28       0.35
 Value of withdrawals in the past 1 month                     5.89        6.95         6.49       7.76
                                                            (15.42)     (15.57)       (16.21)    (19.34)
 Has a non-zero balance in the account                        0.53        0.51         0.33       0.32
 Current Balance in the account                              31.57       13.63         7.28       9.87
                                                            (82.84)     (27.59)       (18.95)    (24.25)
 Observations                                                 35          39            36         34

Panel B. Telecom administrative data (June 2018-August 2019)
  Made at least 1 deposit after June 2018                         -         -            0.53       0.54
  Value of Deposits (monthly average)                             -         -            5.93       7.17
                                                                  -         -          (12.40)    (13.83)
  Average Running Monthly Balance                                 -         -            1.80       1.71
                                                                  -         -           (3.32)     (3.38)
  Observations                                                                           160        160
Notes: In Panel A, data comes from the follow up phone survey conducted in September 2019 and
collected information on usage in the past 1 month with a randomly selected 200 participants. About 72%
of the random sample was reached. Attrition rates were not different between groups. In Panel B, data
comes from the administrative Airtel data for all subjects in the mobile money group. The value and
number of deposits and withdrawals are winsorized at 5% level.




                                                      37
         Web Appendix A - Main Appendix Figures and Tables

Saving for Multiple Financial Needs: Evidence from Lockboxes and Mobile
                            Money in Malawi

             Shilpa Aggarwal, Valentina Brailovskaya and Jonathan Robinson




                                          38
                   Web Appendix Figure A1. Map of Blantyre with Treatment Assignment




Notes: GPS coordinates are shown with added random noise for visibility.




                                                   39
                                    Web Appendix Figure A2. Experimental Design

                                                                                     Full
                                                                                   Sample
                                                                                    (801)


                                                                                    MM
                        Boxes                                                                                              Control
                                                                                  Accounts
                        (320)0                                                                                              (160)
                                                                                   (321)


                                        Multiple                                                    Multiple
       1 Box                                                          1 MM
                                         Boxes                                                        MM
       (160)                                                          (160)
                                         (160)                                                       (161)



 HF            Non-HF             HF          Non-HF            HF            Non-HF          HF           Non-HF    HF          Non-HF
(80)            (80)             (80)          (80)            (80)            (80)          (81)           (80)    (80)          (80)




                                                                        40
                      Web Appendix Figure A3. Project and Survey Timeline

2017   Jan
       Feb
       Mar                     Census
       Apr
                           Baseline (N=800)
       May
       Jun
       Jul              Intake Survey (N=800)                       Account Opening (N=640)

       Aug
       Sep
             High Frequency Phone Survey, Round 1 (N=400)
       Oct
       Nov
                                                                 Mobile Money Withdrawal Fees are
       Dec         In Person LockBox Check (N=241)                        Reimbursed
2018   Jan                 Midline (N=800)
       Feb
       Mar   High Frequency Phone Survey, Round 2 (N=400)
       Apr           Monitoring Survey 2 (N=800)
       May




                                                41
                       Web Appendix Figure A4. Mobile money usage over time

                         Panel A. Cumulative usage: Deposits and Withdrawals




          Panel B. Deposits and Withdrawals (averages per day, smoothed over 2 week period)




              Panel C. Running Balance (averages per day, smoothed over 2 week period)




Notes: Data taken from administrative data from telecom company for mobile money accounts. Panel A
shows average (per-person) cumulative deposits, withdrawals and net deposits (the difference) over time.
Panel B shows average deposits and withdrawals during the study period. The values are daily averages
collapsed into 2 week periods. Panel C shows running balances. The dashed line represents the date at
which withdrawals stopped being reimbursed.




                                                   42
Web Appendix Table A1. Savings goals
                                                  (1)                (2)            (3)            (4)              (5)

                                        Savings goals listed at             Savings goals listed for treatment accounts
                                             baseline (all
                                                                     One         Multiple      One mobile        Multiple
                                            respondents)
                                                                     box          boxes          money         mobile money
Expand business, start new business,
                                                 0.64                0.33           0.55           0.36            0.49
 or invest in inventory

General consumption                              0.40                0.03           0.16           0.04            0.08

Emergencies                                      0.40                0.11           0.43           0.18            0.21

Buying land                                      0.18                0.25           0.28           0.26            0.22

Durable goods                                    0.11                0.08           0.12           0.02            0.03

Children's education                             0.12                0.12           0.24           0.09            0.16

Home improvement                                 0.07                0.04           0.13           0.04            0.04

Home expenses (rent, utilities, etc.)            0.07                0.01           0.02           0.01            0.03

Agriculture                                      0.04                0.04           0.08           0.01            0.03

Observations                                     801                   159          160           160              156
Notes: The unit of observation is the individual. List is restricted to goals that were named by at least 5% of people at
baseline. At baseline (in column 1), goals were measured by asking respondents about their current savings in various
sources. If the amount saved in a source was non-zero, respondents were asked about what the savings were for.




                                                             43
Web Appendix Table A2. Attrition
                                   (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)                         (5)                        (6)
                                           High Frequency Phone Surveys (HFPS)                                         Monitoring Surveys
                                        Round 1                           Round 2
                                (September-October 2018)                (March 2018)                    Completed round 1        Completed round 2
                              Completed at       Percentage        Completed at       Percentage         (January 2018)            (April 2018)
                              least 1 survey     completed         least 1 survey     completed
One lockbox                        0.00             -0.02               0.00              -0.03                 0.01                    0.00
                                  (0.02)           (0.04)              (0.06)            (0.06)                (0.04)                  (0.04)
Multiple lockboxes                 -0.04            -0.05               0.03              -0.01                 -0.01                   0.05
                                  (0.02)           (0.04)              (0.06)            (0.06)                (0.04)                  (0.04)
One mobile money                   0.00             0.03                0.04              0.06                  0.05                    0.04
                                  (0.02)           (0.04)              (0.06)            (0.06)                (0.04)                  (0.04)
Multiple mobile money              -0.01            -0.06               0.03              0.00                  -0.02                   0.02
                                  (0.02)           (0.04)              (0.06)            (0.06)                (0.04)                  (0.04)
High Frequency Surveys                                                                                        -0.07**                   -0.03
                                                                                                               (0.03)                  (0.03)

Observations                        400             400                  400              400                    801                     801
Control Mean                       0.99             0.89                0.84              0.74                  0.86                     0.78
Notes: See text for discussion of surveys and Figure A3 for a project timeline. Standard errors in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance
at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.




                                                                         44
Web Appendix Table A3. Summary statistics and randomization check from intake survey
                                    (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)                (6)       (7)             (8)
                                                   Full Sample                                         HFPS sample only

                                                  p -value for F-test of joint equality              p- value for F-test of joint equality

                                      Control                                             Control
                                       Mean        1 Box = 1 MM =                          Mean      1 Box = 1 MM =
                                                                             Joint                                              Joint
                                                  Multi Box Multi MM                                Multi Box Multi MM
                                                                            equality                                           equality
                                                     =0       =0                                       =0       =0


Average hours worked                      7.70         0.54      0.42           0.60        8.13         0.63       0.32        0.62
                                         (3.88)                                            (3.82)
Average profits                           4.27         0.45      0.18           0.35        4.57         0.71       0.43        0.67
                                         (5.74)                                            (6.05)
Hours farmed                              0.03         0.69      0.12          0.04**       0.01         0.76       0.27       0.098*
                                         (0.16)                                            (0.10)
Total deposits to savings                 3.40         0.11      0.16          0.081*       3.37         0.34       0.66        0.60
                                         (6.01)                                            (5.47)
Total withdrawals from savings            2.14         0.11      0.18         0.016**       2.38         0.46       0.41        0.34
                                         (5.09)                                            (6.30)
Average Food expenditures                 1.56         0.72      0.90           0.90        1.60         0.98       0.88        0.97
                                         (1.16)                                            (1.11)
                            1
Average Total expenditures                2.49         0.95      0.54           0.82        2.40         0.74       0.66        0.86
                                         (1.79)                                            (1.45)
Net transfers to friends and family       0.17        0.072*     0.21           0.21        0.34         0.12      0.041**      0.14
                                         (1.12)                                            (1.25)
Net transfers to spouse                   -0.16        0.82      0.39           0.73        -0.07        0.49       0.69        0.68
                                         (0.16)                                            (0.07)
Observations                               761                                               392
Note: Variables are converted to daily values. Means are population weighted. Randomization check_intake is performed only for
businesses that appear in the analysis sample (i.e. completed a monitoring survey or at least one phone survey). Monetary values are
winsorized at 1% and expressed in USD.
1
  Expenditures measured at the intake survey are a subset of those in later surveys, and include food, personal items, household items




                                                                   45
Web Appendix Table A4. Take-up of project accounts, survey responses
                                                            (1)        (2)               (3)      (4)
                                                              Box groups                 Mobile money
                                                                        Multiple         One       Multiple
                                                             One box
                                                                         boxes         account     accounts
Panel A. HFPS (covering approximately 3.5 months in total)
 Made at least 1 transaction                               0.94           0.91          0.79        0.63
 Total value of deposits (monthly average)                 20.03          33.27         32.13       25.68
                                                          (30.96)        (43.31)       (45.41)     (39.12)
 Total value of withdrawals (monthly average)              4.23           14.04         23.21       16.58
                                                          (10.80)        (39.40)       (36.22)     (29.76)
 Observations                                               80             80            80          80

Panel B. Monitoring surveys (covering approximately 4 months in total)
 Made at least 1 transaction                                   0.81        0.83          0.59       0.56
 Total value of deposits (monthly average)                     33.08      42.30         25.38       25.68
                                                              (37.47)    (49.54)       (39.50)     (39.12)
 Total value of withdrawals (monthly average)                  23.76      33.72         19.94       16.58
                                                              (36.38)    (51.28)       (35.07)     (29.76)
 Observations                                                   160         161          160         160
Notes: See text for discussion of data sources. Means are presented, with standard deviations in
parentheses. The value of deposits and withdrawals are winsorized at 5% level.




                                                     46
Web Appendix Table A5. FDR-adjusted q-values for pre-specified outcomes (high frequency phone survey)
                                       (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)                   (6)          (7)
                                                    Individual treatments                                          Pooled
                                                                                    Multiple
                                                       Multiple     One mobile                                                    Mobile
                                         One box                                    Mobile         All Accounts        Boxes
                                                        Boxes        Money                                                        money
                                                                                    Money
Savings
Total Box Deposits                       0.001***       0.001***        0.32           0.12          0.002***         0.001***       0.13
                                         [0.037**]     [0.001***]      [0.87]         [0.58]         [0.013**]       [0.001***]     [0.40]
Total Mobile Money Deposits                0.084*          0.16        0.01**         0.082*            0.55           0.085*     0.008***
                                           [0.43]         [0.58]      [0.086*]        [0.43]           [1.00]           [0.33]    [0.05**]
Total Deposits                              0.38          0.05*         0.56           0.14             0.72             0.41        0.79
                                           [0.87]         [0.31]       [1.00]         [0.58]           [1.00]           [0.82]      [1.00]
Business Outcomes
=1 if worked in main business            0.019**          0.93           0.15          0.14            0.052*            0.10      0.072*
                                          [0.14]         [1.00]         [0.58]        [0.58]           [0.17]           0.332       [0.33]
Hours in Main Business                   0.048**          0.73           0.18          0.87             0.30             0.26        0.49
                                          [0.31]         [1.00]         [0.65]        [1.00]           [0.68]           [0.55]      [0.94]
=1 if worked secondary occupation          0.72           0.32           0.46          0.98             0.60             0.67        0.62
                                          [1.00]         [0.87]         [1.00]        [1.00]           [1.00]           [1.00]      [1.00]
Hours in Other occupations                 0.33           0.22           0.13          0.58             0.97             0.52        0.25
                                          [0.87]         [0.68]         [0.58]        [1.00]           [1.00]           [0.94]      [0.55]
=1 if farmed                               0.31        0.002***       0.007***         0.90          0.003***         0.009***     0.03**
                                          [0.87]       [0.039**]       [0.083*]       [1.00]         [0.013**]        [0.05**]      [0.15]
Hours Farming                             0.066*       0.007***       0.002***         0.23          0.001***         0.005***    0.003***
                                          [0.39]        [0.083*]      [0.038**]       [0.69]         [0.013**]        0.043**     [0.04**]
Business Profits                           0.26           0.44           0.21         0.087*            0.12             0.26      0.094*
                                          [0.77]         [0.97]         [0.68]        [0.43]           [0.35]           [0.55]      [0.33]
Business Revenues                          0.57           0.57           0.90          0.77             0.73             0.49        0.93
                                          [1.00]         [1.00]         [1.00]        [1.00]           [1.00]           [0.94]      [1.00]
Expenditures
Food                                       0.57          0.70             0.85        0.78             0.77            0.57        0.99
                                          [1.00]         [1.00]          [1.00]       [1.00]           [1.00]          [1.00]      [1.00]
Personal                                   0.43           0.98             0.69        0.56             0.83            0.70        0.99
                                          [0.97]         [1.00]           [1.00]      [1.00]           [1.00]          [1.00]      [1.00]
Household                                  0.54           0.24            0.095*       0.48             0.22            0.27        0.33
                                          [1.00]         [0.74]           [0.45]      [1.00]           [0.57]          [0.55]      [0.68]
Education                                0.01***       0.008***          0.033**       0.82          0.002***        0.001***      0.08*
                                         [0.086*]      [0.083*]           [0.23]      [1.00]         [0.013**]       [0.014**]     [0.33]
Holiday                                      -              -                -           -                -               -           -
                                             -              -                -           -                -               -           -
Total                                      0.28           0.22             0.20        0.52             0.24            0.16        0.53
                                          [0.86]         [0.68]           [0.68]      [1.00]           [0.57]          [0.44]      [0.94]
Credit
Value of loans received                    0.35           0.84            0.70         0.50             0.79            0.60        0.93
                                          [0.87]         [1.00]          [1.00]       [1.00]           [1.00]          [1.00]      [1.00]
Value of credit to customers                 -              -               -            -         -      -               -           -
Notes: Naïve p-values are presented first, with q-values in square brackets. Standard errors are adjusted using the procedure in Anderson
(2008). Regressions are population weighted.
*, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.




                                                                    47
Web Appendix Table A6. FDR-adjusted q-values for pre-specified outcomes (monitoring surveys)
                                        (1)            (2)           (3)        (4)          (5)                      (6)            (7)
                                                   Individual treatments                                           Pooled
                                                                                   Multiple
                                                        Multiple      One mobile                                                   Mobile
                                          One box                                  Mobile       All Accounts         Boxes
                                                         Boxes          Money                                                      money
                                                                                   Money
Savings
Total Box Deposits                         0.001***      0.001***         0.53        0.45        0.001***          0.001***         0.96
                                          [0.001***]    [0.001***]       [1.00]      [1.00]      [0.001***]        [0.001***]       [0.97]
Total Mobile Money Deposits                   0.25          0.41       0.004***     0.026**          0.29              0.27       0.003***
                                             [0.96]        [1.00]        [0.12]      [0.51]         [0.56]            [0.78]      [0.085*]
Total Deposits                                0.73       0.015**          0.13        0.77           0.20              0.19          0.30
                                             [1.00]        [0.36]        [0.90]      [1.00]         [0.53]            [0.78]        [0.78]
Business Outcomes
=1 if worked in main business               0.26           0.69           0.12        0.37           0.17             0.37           0.12
                                           [0.96]         [1.00]         [0.90]      [1.00]         [0.53]           [0.78]         [0.65]
Hours in Main Business                      0.52           0.47         0.083*        0.23           0.14             0.44         0.072*
                                           [1.00]         [1.00]         [0.77]      [0.96]         [0.53]           [0.78]         [0.65]
=1 if worked secondary occupation           0.56         0.035**          0.36        0.60           0.24             0.28           0.37
                                           [1.00]         [0.65]         [1.00]      [1.00]         [0.53]           [0.78]         [0.78]
Hours in Other occupations                  0.43           0.22           0.25        0.49           0.31             0.63           0.23
                                           [1.00]         [0.96]         [0.96]      [1.00]         [0.56]           [0.95]         [0.78]
=1 if farmed                                0.30           0.13         0.059*        0.55           0.16             0.13           0.35
                                           [1.00]         [0.90]         [0.77]      [1.00]         [0.53]           [0.65]         [0.78]
Hours Farming                               0.17         0.017**       0.004***       0.22        0.004***          0.018**       0.009***
                                           [0.90]         [0.36]         [0.12]      [0.96]       [0.046**]          [0.20]         [0.16]
Business Profits                            0.25           0.67           0.21        0.17           0.19             0.35           0.14
                                           [0.96]         [1.00]         [0.96]      [0.90]         [0.53]           [0.78]         [0.65]
Business Revenues                          0.089*          0.42           0.13        0.30           0.11             0.14           0.14
                                           [0.77]         [1.00]         [0.90]      [1.00]         [0.53]           [0.65]         [0.65]
Expenditures
Food                                        0.37          0.23            0.12       0.82           0.25             0.23           0.36
                                            [1.00]        [0.96]          [0.90]     [1.00]        [0.53]            [0.78]         [0.78]
Personal                                     0.26          0.38            0.15       0.22          0.14              0.25           0.12
                                            [0.96]        [1.00]          [0.90]     [0.96]        [0.53]            [0.78]         [0.65]
Household                                  0.048**         0.45            0.15       0.59          0.14              0.12           0.24
                                            [0.77]        [1.00]          [0.90]     [1.00]        [0.53]            [0.65]         [0.78]
Education                                    0.99          0.66            0.57       0.52          0.91              0.80           0.97
                                            [1.00]        [1.00]          [1.00]     [1.00]        [0.66]            [0.97]         [0.97]
Holiday                                      0.47          0.57           0.075*      0.51          0.23              0.45           0.15
                                            [1.00]        [1.00]          [0.77]     [1.00]        [0.53]            [0.78]         [0.65]
Total                                        0.17          0.33           0.068*      0.75          0.15              0.18           0.19
                                            [0.90]        [1.00]          [0.77]     [1.00]        [0.53]            [0.78]         [0.78]
Credit
Value of loans received                     0.54           0.98            0.65       0.75           0.69             0.74          0.66
                                           [1.00]         [1.00]          [1.00]     [1.00]         [0.65]           [0.97]        [0.95]
Value of credit extended to customers c    0.076*         0.054*          0.085*      0.19         0.017**          0.019**        0.066*
                                           [0.77]         [0.77]          [0.77]     [0.96]         [0.14]           [0.20]        [0.65]
Notes: Naïve p-values are presented first, with q-values in square brackets. Standard errors are adjusted using the procedure in Anderson
(2008). Regressions are population weighted.
*, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.




                                                                     48
Web Appendix Table A7. Treatment effects on other measures of farming activity
                                                (1)           (2)          (3)
                                                     Land
                                                                         Farm
                                           =1 if bought =1 if rented
                                                                        inputs
                                               land          land
Panel A. Individual Accounts                   0.02         0.09*         8.13
One lockbox                                   (0.02)        (0.05)       (4.94)
                                             0.06**         0.09*         7.10
Multiple lockboxes                            (0.03)        (0.05)       (5.55)
                                               0.03          0.06      10.92**
One mobile money account                      (0.03)        (0.05)       (4.93)
                                               0.04          0.03         1.83
Multiple mobile money accounts                (0.02)        (0.04)       (4.47)

Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes                                       0.04*                 0.09**        7.61*
                                            (0.02)                (0.04)        (4.47)
Mobile Money                                 0.03                  0.05          6.79
                                            (0.02)                (0.04)        (4.18)

Panel C. Pooled Treatment
Any Accoumt                                        0.03**         0.07*         7.20*
                                                   (0.02)         (0.04)        (3.92)

Observations                                         645            646          1302
Number of Businesses                                 645            646           719
Control Mean                                         0.02           0.05         27.67
Control SD                                           0.13           0.21         40.90
Notes: All regressions control for strata, date fixed effects and are probability
weighted (see in the text for details). All monetary variables are expressed in USD
and are winsorized at 5%.
Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate
significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.




                                           49
Web Appendix Table A8. Treatment effects on transfers (high frequency phone surveys)
                                                                 (1)        (2)        (3)             (4)
                                                                       Interpersonal transfers
                                                                  Received                 Gave
                                                                               Value                 Value
                                                                  transfer               transfer
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox                                                         0.03        -0.30      0.07       1.03
                                                                   (0.06)      (1.24)     (0.06)     (1.05)
Multiple lockboxes                                                  0.01        -0.12      0.09       1.01
                                                                   (0.06)      (1.12)     (0.06)     (0.93)
One mobile money account                                            0.06        1.03      0.12**      1.17
                                                                   (0.06)      (1.33)     (0.06)     (0.91)
Multiple mobile money accounts                                      0.05        -0.66      0.07       0.34
                                                                   (0.07)      (1.14)     (0.07)     (0.80)

Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes                                                               0.02       -0.21       0.08       1.02
                                                                   (0.05)      (1.00)     (0.05)     (0.80)
Mobile Money                                                        0.05        0.28      0.10*       0.80
                                                                   (0.06)      (1.07)     (0.06)     (0.74)

Panel C. Pooled Treatment
Any Accoumt                                                         0.04        0.03      0.09*       0.91
                                                                   (0.05)      (0.92)     (0.05)     (0.68)

Observations                                                          4544      4544        4544       4544
Number of Businesses                                                   391       391         391        391
Control Mean                                                          0.38       5.48        0.59       5.05
Control SD                                                            0.49      12.42        0.49       8.23
Notes: Transfers include gifts and loans, and both cash and in-kind payments and do not include survey
compensation. Variables are measured over the 7 days prior to the survey and converted to daily averages.
All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey (where
applicable), assignement to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details).
Date fixed effects are included. All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%.
Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%,
and 1% respectively.




                                                      50
Web Appendix Table A9. Treatment effects on transfers (monitoring surveys)
                                      (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)
                                             Interpersonal transfers
                                        Received                 Gave
                                                     Value                  Value
                                        transfer               transfer
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox                               -0.05       -0.05      -0.04       0.02
                                         (0.05)      (0.08)     (0.06)      (0.05)
Multiple lockboxes                       -0.11*       0.00      (0.01)       0.03
                                         (0.06)      (0.08)     (0.06)      (0.06)
One mobile money account                  -0.01      (0.03)      0.00        0.08
                                         (0.05)      (0.08)     (0.06)      (0.05)
Multiple mobile money accounts            0.01       (0.02)     (0.03)       0.01
                                         (0.06)      (0.08)     (0.06)      (0.05)

Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes                               -0.08*    -0.02              -0.02       0.03
                                     (0.05)  (0.07)             (0.05)      (0.04)
Mobile Money                          0.00   (0.03)             (0.02)      0.05
                                     (0.05)  (0.07)             (0.05)      (0.04)

Panel C. Pooled Treatment
Any Accoumt                                -0.04      -0.03      -0.02       0.04
                                          (0.04)     (0.07)     (0.04)      (0.04)

Observations                                1323       1323       1323      1323
Number of Businesses                         723       723         723       723
Control Mean                                0.58       0.43       0.59       0.26
Control SD                                  0.49       0.73       0.49       0.39
Notes: Transfers include gifts and loans, and both cash and in-kind payments and
do not include survey compensation. Variables are measured over the 7 days prior
to the survey and converted to daily averages. All regressions control for strata, a
measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey (where applicable),
assignement to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text
for details). Survey date fixed effects are included. All monetary variables are
expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%.
Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate
significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.




                                          51
Web Appendix Table A10. How did respondents use their mobile money accounts?

Panel A. Airtel Transactional History
 Used Mobile Money to Deposit/Withdraw Cash                                    0.95
   Average Amount Deposited                                                  117.96
                                                                            (149.82)
   Average Amount Withdrawn                                                  130.64
                                                                            (176.54)
 Used Mobile Money to make transfers                                           0.67
  Transfers Sent                                                              14.17
                                                                             (26.01)
   Transfers Received                                                         12.29
                                                                             (29.41)
 Used Mobile Money to make payments                                            0.73
  Transactions Made                                                           10.76
                                                                             (17.15)
  Observations                                                                264
Panel B. Debriefing questions about mobile money
  Used Mobile Money for longer-term savings                                    0.83
  Used Mobile Money to store money temporarily                                 0.12
  Observations                                                                 259
Notes: Panel A comes from Airtel administrative data. Data is restricted to accounts
with non-zero usage. Panel B comes from responses collected during a debriefing
section of the endline survey, at the conclusion of the project. Data is restricted to the
mobile money treatment group in the experiment.




                                            52
Web Appendix Table A11. Effect of accounts on coping with health shocks
                                               (1)               (2)             (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)            (7)          (8)
                                          Net transfers          Net deposits                       Expenditures                Labor supply & income
                                           across all      Experimental       All        Medical                                  Hours        Total
                                                                                                        Food        Total
                                            sources          Accounts      sources       Expenses                                 worked      income
Panel A. Respondent sick
Respondent sick                                -0.86              -              -1.09    1.80***      1.06**      3.57***         -0.39         0.09
                                              (1.42)              -             (1.29)     (0.48)      (0.42)       (1.20)        (0.74)        (2.09)
1 Box * respondent sick                       4.98*             -0.54            -2.42       -0.9       -0.23        -3.67         0.23          -1.04
                                              (2.71)           (1.01)           (2.22)     (0.58)      (0.64)       (2.31)        (0.89)        (2.95)
Multiple Box * respondent sick                 -1.83            0.84             -0.24       -0.4       0.08         0.71          -0.37         0.21
                                              (1.99)           (0.79)           (2.13)     (0.59)      (0.83)       (2.06)        (0.96)        (2.37)
1 MM * respondent sick                         2.41             0.39             -1.43      0.09       -1.46*        -0.94         -0.85         0.72
                                              (1.83)           (0.54)           (1.95)     (0.70)      (0.75)       (2.58)        (0.95)        (2.48)
Multiple MM * respondent sick                  1.97             0.41             0.23       -0.76     -2.01***      -3.72*         -0.53         -2.73
                                              (2.02)           (0.86)           (1.75)     (0.52)      (0.61)       (2.09)        (0.90)        (2.47)
p-values
 Joint significance interaction terms        0.039**           0.48             0.52       0.28        0.92        0.18           0.75          0.88
Observations                                  4543             4538             4538       4543        4529        4543           4543          4543
Number of businesses                           391              391              391        391         391         391            391           391
Control Mean                                  -0.12             0.00            12.04       0.49       10.27       27.36           8.77         25.19
Control SD                                    11.08             0.00            23.55       1.58        6.26       20.36           4.87         20.95
Panel B. Household member sick
Household member sick                          2.22             -0.27            -0.33    2.52***     1.48**       5.72***        -1.25*         1.22
                                              (2.25)           (0.23)           (1.23)     (0.36)      (0.74)       (2.12)        (0.69)        (1.58)
1 Box * household member sick                  -3.92            0.62             -1.78      0.73        -1.15        -2.72         1.14          -2.32
                                              (2.87)           (1.03)           (2.01)     (0.55)      (0.88)       (2.61)        (0.83)        (1.94)
Multiple Box * household member sick           -1.32            -0.56            0.39       -0.53       -0.45        -2.79        2.01**         0.61
                                              (2.45)           (1.00)           (2.27)     (0.49)      (0.86)       (3.06)        (0.79)        (2.35)
1 MM * household member sick                   -0.14            0.35             1.77       -0.10     -1.91**        -2.86         1.04          -4.04
                                              (3.14)           (0.69)           (2.47)     (0.47)      (0.92)       (2.76)        (0.83)        (2.62)
Multiple MM * household member sick            -1.51            -0.75            -2.75      -0.48       -0.91        -2.42         1.48*         -2.93
                                              (2.56)           (0.79)           (2.49)     (0.47)      (0.89)       (3.11)        (0.83)        (2.34)
p-values
 Joint significance interaction terms            0.33             0.72          0.60          0.066*      0.36       0.54          0.034**       0.26
Observations                                    4543              4538          4538           4543       4529       4543           4543        4543
Number of Businesses                              391              391           391            391        391        391            391          391
Control Mean                                     -0.29             0.00         11.52           0.40      10.09      26.35           8.67        24.81
Control SD                                      10.64              0.00         21.64           1.38       6.10      19.18           4.87        20.55
Notes: Regression are at the week level. Fixed effects regressions with survey date fixed effects. Regressions are population weighted. Transfers
include gifts and loans, and both cash and in-kind payments. Net transfers and withdrawals are positive for inflows and negative for outflows.
Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.


                                                                           53
Web Appendix Table A12. Effect of accounts on treating illness
                                                      (1)               (2)

                                                  =1 if fully      =1 if treated
                                                treated illness    immediately

Panel A. Respondent sick
One lockbox                                          0.02             -0.17*
                                                    (0.07)            (0.09)
Multiple lockboxes                                   0.06              -0.04
                                                    (0.06)            (0.09)
One mobile money account                             -0.06              0.05
                                                    (0.06)            (0.08)
Multiple mobile money accounts                       -0.04             -0.08
                                                    (0.07)            (0.10)
p-values
 Joint significance all accounts                     0.44            0.036**
Observations                                         500               500
Number of businesses                                  249              249
Control Mean                                         0.83              0.78
Control SD                                             -                 -

Panel B. Household member sick
One lockbox                                          -0.07             -0.03
                                                    (0.05)            (0.07)
Multiple lockboxes                                    0.02            0.12*
                                                    (0.05)            (0.07)
One mobile money account                             -0.08              0.1
                                                    (0.06)            (0.06)
Multiple mobile money accounts                        0.05            0.12*
                                                    (0.04)            (0.07)
p-values
  Joint significance all accounts                    0.04**            0.092*
Observations                                          614               614
Number of businesses                                   260               260
Control Mean                                          0.95              0.74
Control SD                                              -                 -
Notes: Regressions are restricted to observations in which the respondent (or
a household member was sick). The dependent variable in column 1 is an
indicator for treating an illness fully, and the dependent variable in column 2
is an indicator for treating the illness immediately. All regressions control for
strata and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). Standard
errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate
significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.




                                        54
Web Appendix Table A13. Treatment effects on prevalence of sickness
                                                  (1)                   (2)
                                          =1 if member of
                                                              =1 if respondent sick
                                         household sick in
                                                                  in past week
                                             past week
One lockbox                                      0.01                  0.02
                                                (0.03)                (0.03)
Multiple lockboxes                               0.02                  0.01
                                                (0.03)                (0.02)
One mobile money account                         0.01                  0.03
                                                (0.02)                (0.03)
Multiple mobile money accounts                   -0.02                 -0.02
                                                (0.02)                (0.02)

Observations                                   4543                   4543
Number of businesses                            391                    391
Control Mean                                    0.12                   0.12
Notes: Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. All
regressions control for strata and are probability weighted (see in the text for
details).
Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and ***
indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.




                                         55
           Web Appendix B - Additional Measures of Savings

Saving for Multiple Financial Needs: Evidence from Lockboxes and Mobile
                            Money in Malawi

             Shilpa Aggarwal, Valentina Brailovskaya and Jonathan Robinson




                                          56
Web Appendix Table B1. Treatment effects on withdrawals (high frequency phone surveys)
                                      (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)           (5)                     (6)
                                                                                     Withdrawals from other
                                 Withdrawals                                             savings sources
                                                                   Total mobile
                                     from        Total lockbox                                                              Total
                                                                     money
                                 experimental     withdrawals                                        Bank                Withdrawals
                                                                   withdrawals     Cash at home
                                   account                                                         accounts

Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox                            0.19***           0.15              -0.06             -0.13          0.03             -0.13
                                        (0.07)          (0.10)            (0.05)            (0.19)         (0.16)            (0.34)
Multiple lockboxes                     0.48***         0.49***            (0.03)           -0.36**         0.14              0.36
                                        (0.13)          (0.17)            (0.05)            (0.17)         (0.21)            (0.40)
One mobile money account               0.30***          -0.05             0.19**              0.16          0.29              0.58
                                        (0.07)          (0.06)            (0.07)            (0.26)         (0.35)            (0.48)
Multiple mobile money accounts         0.23***          -0.09               0.09            -0.29*          0.05             -0.31
                                        (0.06)          (0.06)            (0.06)            (0.16)         (0.15)            (0.30)
p-values
 One lockbox = multiple lockbox        0.035**          0.078*             0.46             0.16           0.67              0.26
 One m.m. = multiple m.m.               0.37             0.48              0.18            0.046**         0.42             0.031**

Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes                              0.33***      0.31***                    -0.05            -0.24           0.08              0.11
                                    (0.08)       (0.10)                   (0.05)            (0.16)         (0.14)            (0.30)
Mobile Money                       0.27***        -0.07                   0.14**            -0.04           0.18              0.17
                                    (0.06)       (0.06)                   (0.06)            (0.20)         (0.23)            (0.35)

Panel C. Pooled Treatment
Any Accoumt                            0.30***          0.12*              0.05             -0.14           0.13              0.14
                                        (0.05)          (0.07)            (0.05)            (0.16)         (0.16)            (0.29)

Observations                            4534            4534              4534              4534           4534              4534
Number of Businesses                     391            391                391              391            391                391
Control Mean                            0.00            0.15              0.16              0.76           0.39              1.69
Control SD                              0.00            0.81              0.65              1.96           6.10              6.74

Note: All results are converted to daily averages. Withdrawals were measured over the past 7 days. All regressions control for strata, a
measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey (where applicable), assignement to high frequency group and are probability
weighted (see in the text for details). Date and date survey fixed effects are included in Panel A and B, respecitvely. All monetary
variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%.
Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.




                                                                  57
Web Appendix Table B2. Treatment effects on withdrawals (monitoring surveys)
                                      (1)            (2)               (3)                   (4)           (5)                 (6)
                                                                                           Withdrawals from other
                                     Withdrawals                                              savings sources
                                                                       Total mobile
                                        from         Total lockbox                                                           Total
                                                                         money
                                     experimental    withdrawals                                            Bank          Withdrawals
                                                                       withdrawals       Cash at home
                                       account                                                            accounts

Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox                            0.48***          0.42***            -0.02           -0.13***         0.01            0.26**
                                        (0.07)           (0.08)            (0.03)           (0.04)         (0.08)            (0.13)
Multiple lockboxes                     0.78***          0.71***             0.02           -0.15***         0.20            0.83***
                                        (0.08)           (0.09)            (0.03)           (0.04)         (0.13)            (0.19)
One mobile money account               0.23***            0.08            0.14***             0.03         0.18*            0.47***
                                        (0.04)           (0.07)            (0.04)           (0.06)         (0.11)            (0.16)
Multiple mobile money accounts         0.19***            0.01            0.08**             -0.08          0.08              0.13
                                        (0.04)           (0.05)            (0.04)           (0.05)         (0.08)            (0.13)

p-values
 One lockbox = multiple lockbox        0.035**          0.078*             0.46              0.16           0.67             0.26
 One m.m. = multiple m.m.               0.37             0.48              0.18             0.046**         0.42            0.031**

Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes                              0.62***      0.56***                     0.00           -0.14***         0.10            0.54***
                                    (0.06)       (0.07)                    (0.03)           (0.04)         (0.08)            (0.14)
Mobile Money                       0.21***        0.05                    0.11***            -0.02          0.13             0.31**
                                    (0.03)       (0.05)                    (0.03)           (0.05)         (0.09)            (0.13)

Panel C. Pooled Treatment
Any Accoumt                            0.41***          0.30***           0.06**             -0.08*         0.12            0.43***
                                        (0.04)           (0.06)           (0.03)             (0.04)        (0.07)            (0.12)

Observations                            1323             1323              1323              1323          1323              1323
Number of Businesses                       723              723               723                723           723               723
Control Mean                              0.00              0.15              0.12               0.19          0.16              0.62
Control SD                                0.00              0.49              0.29               0.41          1.24              1.60
Note: All results are converted to daily averages. Withdrawals were measured over the past 2 months. All regressions control for strata,
a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey (where applicable), assignement to high frequency group and are
probability weighted (see in the text for details). Date and date survey fixed effects are included in Panel A and B, respecitvely. All
monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%.
Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.




                                                                  58
Web Appendix Table B3. Treatment effects on balances (monitoring surveys only)
                                         (1)              (2)                  (3)            (4)                      (5)          (6)          (7)              (8)
                                          Balance in Lockboxes              Balance in Mobile Money                   Balance in other savings sources
                                                                                                                                                                Total
                                           Project                             Project Mobile   All mobile           Cash at        Bank        Savings
                                                          All lockboxes                                                                                        Balance
                                         lockboxes                                 money      money accounts          home        accounts      groups
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox                              49.16***           49.05***               0.44              -4.20           -7.99**        -7.10         4.27          26.96
                                          (7.27)             (7.48)               (0.94)            (3.47)            (3.94)       (15.28)       (6.38)        (20.95)
Multiple lockboxes                       58.27***           57.26***               0.35              -3.47          -10.36***       23.53         -1.46        61.45**
                                          (6.71)             (6.89)               (1.07)            (3.52)            (3.46)       (21.74)       (7.54)        (24.88)
One mobile money account                   0.47             18.37***             10.42***             3.83             0.10         38.22         -5.10         50.47*
                                          (2.61)             (5.68)               (2.85)            (4.31)            (4.17)       (24.62)       (5.78)        (28.11)
Multiple mobile money accounts             -0.64              9.48*              15.91***           9.00**             0.27          2.48         -5.85          8.66
                                          (2.30)             (5.47)               (3.23)            (4.18)            (4.33)       (16.33)       (6.56)        (20.53)

p-values
 One lockbox = multiple lockbox             0.35              0.40                 0.93              0.78              0.34        0.092*        0.41            0.16
 One m.m. = multiple m.m.                   0.69              0.20                 0.17              0.21              0.97        0.081*        0.89           0.099*

Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes                                53.56***       52.98***                       0.42              -3.82           -9.14***        7.48         1.50         43.47**
                                      (5.09)         (5.32)                       (0.85)             (3.23)            (3.50)      (16.25)       (6.01)        (19.42)
Mobile Money                           -0.25        14.04***                     12.97***            6.22*              0.23        20.79        -5.32          30.21
                                      (2.07)         (4.36)                       (2.29)             (3.70)            (3.76)      (18.57)       (5.52)        (21.46)

Panel C. Pooled Treatment
Any Accoumt                              26.11***           33.12***              6.82***             1.30            -4.38         14.20        -1.98         36.70**
                                          (3.25)             (3.85)                (1.52)            (3.28)           (3.42)       (16.23)       (5.31)        (18.55)

Observations                                 648                 648                  647               648            645          633         648              648
Number of Businesses                         648                 648                  647               648            645          633         648              648
Control Mean                                 0.00               3.50                 0.00              12.17         13.60         38.04       22.98            94.76
Control SD                                   0.00              15.47                 0.00              27.12         24.76        108.40       45.24           126.90
Note: Balances were measured as of the date of the endline survey only. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake
survey survey (where applicable), date of the survey fixed effects, assignement to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). All
monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%. Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses.
Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.


                                                                                   59
Web Appendix Table B4. Treatment effects on net deposits (evidence from high frequency phone surveys)
                                      (1)               (2)              (3)             (4)            (5)                   (6)
                                                                                      Net Deposits from other
                                 Net Deposits                                             savings sources
                                                                    Total mobile
                                       to       Total lockbox net                                                          Total Net
                                                                     money net
                                 experimental       deposits                                           Bank                Deposits
                                                                      deposits      Cash at home
                                   account                                                           accounts

Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox                            0.62***         0.39***            -0.09            -0.38***       -0.07              -0.06
                                        (0.09)          (0.10)            (0.06)            (0.10)        (0.07)            (0.26)
Multiple lockboxes                     1.11***         0.95***            -0.06            -0.32***        0.01             0.71**
                                        (0.18)          (0.20)            (0.06)            (0.11)        (0.12)            (0.35)
One mobile money account               0.16***          -0.09              0.03               0.11        -0.01               0.06
                                        (0.06)          (0.08)            (0.06)            (0.16)        (0.09)            (0.26)
Multiple mobile money accounts         0.20***          -0.12              0.04              -0.13        -0.03              -0.18
                                        (0.06)          (0.08)            (0.07)            (0.11)        (0.08)            (0.23)

p-values
 One lockbox = multiple lockbox        0.01**          0.006***           0.54              0.34           0.54            0.037**
 One m.m. = multiple m.m.               0.59             0.69             0.84             0.095*          0.83             0.33

Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes                              0.86***      0.66***                   -0.08            -0.35***       -0.03              0.31
                                    (0.11)       (0.13)                   (0.05)            (0.10)        (0.08)            (0.25)
Mobile Money                       0.18***        -0.11                    0.03              0.00         -0.02             -0.05
                                    (0.05)       (0.07)                   (0.06)            (0.12)        (0.07)            (0.22)
Panel C. Pooled Treatment
Any Accoumt                        0.52***      0.28***                   -0.02             -0.18*        -0.03              0.13
                                    (0.07)       (0.09)                   (0.05)            (0.11)        (0.06)            (0.20)

Observations                              4534              4534               4534             4534           4534             4534
Number of Businesses                       391               391                391              391            391              391
Control Mean                              0.00              0.28               0.15             0.48            0.27            1.68
Control SD                                0.00              0.71               0.58             1.16            2.44            3.22
Note: All results are converted to daily averages. Deposits and withdrawals were measured over the past 7 days. All regressions control
for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey (where applicable), assignement to high frequency group and are
probability weighted (see in the text for details). Date fixed effects are included. All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are
winsorized at 5%.
Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.




                                                                  60
Web Appendix Table B5. Treatment effects on net deposits (monitoring surveys)
                                      (1)              (2)               (3)                   (4)           (5)                (6)
                                                                                            Net Deposits from other
                                     Net Deposits                                               savings sources
                                                                        Total mobile
                                          to      Total lockbox net                                                          Total Net
                                                                         money net
                                     experimental     deposits                                               Bank            Deposits
                                                                          deposits        Cash at home
                                       account                                                             accounts

Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox                             0.25***         0.16***             -0.03           -0.11***         -0.05             -0.03
                                         (0.04)          (0.05)            (0.02)            (0.03)         (0.06)             (0.10)
Multiple lockboxes                      0.29***         0.19***            -0.05*           -0.13***         0.05              0.06
                                         (0.04)          (0.06)            (0.02)            (0.03)         (0.07)             (0.11)
One mobile money account                 0.06**          -0.01               0.00             -0.03         0.16**              0.18
                                         (0.03)          (0.04)            (0.03)            (0.04)         (0.08)             (0.11)
Multiple mobile money accounts           0.05*           -0.04               0.03             -0.02           0.00             -0.01
                                         (0.02)          (0.04)            (0.02)            (0.04)         (0.06)             (0.10)

p-values
 One lockbox = multiple lockbox         0.01**          0.006***            0.54              0.34           0.54             0.037**
 One m.m. = multiple m.m.                0.59             0.69              0.84             0.095*          0.83              0.33

Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes                              0.27***      0.18***                    -0.04**          -0.12***          0.00              0.01
                                    (0.03)       (0.04)                     (0.02)           (0.03)          (0.05)            (0.09)
Mobile Money                       0.05***        -0.02                      0.01             -0.03           0.08              0.09
                                    (0.02)       (0.03)                     (0.02)           (0.03)          (0.06)            (0.09)

Panel C. Pooled Treatment
Any Accoumt                             0.16***          0.08**             -0.01            -0.07**          0.04              0.05
                                         (0.02)          (0.03)             (0.02)            (0.03)         (0.05)            (0.08)

Observations                             1323            1323               1323              1323           1323              1323
Number of Businesses                       723             723                723               723            723              723
Control Mean                              0.00             0.13               0.07              0.13           0.16             0.55
Control SD                                0.00             0.41               0.23              0.29           0.55             0.85
Note: All results are converted to daily averages. Deposits and withdrawals over the past 2 months in the monitoring surveys. All
regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey (where applicable), assignement to high
frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). Survey date fixed effects are included. All monetary variables
are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%.
Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.




                                                                   61
        Web Appendix V - Assessing Possible Threats to Validity

Saving for Multiple Financial Needs: Evidence from Lockboxes and Mobile
                            Money in Malawi

             Shilpa Aggarwal, Valentina Brailovskaya and Jonathan Robinson




                                          62
                 Web Appendix Figure V1. Reporting vs. verified lockbox balances

                         Panel A. Verified vs. reported balance (all boxes)




                  Panel B. Verified vs. reported balances (below 75th percentile)




Notes: The y-axis is the amount actually found in the lockbox during the check in December 2018
and the x-axis is the amount reported as the balance (prior to opening the box). 260 Respondents
were assigned to the lockbox check group, and 241 completed pre-lockbox check survey, 215
consented to show us the lockbox, 190 consented to open the lockbox. Panel A shows all boxes,
Panel B shows only those below the 75th percentile for both measures. About 50% of users reported
the exact balance in the boxes, 14% under-reported, and 37% over-reported.




                                                63
Web Appendix Table V1. Correlations between Self-Reports and Administrative Data for Mobile Money Groups
                                                                        (1)                         (2)
                                                                  Mobile money transaction data from telecom
                                                              =1 if deposit appears in   Value of deposits in telco
                                                                     telco data                    data
Values reported in HFPS survey

Panel A. Day Level
=1 if reported a deposit                                             0.344***                         -
                                                                       (0.01)                         -
Total value of reported deposits                                          -                      0.452***
                                                                          -                        (0.02)
Observations                                                           3,704                       3,704
Number of respondents                                                   156                         156
Mean of dependent variable                                            0.0473                       0.314
SD of dependent variable                                               0.212                        2.14

Panel B. Week Level
=1 if reported a deposit                                             0.525***                         -
                                                                       (0.02)                         -
Total value of reported deposits                                          -                      0.653***
                                                                          -                        (0.02)
Observations                                                           1,851                       1,851
Number of respondents                                                   156                         156
Mean of dependent variable                                             0.226                         2.4
SD of dependent variable                                               0.418                       6.707

Panel C. Cumulative over entire HFPS period
Total value of reported deposits                                         -                       0.823***
                                                                         -                        (0.049)

Observations                                                                                        294
Number of respondents                                                                               156
Mean of dependent variable                                                                         18.17
SD of dependent variable                                                                           32.42

Panel D. Long Term Usage Survey
=1 if reported a deposit in the last month                           0.600***
                                                                       (0.09)
Total Value of Deposits in the last month                                                         0.445***
                                                                                                    (0.07)
Observations                                                             70                           70
Number of Respondents                                                    70                           70
Mean of dependent variable                                             0.201                        2.738
SD of dependent variable                                                0.4                         7.702
Notes: Independent variables are from high-frequency phone surveys. Dependent variables are from administrative
data of mobile money transactions from the telecom company. The regressions are run without a constant term. All
monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%,
5%, and 1% respectively.




                                                        64
Web Appendix Table V2. Correlations between reported and verified balances in boxes
                                                (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)
                                                Independently Verified Balance in Boxes
                                          All Boxes
                                                           Silver      Black      Brown
                                          (pooled)
Panel A. All box groups
Self Reported balance in survey             1.047          0.927       0.803      1.357
                                            (0.02)         (0.01)      (0.08)     (0.01)
Observations                                 190            185          65         46

Panel B. One box group
Self Reported balance in survey             0.881             -          -           -
                                            (0.01)            -          -           -
Observations                                  94              -          -           -

Panel C. Multiple box group
Self Reported balance in survey               1.096        0.986      0.803       1.357
                                              (0.03)       (0.01)     (0.08)      (0.01)
Observations                                    96           91         65          46
Note: Regressions are run without a constant term. 260 Respondents were assigned to the
lockbox check group, and 241 completed pre-lockbox check survey, 215 consented to show
us the lockbox, 190 consented to open the lockbox.




                                           65
Web Appendix Table V3. Does high frequency surveying affect reporting?
                                             (1)            (2)                (3)         (4)          (5)             (6)       (7)         (8)            (9)
                                                 Savings                                     Labor supply                        Business outcomes
                                             Deposits into                     Main business                  Farming                                   Total
                                                               Total
                                             experimental                     =1 if                     =1 if                    Profits    Revenues expenditures
                                                       1      Deposits                    Hours                     Hours
                                               account                       worked                    farmed
HFPS                                              0.06          -0.10          0.01        0.23         -0.14*      -1.00          0.44        0.87        -8.21
                                                 (0.04)         (0.31)        (0.05)      (0.59)        (0.07)      (0.71)        (0.50)      (1.82)       (5.20)
One lockbox                                     0.73***          -0.05         0.01        0.14          -0.05       0.27          0.03        -1.45        4.11
                                                 (0.09)         (0.29)        (0.04)      (0.54)        (0.07)      (0.72)        (0.58)      (2.01)       (5.73)
Multiple lockboxes                              1.05***         0.58*          -0.02       -0.41         -0.01       0.70          0.04         0.37        3.66
                                                 (0.13)         (0.35)        (0.04)      (0.56)        (0.10)      (0.82)        (0.52)      (1.59)       (5.84)
One mobile money account                        0.27***           0.31         -0.07       -0.93          0.06      1.61*          0.03        -1.63        6.52
                                                 (0.06)         (0.35)        (0.06)      (0.72)        (0.08)      (0.97)        (0.53)      (1.66)       (5.90)
Multiple mobile money accounts                  0.27***           0.39          0.00       -0.65         -0.07       0.33          -0.05       -1.14        1.83
                                                 (0.06)         (0.32)        (0.04)      (0.55)        (0.07)      (0.78)        (0.52)      (1.85)       (5.90)
Interactions
One lockbox*HFPS                                 -0.21*         -0.01         -0.11       -0.87        0.22**        1.07         -0.88       -1.59         1.07
                                                 (0.13)         (0.40)        (0.07)      (0.80)       (0.10)       (1.29)        (0.72)      (2.57)       (6.80)
Multiple lockboxes*HFPS                           -0.26          0.06          0.03        0.29         0.21         1.97         -0.33       -2.84        -0.39
                                                 (0.18)         (0.46)        (0.07)      (0.83)       (0.13)       (1.58)        (0.74)      (2.30)       (7.15)
One mobile money account*HFPS                     -0.01          0.04          0.02        0.19         0.08         0.62          -0.91       -0.42        0.04
                                                 (0.08)         (0.43)        (0.08)      (0.93)       (0.11)       (1.36)        (0.70)      (2.51)       (7.10)
Multiple mobile money accounts*HFPS               -0.12          -0.67         -0.06       0.35         0.08         1.10          -0.83      -0.31        -1.47
                                                 (0.08)         (0.41)        (0.07)      (0.86)       (0.10)       (1.29)        (0.69)      (2.53)       (6.99)
p-values
   Joint significance of interaction terms         0.19           0.28         0.25         0.53         0.22        0.73         0.62         0.65         1.00
Observations                                      1323            1323         9261         9261         1323       1321          1308        1317         1323
Number of Businesses                               723             723          723          723          723        723           721         722          723
Control mean                                       0.00           1.53         0.74         7.35         0.24        2.05         3.02        10.07        37.41
Control sd                                         0.00           1.80         0.44         5.08         0.43        5.76         3.37        13.51        26.12
Notes: Deposits (columns 1-2), business earnings (columns 7-8) and total expenditures (column 9) are measured over the past week and converted to daily
values. Labor supply in the main business (columns 3-4) is measured at the daily level in the past 7 days prior to the survey date. Farming is presented over a
week since this is how it was measured in the surveys and it is the only way to present the extensive margin. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the
dependent variable during the intake survey (where applicable), date of the survey fixed effects, assignment to high frequency group and are probability
weighted (see in the text for details). All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%.
Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.
1
  Experimental account is the mobile money or box, depending on the treatment group.


                                                                                 66
          Web Appendix C - Additional Pre-specified Analyses

Saving for Multiple Financial Needs: Evidence from Lockboxes and Mobile
                            Money in Malawi

             Shilpa Aggarwal, Valentina Brailovskaya and Jonathan Robinson




                                          67
Web Appendix Table C1. Heterogeneity by pre-specified characteristics (high frequency phone surveys)
                                              (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)              (6)
                                                                                1
                                           Deposits into experimental account                    Total Deposits
Interacted variable                             Taxed        Female      Hyperbolic        Taxed        Female      Hyperbolic

One lockbox                                    0.66***       0.77***      0.73***            0.07        -0.07        -0.86**
                                                (0.13)        (0.21)       (0.14)           (0.50)       (0.60)        (0.36)
Multiple lockboxes                             1.35***       1.64***      1.51***             0.64         0.85         0.73
                                                (0.28)        (0.34)       (0.32)           (0.55)       (0.65)        (0.55)
One mobile money account                       0.21**           0.24      0.34***             0.05        -0.71         -0.02
                                                (0.08)        (0.17)       (0.10)           (0.49)       (0.45)        (0.45)
Multiple mobile money accounts                 0.36***          0.20      0.24**             -0.25      -1.16**       -0.91**
                                                (0.11)        (0.19)       (0.10)           (0.36)       (0.54)        (0.35)
X                                                0.01          -0.23        -0.09            -0.12        -0.81       -1.05**
                                                (0.09)        (0.15)       (0.12)           (0.49)       (0.51)        (0.41)
One lockbox * X                                  0.21         -0.22         0.09            -0.88         -0.18       2.57**
                                                (0.28)        (0.27)       (0.34)           (0.74)       (0.70)        (1.18)
Multiple lockboxes * X                           0.64         -0.31         0.38            0.85          0.00          0.6
                                                (0.61)        (0.47)       (0.66)           (1.03)       (0.77)        (1.01)
One mobile money account * X                     0.34*        -0.03         -0.02           0.46         1.60**         0.66
                                                (0.19)        (0.22)       (0.19)           (0.76)       (0.71)        (0.63)
Multiple mobile money accounts * X               -0.18         0.08         0.34            -0.82        1.59**       1.93**
                                                (0.21)        (0.25)       (0.28)           (0.75)       (0.69)        (0.82)
p-values
 Joint significance of accounts for X = 0      0.001***     0.001***      0.001***          0.54        0.034**      0.001***
  Joint significance of interaction terms            0.24        0.78          0.82            0.26        0.029**       0.063*
Observations                                        4544         4502         4544             4544         4502          4544
Number of businesses                                 391          388          391              391          388           391
Control Mean for X = 0                               0.00        0.00          0.00            2.56          2.32         2.47
Control SD                                           0.00        0.00          0.00            4.63          2.49         4.31
Notes: Each column is a separate regression of the outcome on the treatments, the given variable, and the interactions between
the treatments and variable. The coefficient labeled as "X" is the variable, and the interactions "account * X" are the
interactions. The variable "taxed" is equal to 1 if the respondent gave money at baseline but didn't receive. Deposits are
measured over the past week and converted to daily values. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent
variable during the intake survey (where applicable), assignment to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in
the text for details). Date fixed effects are included.
Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%
respectively.
1
  Experimental account is the mobile money or box, depending on the treatment group.




                                                               68
Web Appendix Table C2. Heterogeneity by pre-specified characteristics (monitoring surveys)
                                              (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)               (5)           (6)
                                                                                    1
                                               Deposits into experimental account                    Total Deposits
Interacted variable                             Taxed         Female    Hyperbolic         Taxed        Female        Hyperbolic

One lockbox                                    0.54***       0.73***      0.66***           -0.14         -0.03         -0.02
                                                (0.06)        (0.10)       (0.08)           (0.25)       (0.27)         (0.26)
Multiple lockboxes                             0.86***       1.03***      0.93***            0.49          0.53           0.36
                                                (0.11)        (0.13)       (0.10)           (0.33)       (0.35)         (0.29)
One mobile money account                       0.33***       0.30***      0.24***           0.55*          0.27            0.3
                                                (0.06)        (0.07)       (0.04)           (0.31)       (0.28)         (0.28)
Multiple mobile money accounts                 0.19***       0.22***      0.21***            0.05         -0.30          -0.01
                                                (0.05)        (0.08)       (0.05)           (0.27)       (0.29)         (0.25)
X                                                -0.04         0.00           0              0.08        -0.55*          -0.39
                                                (0.04)        (0.06)       (0.05)           (0.31)       (0.29)         (0.29)
One lockbox * X                                  0.28*        -0.18        -0.19*           0.57          0.52          0.19
                                                (0.15)        (0.13)       (0.12)           (0.49)       (0.38)         (0.41)
Multiple lockboxes * X                           0.19         -0.19         -0.03           0.07          0.19          0.66
                                                (0.20)        (0.17)       (0.23)           (0.55)       (0.47)         (0.72)
One mobile money account * X                    -0.14*        -0.04          0.1            -0.17         0.44          0.82*
                                                (0.08)        (0.09)       (0.11)           (0.48)       (0.39)         (0.49)
Multiple mobile money accounts * X               0.07          0.01         -0.06           -0.17        0.87**         -0.37
                                                (0.10)        (0.10)       (0.13)           (0.46)       (0.40)         (0.43)
p-values
 Joint significance of accounts for X = 0      0.001***     0.001***      0.001***         0.031**        0.18          0.40
  Joint significance of interaction terms          0.022**       0.60          0.45            0.58          0.33        0.069*
Observations                                        1323         1314         1323             1323         1314          1323
Number of businesses                                 723          718          723              723          718           723
Control Mean for X = 0                               0.00        0.00          0.00            1.53          1.62         1.63
Control SD                                           0.00        0.00          0.00            1.91          1.62         1.89
Notes: Each column is a separate regression of the outcome on the treatments, the given variable, and the interactions between
the treatments and variable. The coefficient labeled as "X" is the variable, and the interactions "account * X" are the
interactions. The variable "taxed" is equal to 1 if the respondent gave money at baseline but didn't receive. Deposits are
measured over the past week and converted to daily values. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent
variable during the intake survey (where applicable), assignment to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in
the text for details). Survey date fixed effects are included.
Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%
respectively.
1
  Experimental account is the mobile money or box, depending on the treatment group.




                                                               69
Web Appendix Table C3. Effects of random payouts
                                                      (1)               (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)             (6)       (7)         (8)           (9)
                                                            Savings                              Labor supply                        Business outcomes
                                                 Deposits into                     Main business                  Farming                                  Total
                                                                       Total
                                                 experimental                     =1 if                     =1 if                    Profits   Revenues expenditures
                                                           1          Deposits               Hours                     Hours
                                                   account                       worked                    farmed
Received a random payment last period                    -              -0.72      0.02       0.01           0.01        0.06         0.60       3.56**        -0.65
                                                         -             (0.74)    (0.01)      (0.15)        (0.01)      (0.08)        (0.50)      (1.64)       (0.64)
1 Box * Received a random payment                   -1.47**             0.50       0.02       0.46*         -0.03       -0.11         1.10        3.28         -0.01
                                                     (0.75)            (1.50)    (0.02)      (0.24)        (0.02)      (0.10)        (0.71)      (2.49)       (1.43)
Multiple Box * Received a random payment               0.18             2.15       0.05       0.54*         -0.01        0.01         0.63        3.70          0.55
                                                     (0.68)            (1.39)    (0.03)      (0.29)        (0.02)      (0.12)        (1.07)      (3.70)       (1.12)
1 MM * Received a random payment                       0.35             2.27      -0.02      -0.48*         0.03       0.38*          1.00        4.70*       -0.31
                                                     (0.40)            (1.54)    (0.03)      (0.27)        (0.03)      (0.21)        (0.68)      (2.61)       (1.13)
Multiple MM * Received a random payment               -0.46             3.40     0.08**      0.93**         0.02        0.21          0.53        2.41        -0.49
                                                     (0.54)            (2.85)    (0.03)      (0.46)        (0.02)      (0.14)        (0.87)      (3.33)       (1.33)
p-values
  Joint significance all account interactions          0.18           0.22        0.039** 0.011**            0.22        0.20           0.42       0.25         0.97
Observations                                           3808            3808        30460       30459         3806         3806           3854       3862         3808
Number of businesses                                    384             384          392         392          383          383            385        385          384
Control Mean                                           0.00           14.69         0.81        8.14         0.03        0.12           21.87      75.77        25.94
Control SD                                             0.00           17.42         0.40        4.71         0.18         0.78          16.66      80.75        18.81
Notes: Regressions include individual fixed effects. Deposits (columns 1-2), business earnings (columns 7-8) and total expenditures (column 9) are measured over
the past week and converted to daily values. Labor supply in the main business (columns 3-4) is measured at the daily level in the past 7 days prior to the survey date.
Farming is presented over a week since this is how it was measured in the surveys and it is the only way to present the extensive margin. All regressions control for
individual fixed effects, strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey (where applicable), date fixed effects, assignment to high frequency
group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details).
Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.
1
  Experimental account is the mobile money or box, depending on the treatment group.




                                                                                   70
