ENDOGENOUS EDUCATION AND LONG-RUN FACTOR
                  SHARES
             Gene M. Grossman
              Elhanan Helpman
               Ezra Oberfield
              Thomas Sampson
           WORKING PAPER 27031
                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            ENDOGENOUS EDUCATION AND LONG-RUN FACTOR SHARES

                                     Gene M. Grossman
                                     Elhanan Helpman
                                       Ezra Oberfield
                                     Thomas Sampson

                                     Working Paper 27031
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27031


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2020




This paper evolved from our earlier working paper, "The Productivity Slowdown and the
Declining Labor Share: A Neoclassical Exploration" (NBER WP 23853), although the focus of
the paper has changed substantially. We are grateful to Ben Bridgman, Andrew Glover, Chad
Jones, Jacob Short, Gianluca Violante, and Ariel Weinberger for discussions and suggestions on
the earlier paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Gene M. Grossman, Elhanan Helpman, Ezra Oberfield, and Thomas Sampson. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Endogenous Education and Long-Run Factor Shares
Gene M. Grossman, Elhanan Helpman, Ezra Oberfield, and Thomas Sampson
NBER Working Paper No. 27031
April 2020
JEL No. E25

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the determinants of factor shares in a neoclassical environment with capital- skill
complementarity and endogenous education. When more physical capital raises the marginal
product of skills relative to that of raw labor, an increase in a broad measure of embodied human
capital raises the capital share in national income for any given rental rate. When education is
chosen optimally, a dynamic equilibrium is characterized by an inverse relationship between the
level of human capital and both the rental rate on capital and the difference between the interest
rate and the growth rate of wages. As a consequence, estimates of the elasticity of substitution
that fail to account for levels of human capital will be biased upward. We develop a model with
overlapping generations, ongoing increases in educational attainment, and technology-driven
neoclassical growth, and show that for a class of production functions with capital-skill
complementarity, a balanced growth path exists and is characterized by an inverse relationship
between the rates of capital- and labor-augmenting technological progress and the capital share in
national income.

Gene M. Grossman                                Ezra Oberfield
International Economics Section                 Department of Economics
Department of Economics                         Princeton University
Princeton University                            Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544                             Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER                                        and NBER
grossman@princeton.edu                          edo@princeton.edu

Elhanan Helpman                                 Thomas Sampson
Department of Economics                         Centre for Economic Performance
Harvard University                              London School of Economics
1875 Cambridge Street                           Houghton Street
Cambridge, MA 02138                             London, WC2A 2AE
and NBER                                        United Kingdom
ehelpman@harvard.edu                            t.a.sampson@lse.ac.uk
1     Introduction

Ever since John Maynard Keynes (1939, p.48) famously touted the stability of the capital and

labor shares in national income as "one of the most surprising, yet best-established, facts in the

whole range of economic statistics,"growth theorists have been fascinated by the determinants

of long-run factor shares and the reasons for their stability. Kaldor (1961) made the constancy

of factor shares one of his six `
                                stylized' facts of economic growth and many economists have

observed the continued stability of these shares well beyond the time of his writing. But, in

recent years, the labor share declined precipitously, as has been documented and discussed by

Elsby et al. (2013), Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014), and many others. Now, the factor

shares may well have stabilized again, with workers receiving a new and smaller slice of the

economic pie.1 These events have revived interest among growth economists in the determinants

of the functional distribution of income.

    If income shares are stable for long periods in the face of factor accumulation and (biased)

technical progress, some equilibrating forces must be at work. A unitary aggregate elasticity

of substitution between capital and labor could be one such force, because in a Cobb-Douglas

world, any persistent divergence between the growth rates of the labor force and the capital

stock would be o¤set by opposing trends in factor returns. But a large body of empirical research

suggests that the elasticity of substitution is not equal to one.2 In Grossman et. al (2017a),

we suggested another possible equilibrating force: the endogenous response of education to a

rise in the return to schooling could stabilize factor shares in the face of ongoing declines in the

relative price of capital goods if the aggregate technology exhibits complementarity between

capital and skills.3
   1
     See, for example, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Nonfarm Business Sector: Labor Share [PRS85006173],
retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis; https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/PRS85006173, March
8, 2020.
   2
     See, for exmaple, Chirinko (2008, p.671), who surveyed many studies that sought to measure this elasticity
and concluded that "the weight of the evidence usggests a value of [the elasticity of substitution] in the range of
0.4 to 0.6." In research conducted after that survey was written, Karabarbounis and Neimann (2014) estimate
an elasticity of substitution substantially greater than one, while Chirinko et. al (2011), Ober...eld and Raval
(2019), Chirinko and Mallick (2014) and Herrendor¤ et. al (2015) ...nd elasticities well below 1.
   3
     Acemoglu (2003) proposes yet another equilibrating force: in his setting in which ...rms can choose between
capital-augmenting and labor-augmenting technological improvements, they tend toward only the latter in the
long run. Factor shares evolve during a transition phase with capital-augmenting progress, but stabilize in the


                                                        1
    Our previous paper focused on the requirements for balanced growth. We explored a model

with eeting lifespans and were able to derive necessary and su¢ cient conditions for constant

steady-state factor shares in the presence of ongoing capital-augmenting technological progress

and a non-unitary aggregate elasticity of substitution between capital and labor. In particular,

we identi...ed a class of aggregate production functions characterized by capital-skill comple-

mentarity that deliver balanced growth. However, our model could not speak to changes in

the steady-state factor shares, because our convenient assumption of eeting lives severed the

link between these shares and the parameters of the growth process. Rather, changes in long-

run factor shares could only be explained by once-and-for-all changes in the static production

technology.

    In this paper, we allow for longer lives, which renders investment in education an intertem-

poral and forward-looking decision. In the body of our text, we focus on a model in which

all individuals accumulate human capital by spending time in school. But our results are not

limited to this model of educational attainment; in the appendix we show that similar results

obtain in a model of discrete occupational choice with endogenous fractions of the population

opting to be skilled or unskilled workers.

    We begin in Section 2 by examining the link between equilibrium factor shares, levels of

human capital, and the rental rate on capital in a competitive economy with an aggregate

production function characterized by capital-skill complementarity. In such a setting, a greater

level of human capital goes hand in hand with a greater capital share, whereas an inverse rela-

tionship exists between the rental rate on capital and the capital share whenever the elasticity

of substitution between capital and raw labor falls short of one. In Section 3, we introduce

schooling as an intertemporal choice for overlapping generations of the population. In our set-

ting of "perpetual youth" with a constant hazard rate of death, it is optimal for members of

each new generation to attend school full-time until they achieve a (time-varying) target level

of human capital, whereupon they enter the work force but continue their schooling part-time

to keep pace with the growing human-capital threshold. When capital and skills are comple-
steady state due to the evolving form of technical change.



                                                       2
mentary, there is an inverse equilibrium relationship between the education target and both

the rental rate on capital and the di¤erence between the interest rate and the growth rate of

wages. Taken together, the results in Sections 2 and 3 imply that failing to control for variation

in human capital will lead to upward bias in estimates of the elasticity of substitution between

capital and labor in an economy with capital-skill complementarity.

    Finally, in Section 4, we close the model and study neoclassical growth driven by exogenous

capital-augmenting and labor-augmenting technological progress. The dynamic equilibrium

features ongoing accumulation of physical and human capital. We establish the existence of a

unique balanced growth path when skills are complementary to capital and human capital enters

the aggregate production function in a particular way. Along the balanced growth path, the

downward pressure on the capital share due to accumulation of better and cheaper machinery is

o¤set by upward pressure from investments in skills that are complementary to those machines.

In the long run, the target level of human capital rises with the di¤erence between growth rate

of wages (which makes human capital more valuable) and the real interest rate (which makes

workers more impatient). An acceleration of technological progress-- be it capital augmenting

or labor augmenting-- raises both the interest rate and the growth rates of income and wages,

but the former by more than the latter when the intertemporal elasticity of substitution exceeds

one. So, faster growth means fewer years of full-time schooling for each generation (conditional

on the e¤ective capital-to-labor ratio), and thus a lower capital share and a higher labor share.

Conversely, a productivity slowdown redistributes national income from labor to capital in the

long run.



2    Human Capital and Factor Shares

In this section, we examine the relationship between human capital and the functional dis-

tribution of income in a general, neoclassical production environment. To this end, we write

Y = F (K; L; h), where Y is aggregate output, K and L are physical inputs of capital and labor,

and h is some measure of the human capital embodied in that labor. This formulation admits



                                                3
various interpretations for h. For example, h might measure the education achieved by the

representative worker, as in Grossman et al. (2017a). Or, h might represent the fraction of the

labor force that is "skilled", with the remaining fraction being "unskilled". Then, we could write

a three-factor production function G (K; S; U ) as in Krusell et al. (2000), with S and U denoting

inputs of skilled and unskilled labor, respectively, so that F (K; L; h)            G (K; hL; (1     h) L).

       We focus on technologies that have constant returns to scale in the physical inputs, K and

L, and that feature capital-skill complementarity. We de...ne capital-skill complementarity in

terms of the e¤ect of capital accumulation on the marginal product of human capital relative

to that of raw labor and invoke

Assumption 1 F (K; L; h) is homogeneous of degree one in K and L and exhibits capital-skill

complementarity; i.e., '       d log (Fh =FL ) =d log K > 0 for all h, L, and K .

       In the most common treatment of human capital, output is taken to be a function of

aggregate capital and "e¢ ciency labor,"where the latter is de...ned as the product of raw labor

and a productivity term reecting average human capital per worker; see, for example, Uzawa

(1965) and Lucas (1988). In that speci...cation, raw labor and skill are perfect substitutes and

thus capital accumulation impacts the returns to both similarly. But, following Griliches (1969),

Krusell et al. (2000) have emphasized the empirical relevance of capital-skill complementarity

and the role it has played in determining the evolution of factor rewards. Using their three-

factor production function, G (K; S; U ), they associated capital-skill complementarity with a

technology in which capital substitutes more closely for unskilled labor than for skilled labor.

Our de...nition coincides with theirs when G ( ) takes a nested-CES form (as they assume),4 while

extending the de...nition to a broader range of production technologies and interpretations of

human capital.5

       Now suppose that the economy is competitive and capital is hired up to the point where its

marginal product is equal to the rental rate R, or FK (K; L; h) = R. De...ne                  RK=Y as the
   4
    See the appendix for proof of this claim.
   5
    Moreover, with constant returns to scale, we can allow F ( ) to represent the output of a "production unit"
that employs K units of capital and L units of labor with human capital h. Then, aggregate output is the sum of
outputs across all production units. In this manner, we can accomodate non-degenerate distributions of human
capital among the workers in the labor force.


                                                      4
capital share in national income (so that 1            is the labor share) and    (FK FL ) = (F FKL )

as the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor for a ...xed level of human capital, h.

Then, using the de...nitions of ', , and      and the ...rst-order condition, FK (K; L; h) = R, it is

straightforward to show that6

                                                               Fh
                                   d = (1      ) d ln R + '       dh.                            (1)
                                                               F

        Equation (1) relates changes in the capital share to changes in the rental rate and changes

in the measure of human capital. In the absence of capital-skill complementarity (i.e., if ' = 0)

the second term drops out and the capital share rises when the rental rate falls if and only if

    > 1. The positive relationship between changes in the labor share and changes in the rental

rate (proxied by changes in the relative price of investment) in cross-country data provides the

basis for Karabarbounis and Neiman's (2014) estimation of an elasticity of substitution between

capital and labor in excess of one and their attribution of approximately half of the fall in the

global labor share in recent years to the fall in the relative price of investment goods since

1975. However, in addition to the usual concerns about the possible endogeneity of R, there is

the additional issue that their estimation fails to control for growth in educational attainment,

which was widespread in their sample of countries. According to (1), a failure to control for dh

will generate an upward bias in estimates of       in the presence of capital-skill complementarity

whenever R and h are negatively correlated. As we shall see, such a negative correlation is a

natural outcome in models of optimal human capital accumulation.



3        Determinants of Optimal Education

In Grossman et al. (2017a) we developed a model of growth with endogenous education and

capital-skill complementarity. We were interested there in the necessary and su¢ cient conditions

for balanced growth, so we invoked a useful shortcut: we assumed that successive generations

of workers survive only for an instant, during which they divide their eeting time between
    6
        See the appendix.



                                                   5
work and education to maximize instantaneous income. This shortcut was helpful, because it

allowed us to avoid thorny aggregation issues; we know of no overlapping generations models in

which educational attainment increases over time in a steady state. Unfortunately, by removing

intertemporal considerations from the schooling problem, we severed all links between factor

shares and the growth process, because without forward-looking investment, the parameters of

the static production function fully determine the functional distribution of income.

       To study the determinants of long-run factor shares, we require a setting with meaningful,

intertemporal tradeo¤s. To this end, we wed a model of overlapping generations à la Yaari

(1965) and Blanchard (1985) with a model of human capital investment à la Ben Porath (1967).

Cohorts born at every instant exist in a state of "perpetual youth." New generations are born

continuously. While alive, individuals allocate their limited time to schooling and work. The

cumulation of these choices determines each individual's human capital and thus the supply of

labor and skills in the aggregate work force.7

       Our economy is populated by a unit mass of identical family dynasties.8 The representative

dynasty comprises a continuum of individuals of mass Nt at time t. Each living individual

generates a new member of her dynasty with a constant, instantaneous probability                        dt in a

period of length dt and faces a constant instantaneous risk of demise dt in that same period,

with      > 0;     0. With these constant hazard rates of birth and death, the size of a dynasty

at time t is given by

                                            Nt = e(      )(t t0 )
                                                                    Nt0 .

       Each newborn enters the world devoid of any human capital. An individual is endowed at

each instant with a unit of time that she can divide arbitrarily between working and learning.

Work yields a wage at time t that reects the extant technology and the size of the aggregate

capital stock, as well as the individual's accumulated human capital, ht . Learning occurs at

full-time school or in continuing education. An individual who devotes a fraction `t of her time
   7
     The model we develop in the main text focuses soley on educational attainment. But in the appendix we
show that we can achieve similar results in a model of occupational choice.
   8
     We assume here that families maximize dynastic utility, including the discounted well-being of unborn gener-
ations. The qualitative results would be much the same in a Yaari (1965) economy with (negative) life insurance
and no bequests, as developed in Blanchard and Fischer (1989, ch.3).


                                                       6
to work and the remaining fraction 1           `t to education accumulates human capital according to


                                                    _t = 1
                                                    h              `t .                                             (2)


The time constraint implies `t 2 [0; 1].

      The representative family maximizes dynastic utility,

                                          Z    1
                                                         (t t0 )         c1
                                                                          t       1
                                  Ut0 =             e              Nt                 dt ,
                                              t0                           1

subject to an intertemporal budget constraint, where ct is per capita consumption by family

members at time t,        is the inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, and                     is the

subjective discount rate. As usual, the Euler equation implies

                                                    c
                                                    _t         t
                                                       =                  ,                                         (3)
                                                    ct

where    t   is the real interest rate in terms of consumption goods at time t. To limit the number

of cases and to conform with widespread empirical evidence, we assume that                              > 1.9

      Considering that there is a continuum of members in every dynasty and that families max-

imize dynastic utility, each individual chooses the path of her time allocation f`t g to maximize

the expected present value of earnings. For an individual born at time , the problem is

                                          Z   1         Rt
                                                             ( z + )dz
                                   max             e                     `t wt (ht ) dt


                  _t = 1
subject to h = 0, h             `t , and 0         `t        1; where wt (ht ) is the wage schedule that relates

compensation at time t to the worker's human capital. Let                         t   be the costate variable associated

with human-capital accumulation. Then the ...rst-order conditions imply
  9
    See, for example, Hall (1988), Campbell (2003) and Yogo (2004) for estimates using macro data, and At-
tanasio and Weber (1993) and Vissing and Jorgenson (2002) for estimates using micro data.




                                                              7
                                                      9        8
                                     wt (ht ) <       >
                                                      >        >
                                                               >      `t = 0
                                                  t   >
                                                      >        >
                                                               >
                                                      =        <
                                     wt (ht ) =   t
                                                          )          `t 2 [0; 1]                          (4)
                                                      >
                                                      >        >
                                                               >
                                                      >
                                                      >        >
                                                               >
                                     wt (ht ) >       ;        :      `t = 1
                                                  t

and
                                                                   0
                                        _t = ( t + )       t   `t wt (ht ) .                              (5)

       In this setting, the optimal schooling problem typically has a simple, bang-bang solution.10

Members of each new cohort engage in full-time schooling beginning at birth, until they accu-

mulate human capital equal to a time-varying threshold, ht . Then, the new "graduates" enter

the labor force, but they continue on with their education to maintain their human capital

equal to the (growing) threshold. This education strategy implies that all workers in the labor

force share a common level of human capital ht = ht ; irrespective of their birth dates.

       The human capital threshold ht equals the education level at which an individual is indi¤er-

ent between school and work. The bene...t of additional schooling is the present value of human

capital,     t,   while the instantaneous cost is the foregone wage, wt . Substituting       t   = wt (ht ) in

(5) and rearranging terms gives

                                                                    0 (h )
                                                                   wt   t
                                         t   +        gwjht ;t =            ,                             (6)
                                                                   wt (ht )

where gwjh;t is the growth rate of wages (for a given level of human capital, h) at time t. Then,

as we show formally in the appendix, for any aggregate production function F ( ) that satis...es

Assumption 1 and that generates an interior choice of ht , (6) gives an inverse relationship

between human capital and both the rental rate on capital and the di¤erence between the

interest rate and the growth rate of wages. The former observation underlies our claim at

the end of Section 2 that optimal human capital accumulation implies a negative correlation

between h and R when capital and skill are complementary. Intuitively, when a rise in the rental
                                                                                 0 (h ) =w (h ).
rate reduces demand for capital, it also reduces the marginal returns to skill, wt   t    t  t
  10
   In the appendix, we show that the bang-bang solution is optimal under the technical conditions detailed in
Assumption A1.


                                                          8
So, the demand for education also falls. Meanwhile, the latter observation-- which does not

require capital-skill complementarity-- shows that the growth process also inuences human

capital accumulation inasmuch as a high interest rate discourages investment while a high rate

of wage growth makes additional schooling more attractive.



4    Optimal Education and Balanced Growth

To study the determinants of long-run factor shares, we need to close the model. Moreover, we

prefer to do so in a way that preserves balanced growth, both for reasons of tractability and

because factor shares were stable for decades after WWII and, after a substantial realignment

for ...fteen or twenty years, seem to have stabilized once again.

    The task of generating a balanced growth path might seem daunting. First, the presence

of ongoing capital-augmenting technical progress is inconsistent with constant factor shares in

a standard neoclassical setting with a non-unitary elasticity of substitution between capital

and labor; see Uzawa (1961). Yet, Gordon (1990), Greenwood et. al (1997) and others have

documented a signi...cant decline in the relative price of capital, which is suggestive of capital-

augmenting progress. Second, a falling rate of return on capital goes hand in hand with ongoing

human-capital accumulation, which means that di¤erent cohorts will target di¤erent levels of

education before entering the labor force. Aggregation becomes an immediate technical concern.

Third, growing educational attainment means falling labor force participation and so the growth

rate of labor supply need not be constant. Yet, capital accumulates at a constant rate along

a balanced growth path (BGP). Despite these hurdles, we are able to close our model in a

way that admits balanced growth by building upon the insights we gained in Grossman et.al

(2017a). By combining the technology introduced in our earlier paper with the Yaari-Blanchard

model of overlapping-generations and the Ben Porath (1967) model of educational investment,

we are able to solve for a BGP and to study its properties.

    To generate long-run growth, we introduce capital and labor-augmenting technology into

the one-good model of Section 2. A ...rm that hires K units of capital and L units of labor with



                                                9
human capital h produces

                                            Yt = F (At K; Bt L; h)                                              (7)

units of output at time t, where At now represents the state of disembodied, capital-augmenting

technology and Bt the state of labor-augmenting technology.11 We retain Assumption 1 from

Section 2 , which imposes capital-skill complementarity and constant returns to scale; the latter

allows us to use (7) also for the aggregate production function. Next we borrow from Grossman

et al. (2017a) the assumption that F ( ) falls within a particular class of production functions,

namely:

                                                                           ~ e
Assumption 2 The production function can be written as F (At K; Bt L; h) = F                        ah A         bh
                                                                                                           t K; e Bt L   ,

with a > 0; b >         0; where


 (i) f (k )     ~ (k; 1) is strictly increasing, twice di¤ erentiable, and strictly concave for all k ;
                F

 (ii) limk!0 kf 0 (k ) =f (k ) < b= (a + b).


       As we discussed in our earlier paper, this class of production functions makes schooling akin

to capital-using (or labor-saving) technical progress; i.e., an increase in human capital raises

the demand for capital relative to that for raw labor at the initial factor prices. Together with

Assumption 1 that stipulates capital-skill complementarity, the restriction on the technology

ensures       < 1; which is in keeping with the ...ndings of Ober...eld and Raval (2019), who estimate

  from a factor-share equation after controlling for workers' human capital. Assumption 2.ii

ensures that the marginal product of human capital is positive for all K; L; and h.12

       Output can be used for consumption or investment. A unit of output produces one unit of

the consumption good or qt units of the investment good at time t, where growth in qt captures
  11
      Recall from Section 3 that all workers in the labor force have the same human capital, so we do not need to
specify the output by heterogeneous labor. If workers were to di¤er in skills, we could subdivide each ...rm into
units with homogeneous labor and sum the output across these units; see footnote 5.
   12
      An alternative but formally equivalent way to express the class of production functions speci...ed by Assump-
tion 2 is
                                F (At K; Bt L; h) = (Bt L)1 F At K; ebh= Bt L       ,
with = b= (a + b). This formulation expresses output as a Cobb-Douglas function of raw labor and a composite
input produced by capital and a measure of worker skills.


                                                        10
investment-speci...c technological change, as in Greenwood et al. (1997). Thus,


                                                          Yt = Ct + It =qt


and
                                                         _ t = It
                                                         K                Kt ,

where Ct and Kt are aggregate consumption and the aggregate capital stock, respectively, It is

gross investment, and                is the constant rate of capital depreciation.

   Technology evolves exogenously in our model. Let                                      L
                                                                                               _
                                                                                             = B=B be the constant rate of
                                               _
labor-augmenting technological progress, gA = A=A the constant rate of disembodied capital-

augmenting progress, and gq = q=q
                              _ the constant rate of embodied (or investment-speci...c)

technological progress. De...ne              K       gA + gq as the total rate of capital-augmenting technological

progress. We are interested in the relationship between these parameters that describe the

growth process and the long-run factor shares.


4.1    Characterizing a Balanced Growth Path

In order to solve for a balanced growth path, we impose some further parameter restrictions.


Assumption 3 The parameters of the economy satisfy


 (i) a >   K;

                                                                                                          b
                kf 0 (k)                             kf 0 (k)                    b           (    1)(   L+ a   K   )+   (   )
 (ii) limk!0     f (k )    >    1+    > limk!1        f (k )    , where              a                    a                     ;
                                                                                                               K


                            b
 (iii) (   1)       L   +       a    K   +       (         ) > 0.


Assumption 3 ensures the existence of a BGP with ...nite dynastic utility. It also generates

interior choices for continuing education among those that have already joined the labor force.

   A competitive ...rm takes the rental rate as given. A ...rm that hires a unit of labor bearing

human capital h at time t will combine that labor with                                   t (h)   units of physical capital, where



                                                                   11
 t (h)   is given implicitly by

                                                h                                 i
                                  e   ah      ~K e
                                           At F      ah
                                                          At   t (h) ; e
                                                                           bh
                                                                                Bt = Rt .             (8)


The worker is paid her marginal product, which, with constant returns to scale, is the di¤erence

between revenue and capital costs, or


                                           ~()
                                  wt (h) = F              e    ah
                                                                    At   t (h) FK
                                                                                  ~ ( ).              (9)


Individuals use the wage schedule wt (h), together with their rational expectations of the evo-

lution of wages and the interest rate to make their optimal schooling decisions, summarized in

(6).

   Let us de...ne a BGP as a dynamic equilibrium with constant rates of growth of output,

consumption, and capital, and with income shares for capital and labor that are constant and

strictly positive. A constant growth rate of consumption implies a constant interest rate, by

the Euler equation (3). We conjecture a constant division of time between work and education,

`, for those that have completed full-time school and entered the workforce. We prove in the

appendix the following lemma that describes important features of the balanced growth path:


Lemma 1 Suppose gq ; gA and            L    are constants and Assumptions1, 2 and 3 are satis...ed. Then

there exists a unique BGP characterized by


                                                                    K
                                                     `=1                                             (10)
                                                                    a

and
                                              e aht At Kt
                                       zt                 = z for all t:                             (11)
                                               ebht Bt Lt

Here, zt adjusts the e¤ective capital-labor ratio at time t (i.e., At Kt =Bt Lt ) for the prevailing level

of human capital of those in the workforce, taking into account the di¤erent complementarity

between human capital and each of the primary factors of production. We henceforth refer to


                                                           12
                      Figure 1: Human Capital Accumulation by Birth Cohort



zt as the schooling-adjusted e¤ ective capital-to-labor ratio.

   Equation (10) implies that the human capital threshold increases linearly with time,


                                              _ =
                                              h        K
                                                           .                                      (12)
                                                t
                                                       a

Then the optimal schooling strategies can be depicted as in Figure 1. Here, the lines with unit

slope represent the human capital accumulation by each cohort whilst its members remain full-

time students. Once a cohort's human capital reaches ht , the members devote a fraction           K =a

of their time to continuing education, just like all others that have completed their full-time

schooling.

   Let s denote the years in full-time school (or "educational attainment") for the cohort born

at time . This is the time it takes for them to catch up with the human capital threshold,

i.e., s = h   +s   . But, with the threshold rising according to (12), h   +s   = h +s   K =a.   Thus,

educational attainment also increases linearly with time,


                                                       K
                                            s
                                            _ =                .                                  (13)
                                                  a        K




                                                  13
Recalling that a >       K   by Assumption 3.i, educational attainment rises in the steady state if

and only if the rate of capital-augmenting technical progress is strictly positive.

       Lemma 1 states that the schooling-adjusted e¤ective capital-labor ratio converges to a con-

stant value, z , in the long run.13 This is the key to balanced growth in the presence of

capital-augmenting technological progress and an elasticity of substitution between capital and

labor less than one. As capital accumulates and becomes more productive, the capital share in

national income would tend to fall when            < 1. However, the capital-skill complementarity im-

plies an increased return to schooling. The extra schooling is capital-using, which puts upward

pressure on the capital share. For the class of production functions described in Assumption 2,

the o¤setting forces just balance, and the capital share remains constant.14

       Why then is it optimal for active workers to upgrade their human capital continuously so

as to keep zt constant? For an interior choice of ` 2 (0; 1), the indi¤erence condition (6) must

be satis...ed in the steady state, when       t   and gwjht ;t are constants. Meanwhile, Assumption 2

implies
                                       0 (h )
                                      wt                       [zt (ht )]
                                           t
                                               =b      a                    ,                             (14)
                                      wt (ht )             1     [zt (ht )]

where (zt )       zt f 0 (zt ) =f (zt ) is the capital share. Notice that the capital share depends only on

the schooling-adjusted e¤ective capital-to-labor ratio. So, a choice of ht that keeps zt constant
            0 (h ) =w (h ) constant, which is consistent with the steady-state requirements of
also keeps wt   t    t  t

(6).15

       Using the optimal allocation of time to school and work, we can now calculate the (constant)

growth rates of the labor force, wages, and output per capita, along with the constant interest

rate and capital share. The aggregate labor force at time t is the product of the fraction of time

that the typical worker devotes to gainful employment and the mass of the surviving population

that has completed its phase of full-time schooling. The measure of individuals that were born
  13
      In our working paper with a di¤erent title and focus, Grossman et al. (2017b), we used numerical methods
to suggest the presumed stability of the balanced growth path.
  14
      Put di¤erently, (12) implies that e aht At qt is constant along the balanced growth path. So, the induced
investment in human capital is just what is needed to o¤set the exogenous improvement in capital productivity.
  15
       Note that for (14) to be satis...ed with a constant value of zt , we need a su¢ ciently large range for
zf 0 (z ) =f (z ). We show in the appendix that Assumption 3.ii guarantees the existence of a solution to (14).



                                                      14
at     and that are still alive at time t is N e            (t       )    = Nt e            (       )(t   )e   (t   )   = Nt e   (t   ).


All those who were born at or before t            ht have already entered the labor force. Therefore,

                                                        Z       t ht
                                                    K                                  (t       )
                                 Lt =       1                                 Nt e                  d
                                                    a           1
                                                    K                    ht
                                      =     1           Nt e                  .                                                   (15)
                                                    a

It follows from (15) that labor-force participation, Lt =Nt , changes at the rate gL                                             gN =

      K =a   < 0. Declining labor-force participation mirrors the increasing educational attainment,

which requires a longer initial stay in school for each successive cohort.

      Next we derive the growth rate of wages. Compensation grows thanks to ongoing techno-

logical progress, as well as ongoing investments in physical and human capital. Using (8) and

(9), we calculate that, along a BGP, the wage paid to each worker in the labor force (who has

growing human capital of ht ) increases at the rate16

                                                                  b
                                                gw =    L   +             K.
                                                                  a

Since factor shares are constant along the BGP, aggregate output is proportional to labor

income, so the growth rate of output per capita can be expressed as


                                           gy = gw + gL                       gN
                                                                 b
                                                =       L   +                     K.
                                                                      a
   16
      We substitute for the arguments of F  ~ ( ) and F~K ( ) using z = e (a+b)ht At t (ht ) =Bt and note that z
is constant along a balanced growth path. The no-arbitrage condition for capital accumulation implies that
Rt qt q _t =qt   = t , and thus, on a BGP with a constant interest rate and a constant rate of investment-speci...c
technical progress, R_ t =Rt = gq . Totally di¤erentiating (8) and (9) with z constant implies

                                                    gq = gA           _t
                                                                     ah

and
                                                 w
                                                 _t                _t,
                                                    =       L   + bh
                                                 wt
from which it follows that
                                                 w
                                                 _t              b
                                                    =   L   +            K.
                                                 wt              a




                                                        15
Combining this expression with Assumption 3.iii implies that the present value of utility is ...nite

along the BGP. Also, per capita consumption is proportional to per capita output, so (3) gives

the long-run interest rate as


                                               =        + gy
                                                                           b
                                               =        +        L    +                K       .                                (16)
                                                                                   a

     Finally, we come to the steady-state factor shares. In the steady state, (6) and (14) imply

                                       b                                      K
                               L   +       K   = +               1                     b       a
                                       a                                      a                    1

or
                                                            b+        L        ( + )
                                                        =                                  .                                    (17)
                                               1                  a            K

Next we substitute for the long-run interest rate, using (16), which gives us a relationship

between the long-run capital share and the primitive parameters of the economy, namely

                                                                               b
                                       b            (       1)       L    +        a   K               +   +
                                   =                                                                           .                (18)
                       1                   a                                  a        K


     We summarize our characterization of the long-run equilibrium as follows:


Proposition 1 Suppose the aggregate production function obeys Assumptions 1 and 2, the

parameters satisfy Assumption 3 and gq , gA and                            L       are constant. Then there exists a unique

balanced growth path along which new cohorts are full-time students until their human capital

reaches a threshold ht that grows linearly with time. Once a cohort enters the labor force, its

members devote a constant fraction ` = 1                      K =a        of their time to work and the remaining time

to continuing education. Wages grow at constant rate                                   L   + (b=a)         K   and per capita income

grows at constant rate     L   + (b            )   K =a.    The long-run real interest rate is given by (16) and

the long-run factor shares are given by (18).




                                                                 16
4.2    Determinants of Long-Run Factor Shares

We are ready to discuss the determinants of the long-run distribution of national income. Let

us begin with (17), which expresses         as a function of        K   and   L,   taking the real interest

rate as given. If, for example, the aggregate economy comprises a continuum of small regional

economies or similar industries that face a common interest rate due to nationwide asset trade,

then (17) would describe the cross-sectional relationship between growth rates of output and

factor shares. From this equation, it is clear that          would be positively correlated with both

 K    and   L   in the cross section ; regions and industries with faster rates of capital or labor-

augmenting technological progress would have higher shares of their income paid to capital in

an economy with a uniform interest rate.

     But in a closed economy (or a global economy), the real interest rate is endogenous and

responds to changes in the growth process. Equation (18) informs us about the long-run rela-

tionship between factor shares and rates of technological progress. Recall our assumption that

  > 1, i.e., that the elasticity of intertemporal substitution is less than one. By di¤erentiating

the expression on the-right hand side of (18) and making use of Assumption 2.iii, which ensures

...nite dynastic utility, we establish our key result:


Proposition 2 When           > 1, an increase in   K    or   L   raises the long-run labor share, 1     .


In other words, an acceleration of technological progress-- no matter whether it is caused by

a speed-up in the pace of labor-augmenting technological progress, the pace of disembod-

ied capital-augmenting technological progress, or the pace of investment-speci...c technological

progress-- will shift the distribution of national income from capital to labor. Of course, a

productivity slowdown does just the opposite. Our model thus predicts a negative correlation

between the growth rate and the capital share across steady states.

     What accounts for this shift in factor shares? Note ...rst from (16) that, in response to an

exogenous shock to the growth process, the interest rate moves in the same direction as the

growth rate of per capita income. Moreover, with             > 1, the response of the former is greater

than that of the latter. Thus, an acceleration of technological progress that causes gy to rise

                                                   17
will cause    gy to rise as well. On a BGP, wages grow almost at the same rate as per capita

income, so      gwjh also rises. This term appears of course in the expression for the optimal

human capital threshold (6); whereas an increase in the growth rate of wages makes staying in

school more desirable, a rise in the interest rate makes extended schooling less palatable. In the

long run, the latter e¤ect dominates, so by a combination of (6) and (14), z eventually rises.

In other words, we ...nd that the long-run schooling-adjusted e¤ective capital-to-labor ratio rises

in response to an acceleration of technological progress, once proper adjustment is made for the

optimal response of targeted human capital and the greater complementarity of schooling with

physical capital than with raw labor. Finally, with an elasticity of substitution between capital

and labor of less than one, a rise in the schooling-adjusted e¤ective capital-labor ratio spells a

fall in the capital share and a corresponding rise in the labor share.

    Recent history has, however, witnessed not an acceleration in technological progress, but

rather a slowdown in productivity growth; see, for example, Gordon (2010, 2016) and Fernald

(2014). Our analysis suggests that a productivity slowdown will contribute to a redistribution

of income from labor to capital in a world of capital-skill complementarity with ongoing gains

in educational attainment. This could be another reason for the recent fall in the global labor

share, in addition to those mentioned by a plethora of other authors.



5    Concluding Remarks

We see three main contributions in this paper.

    First, we have shown that education a¤ects the division of national income between capital

and labor in the presence of capital-skill complementarity. When skills and capital are comple-

mentary, the accumulation of embodied human capital raises the marginal return to physical

capital and thus the share of income that accrues to any given stock of machinery and equip-

ment. Moreover, optimal investment in education induces a negative correlation between the

level of human capital and the return to physical capital in the presence of capital-skill com-

plementarity. In such circumstances, using time-series correlation between capital returns and



                                                18
capital shares will produce upwardly biased estimates of the elasticity of substitution between

capital and labor.

   Second, features of the growth process will a¤ect long run factor shares in the presence of

capital-skill complementarity, even if those shares are stable in a steady state. We have shown

that an increase in rates of technological progress will redistribute income from capital to labor

and, conversely, a productivity slowdown will boost the capital share. The e¤ects work through

the endogenous response of investments in schooling. We have made these points in a neoclas-

sical model of growth with competitive goods and factor markets and exogenous technological

progress. But similar mechanisms exist in models with imperfect competition and endogenous

growth. Many models of automation and robotization feature capital-skill complementarity,

as automated equipment and robots are operated by more-skilled workers while substituting

closely for less-skilled workers. Therefore, the spread of robots in the production process is

bound to a¤ect the distribution of income across skill groups.

   Third, we have developed a growth model that admits balanced growth and stable factor

shares, despite ongoing capital-augmenting technical progress, ongoing growth in educational

attainment, ongoing changes in labor force participation, and elasticities of substitution between

factors that di¤er from one. Moreover, we have done so in a setting with overlapping generations,

where the arrival of new cohorts introduces heterogeneity in schooling choices and labor force

participation that makes aggregation potentially complex. The combination of perpetual youth

à la Yaari (1965) and Blanchard (1985), human capital accumulation à la Ben Porath (1967)

and capital-skill complementarity à la Grossman et. al (2017a) solves the aggregation problem.

This purely technical contribution may prove useful in other contexts.




                                               19
References

 [1] Acemo¼
          glu, Daron, 2003. "Labor- and Capital-Augmenting Technical Change," Journal of

    the European Economic Association 1(1), 1-37.

 [2] Attanasio, Orazio and Weber, Guglielmo, 1993. "Consumption Growth, the Interest Rate

    and Aggregation," Review of Economic Studies 60(3), 631-49.

 [3] Ben Porath, Yoram, 1967. "The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of

    Earnings," Journal of Political Economy 75(4, Pt. I), 352-65.

 [4] Blanchard, Olivier, 1985. "Debt, De...cits, and Finite Horizons," Journal of Political Econ-

    omy 93(2), 223-47.

 [5] Blanchard, Olivier and Fischer, Stanley, 1989. Lectures on Macroeconomics, Cambridge:

    The MIT Press.

 [6] Campbell, John Y., 2003. "Consumption-Based Asset Pricing," ch. 13 in G.M. Constan-

    tanides, M. Harris and R.M. Stultz, eds., Handbook of the Economics of Finance, vol. 1B,

    Amsterdam: Elsevier.

 [7] Chirinko, Robert S., 2008. " : The Long and the Short of It," Journal of Macroeconomics

    30(2), 671-86.

 [8] Chirinko. Robert S. and Mallick, Debdulal, 2014. "The Substitution Elasticity, Factor

    Shares, Long-Run Growth, and the Low-Frequency Panel Model," CESifo Working Paper

    Series No. 4895, CESifo Group.

 [9] Chirinko, Robert S., Fazzari, Steven M., and Meyer, Andrew P., 2011. "A New Approach

    to Estimating Production Function Parameters: The Elusive Capital-Labor Substitution

    Elasticity," Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 29 (4), 587-594.

[10] Elsby, Michael W. L., Hobijn, Bart, and Sahin, Aysegul, 2013. "The Decline of the U.S.

    Labor Share," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 47(2), 1-63.


                                               20
[11] Fernald, John G., 2014. "Productivity and Potential Output Before, During, and After the

    Great Recession," Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2014-15.

[12] Gordon, Robert J., 1990. The Measurement of Durable Goods Prices, Chicago, IL: Univer-

    sity of Chicago Press.

[13] Gordon, Robert J., 2010. "Revisiting U.S. Productivity Growth over the Past Century

    with a View of the Future," NBER Working Paper No. 15834.

[14] Gordon, Robert J., 2016. The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of

    Living Since the Civil War, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

[15] Greenwood, Jeremy, Hercovitz, Zvi and Krusell, Per, 1997. "Long-Run Implications of

    Investment-Speci...c Technological Change," American Economic Review 87(3), 342-62.

[16] Griliches, Zvi, 1969. "Capital-Skill Complementarity," The Review of Economics and Sta-

    tistics 51(4), 465-68.

[17] Grossman, Gene M., Helpman, Elhanan, Ober...eld, Ezra and Sampson, Thomas A., 2017a.

    "Balanced Growth despite Uzawa," American Economic Review 107(4), 1293-1312.

[18] Grossman, Gene M., Helpman, Elhanan, Ober...eld, Ezra and Sampson, Thomas A., 2017b.

    "The Productivity Slowdown and the Declining Labor Share: A Neoclassical Exploration,"

    NBER Working Paper No. 23853.

[19] Hall, Robert E., 1988. "Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption," Journal of Political

    Economy 96(2), 339-57.

[20] Herrendorf, Berthold, Herrington, Christopher, and Ákos Valentinyi, 2015. "Sectoral Tech-

    nology and Structural Transformation," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics

    7(4), 104­33.

[21] Kaldor, Nicholas, 1961. "Capital Accumulation and Economic Growth," in F.A. Lutz and

    D.C. Hague, eds., The Theory of Capital: Proceedings of a Conference of the International

    Economic Association, London:Macmillan.

                                             21
[22] Keynes, John Maynard, 1939. "Relative Movements of Real Wages and Output,"Economic

    Journal 193(49), 34-51.

[23] Karabarbounis, Loukas and Neiman, Brent, 2014. "The Global Decline of the Labor Share,"

    Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(1), 61-103.

[24] Krusell, Per, Ohanian, Lee E., José-Victor Rios-Rull, and Violante, Giovanni L., 2000.

    "Capital-Skill Complementarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis," Economet-

    rica 68(5), 1029-63.

[25] Lucas, Robert E., Jr., 1988. "On the Mechanics of Economic Development," Journal of

    Monetary Economics 22(1), 3-47.

[26] Ober...eld, Ezra and Raval, Devesh, 2019. "Micro Data and Macro Technology," Mimeo.

[27] Uzawa, Hirofumi, 1961. "Neutral Inventions and the Stability of Growth Equilibrium,"

    Review of Economic Studies 28(2), 117-24.

[28] Uzawa, Hirofumi, 1965. "Optimal Technical Change in an Aggregate Model of Economic

    Growth," International Economic Review 6(1), 18-31.

[29] Vissing-Jørgensen, Annette, 2002. "Limited Asset Market Participation and the Elasticity

    of Intertemporal Substitution," Journal of Political Economy 110(4), 825-53.

[30] Yaari, Menachem, 1965. "Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the Con-

    sumer," Review of Economic Studies 32(2), 137-50.

[31] Yogo, Motohiro, 2004. "Estimating the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution When

    Instruments are Weak," Review of Economics and Statistics 86(3), 797-810.




                                             22
  Appendix for "Endogenous Education and Long-Run Factor
                         Shares"
                                                   by

   Gene M. Grossman, Elhanan Helpman, Ezra Ober...eld and Thomas
                                                Sampson



Proofs from Section 2

Capital-skill complementarity

Let G(K; S; U ) be a three-factor production function that is homogeneous of degree one in

(K; S; U ), twice continuously di¤erentiable and has strictly positive ...rst and second derivatives
                                        GK GJ
in all its arguments. Let      KJ       GGKJ    for J = S; U . We show that Assumption 1 implies

 KU   >   KS .   For the nested constant elasticity of substitution production function used by

Krusell et al. (2000),   KU   >    KS   if and only if (equipment) capital is more substitutable with

unskilled labor than with skilled labor.

   Assumption 1 requires ' > 0 where


                                    d ln (Fh =FL )   KFKh       KFKL
                               '                   =                 :                          (19)
                                        d ln K        Fh         FL

Let L = S + U and h = S=L. Then we can write F (K; L; h) = G(K; hL; (1                h)L), which is

equivalent to F (K; S + U; S=(S + U )) = G(K; S; U ). Di¤erentiating yields



                                 FK FL hFh =L       FK FL + (1 h)Fh =L
                   KU     KS   =                                         ;
                                 F FKL hFKh =L       F FKL + (1 h)FKh =L
                                 FK FL F h    1    FKh FKL
                               =                               ;
                                   LF      GKU GKS  Fh   FL

which is positive if and only if ' > 0.


                                                    1
Derivation of equation (1)

Let k = K=L. Output is homogeneous of degree one in K and L by Assumption 1, meaning

that the optimal capital use equation can be written as R = FK (k; 1; h). Di¤erentiating yields


                                                FK             FKh
                                       dk =        d ln R          dh:                            (20)
                                               FKK             FKK

      Likewise, the capital share is given by       = Rk=F (k; 1; h) and di¤erentiating implies


                                                     Fh      (1       )
                                  d = d ln R            dh +              dk:
                                                     F          k

.

Using (20) to substitute for dk then gives


                                             FK                 Fh                   FKh
                     d =     1 + (1     )        d ln R            + (1         )        dh:
                                            kFKK                F                   kFKK

Noting that the homogeneity of F implies kFKK =                 FKL and using equation (19) for ', we

can rearrange this expression to obtain equation (1).



Proofs from Section 3

Optimal education ­derivation of equation (6)

    ^ (k; h) = F (k; 1; h) denote the production function in intensive form where k = K=L. Let
Let F

    t (h)   be the units of physical capital that are combined with a unit of labor bearing human

capital h at time t. Optimal capital use requires


                                              ^k ( t (h); h) = R;
                                              F                                                   (21)

and since competitive producers make zero pro...ts, the wage schedule is given by


                                               ^ ( t (h); h)
                                      wt (h) = F                R t (h):                          (22)


                                                      2
                                                                  ^ ( t (h); h) yields
Di¤erentiating these expressions and suppressing the arguments of F

                                         ^kh
                                         F                 @ t (h)       F^k
                            0
                            t (h)   =
                                         ^kk
                                             ;                     = gR
                                                                         ^kk
                                                                             ;
                                         F                   @t         F                                     (23)
                                                           @wt (h)   @F^
                          0
                         wt       ^h ;
                            (h) = F                                =                 ^k ;
                                                                             gR t (h)F
                                                             @t       @t
where gR denotes the growth rate of R. Note also that using the intensive form production

function we can write:      =            ^     ^
                                    t (h)Fk =F ;    =       ^k (1
                                                            F                  ^kk ); ' =
                                                                      )=( t (h)F                  ^    ^
                                                                                              t (h)Fkh =Fh   = .

   Each individual chooses her labor supply path to maximize the expected present value of

lifetime earnings. Consider an individual with human capital ht at time t and labor supply

path ` for              ~ be an alternative labor supply path de...ned by
                 t. Let `

                                             8
                                             >
                                             >
                                             >
                                             >` + ;          2 [t; t +    ];
                                             >
                                             >
                                             <
                                    ~ =
                                    `
                                             >`
                                             >
                                                       ;     2 (t +      ;t + 2 ];
                                             >
                                             >
                                             >
                                             >
                                             :` ;            >t+2 :

where 2 R and        > 0. The individual'                                        ~ is given by
                                         s human capital under labor supply path `

                            8
                            >
                            >
                            >
                            >h                (     t);               2 [t; t +    ];
                            >
                            >
                            <
                         ~ = h
                         h                    (t + 2             );   2 [t +      ;t + 2 ];
                            >
                            >
                            >
                            >
                            >
                            >
                            :h ;                                         t+2 :

Note that this labor supply perturbation does not a¤ect the individual's human capital outside

the interval (t; t + 2 ).

   Let S be the di¤erence between the individual's expected present value of earnings under
~ and under ` . We have
`




                                                             3
      Z       t+2            R                h                        i
S=                   e       t    ( s + )ds
                                                  `    ~ )
                                                  ~ w (h       ` w (h ) d ;
          t
      Z       t+         R
                                 ( s + )ds
  =                 e    t                   f` (w [h          (       t)]       w [h ]) + w [h           (    t)]g d
          t
      Z       t+2        R
                                 ( s + )ds
  +                  e       t                f` (w [h             (t + 2          )]   w [h ])       w [h       (t + 2             )]g d ;
         t+


                                                   ~ and h
where the second equality uses the expressions for `     ~ above. Expressing the functions

in the integrands as Taylor series around t, computing the integrals and dropping terms that

are o(        2)    implies that for                 close to zero


                                                        2                           0          @wt (ht )
                                              S             ( t + )wt (ht )        wt (ht )              :                            (24)
                                                                                                 @t

The intuition for this expression is as follows. When > 0, switching from labor supply path `
   ~ means working more today and less tomorrow. The bene...t of this switch is ( t + )wt (ht ),
to `

which equals the increase in the expected present value of earnings from bringing forward the
                                                                              0 (h ), which
time at which labor income is received. The costs of delaying schooling are: wt   t
                                                                                                                        @wt (ht )
gives the decline in earnings from having lower human capital tomorrow, and;                                              @t ,      which

is positive when wages are increasing over time. Since human capital accumulation and labor

supply are both linear in `t , agents for whom the bene...ts of delaying schooling exceed the costs

will choose to work full-time, while agents for whom the costs are greater will devote all their

time to schooling.

   Agents are indi¤erent between working and learning if and only if the right hand side of

(24) equals zero for all , which requires


                                             ~t (ht )                             0           @wt (ht )
                                             S          ( t + )wt (ht )          wt (ht )               = 0:                          (25)
                                                                                                @t

   We now make the following assumption


Assumption 4 The production function and parameters of the economy are such that for all t


                                                                             4
                                  ~t (h ) = 0;
(i) There exists ht > 0 such that S    t

(ii)    t (ht )   > 0 for all k where
                   "                                !                                                         #
                              ^                             ^h                      ^2        ^h       ^k F
                                                                                                          ^kh
         t
              1        ^h + @ F
                       F                       ^k
                                     gR t (ht )F
                                                            F                 ^hh + Fkh
                                                                              F
                                                                                            @F
                                                                                                    gR
                                                                                                       F
                                                                                                                :
              ^
              F             @t                          ^
                                                        F   t (ht )Fk
                                                                     ^              ^kk
                                                                                    F        @t         F^kk


Assumption 4.i imposes that a solution to equation (25) exists. This is a relatively weak
                                   ~t (ht ) is continuous in ht whenever the production function is
restriction. To see why, note that S

continuously di¤erentiable in k; h and t. Then if a solution does not exist, either all individuals

work full-time with `t = 1 or all individuals are in full-time education with `t = 0. It is

straightforward to impose su¢ cient conditions to rule out such equilibria. For example, if

individuals with no human capital produce no output then wt (0) = 0, meaning that working

full-time cannot be optimal for newborn agents. In addition, if the economy has a positive

capital stock and the marginal product of capital is unbounded as the capital input approaches

zero, then it cannot be optimal for all agents to be in full-time education.

       Assumption 4.ii is a second order condition for educational choice that ensures the solution
                                                         ~t (ht ) given by (25). Using equations
to equation (25) is unique. To show this we di¤erentiate S

(21)­                                ~t
     (23) and setting ht = ht yields S          ^
                                       0 (h ) = F
                                           t                     t (ht ).
                                                                                                  ~t (ht ) is positive
                                                                            Thus, the gradient of S
   ~t (ht ) = 0.
if S

       This single-crossing property guarantees that equation (25) has a unique solution ht = ht .
                     ~t (ht ) < 0 for all ht < h and S
It also implies that S                               ~t (ht ) > 0 for all ht > h . Consequently,
                                                t                               t

individuals with human capital below the threshold ht prefer to study today and work tomorrow,

while the opposite is true for individuals with human capital above ht . Since labor supply is

bounded on the interval [0; 1] it follows that optimal labor supply is given by `t = 0 if ht < ht

and `t = 1 if ht > ht .

       Setting ht = ht and rearranging equation (25) gives equation (6) in the paper. Taking the

total derivative of this expression for given t and using equations (21)­(23) together with the

de...nitions of ';       and      yields




                                                            5
                               1     ' Fh          1
                    dht =                 d ln R +               dgwjht ;t         d   t       d   ;   (26)
                                  t1   F                    t

where dgwjht ;t denotes the change in the growth rate of wages evaluated at ht . Equation

(26) shows that whenever there is capital-skill complementarity as de...ned in Assumption 1

(meaning ' > 0) and the technical conditions in Assumption 4 hold, an increase in the rental

rate of capital R reduces the optimal human capital threshold ht . Moreover, even in the absence

of capital-skill complementarity, the human capital threshold is increasing in the growth rate

of wages, but decreasing in the real interest rate and the risk of death.


Optimal human capital in a model of occupational choice

Suppose there are two types of labor ­skilled and unskilled ­and h denotes the fraction of the

labor force that is skilled. Formally, let S denote the skilled labor force and U the unskilled

labor force. Then L = S + U and human capital h = S=L. Let wU denote the unskilled wage

and wS =     wU the skilled wage, where             denotes the skill premium. For this economy the

wage schedule wt (h) satis...es


                                         wU U + wS S
                            wt (h) =                 = wU [1 + h (                 1)] ;               (27)
                                              L
               0 (h) = w U (
implying that wt                   1).

   Competitive ...rms hire capital and labor taking the rental rate and the wage schedule as

given, implying that equations (21)-(23) hold. Using the wage schedule in (27) to di¤erentiate
                                             0 (h) in (23) we obtain
(21), (22) together with the expression for wt


                                    1    '                1        1               d
                         dh =              d ln R                                              ;       (28)
                                    ~t 1                  ~ t 1 + h(          1)           1

where

                                                                      !
                                               1     ^2
                                                     F
                                         ~t            kh       ^hh
                                                                F         ;
                                               ^
                                               Fh    ^kk
                                                     F


                                                      6
and we assume ~ t > 0 for all t to ensure that the second order condition for pro...t maximization

holds. Thus, the relative demand for skilled labor is declining in the skill premium                                       and also

decreasing in the capital rental rate R whenever there is capital-skill complementarity.

     Equation (28) gives demand for human capital conditional on the skill premium. However,

when individuals choose whether or not to invest in becoming skilled, the skill premium also

a¤ects occupational choice. Suppose all newborns are unskilled, but have the opportunity

to become skilled workers by attending school for                                   periods. Apart from this change to the

education technology, the economy is as speci...ed in Section 3.

     To maximize dynastic utility, each individual chooses the occupation that o¤ers the highest

expected present value of lifetime earnings. We restrict attention to equilibria where at each

instant some, but not all, unskilled individuals choose to become skilled. This requires that

unskilled individuals are indi¤erent over whether or not to attend school. Skilled agents earn

nothing for      periods and then receive the skilled wage, while unskilled agents always earn the

unskilled wage. Therefore, the indi¤erence condition at time                                     is

                              Z   1       Rt                            Z   1       Rt
                                               ( z + )dz    U                            ( z + )dz       U
                                      e                    wt dt    =           e                     t wt dt;
                                                                            +

where the left hand side is the expected present value of earnings of an unskilled worker and

the right hand side is the expected present value of earnings of an individual that chooses to

become skilled. Di¤erentiating the indi¤erence condition with respect to                                         yields


                                                            R   +
                                               wU = e               ( z + )dz
                                                                                    +    wU+ :                                 (29)

Thus, the unskilled wage at time                   equals the expected present value of the skilled wage at time

    + , which is when skilled agents who start schooling at                                   join the labor force.
          U (t; ) = w U =w U
     Let gw                               denote growth in the unskilled wage between t                                   and t and
                     t    t
           Rt
                 ( z + )dz
^(t; ) = e   t               be the inverse of the discount factor used to value time t earnings at time

t     . Then di¤erentiating (29) with                      =t           gives




                                                                        7
                                                                      U (t; )
                                                                    dgW
                                       d   t       d^(t; )
                                               =                      U (t; )
                                                                              ;
                                           t       ^(t; )            gW

and using this expression to substitute for d               t   in (28) yields


                      1    '          1          1                                    U (t; )
                                                                                    dgw           d^(t; )
                                                                              t
             dht =           d ln R +                                                                     :   (30)
                      ~t 1            ~ t 1 + ht (              t   1)   t        1 gwU (t; )     ^(t; )

   Equation (30) is analogous to equation (26) from the baseline model. As in the baseline

model, an increase in the capital rental rate reduces equilibrium human capital h whenever

there is capital-skill complementarity. In addition, h is increasing in the growth rate of unskilled

wages, but decreasing in the compound interest rate during the period when individuals attend

school. This shows that the qualitative results concerning the determinants of optimal human

capital derived in Section 3 continue to hold in a model of occupational choice with endogenous

supplies of skilled and unskilled labor.



Proofs from Section 4

Proof of Lemma 1 and Proposition 1

Imposing the functional form in Assumption 2 and noting that optimal capital use satis...es

equation (8), a ...rm that hires labor with human capital ht at time t has capital share [zt (ht )]

where (z )      zf 0 (z )=f (z ) and zt (h)        e   (a+b)h At     t (h )
                                                                    Bt .      Moreover, equation (8) implies zt is

strictly decreasing in ht and Grossman et al. (2017a) show that (z ) is strictly decreasing in z .

It follows that [zt (ht )] is strictly increasing in ht .

   Di¤erentiating the wage schedule in (9) yields


                              1 @wt (h)                                            [zt (h)]
                                        =              L   + (gA      gR )                    ;
                            wt (h) @t                                         1      [zt (h)]

and substituting this expression together with equation (14) into equation (25) gives




                                                                8
                ~t (ht ) =                                                         [zt (ht )]
                S              t   +       b     L   + (a + gR        gA )                        wt (ht ):
                                                                             1       [zt (ht )]

                                                              ~t (h ) = 0 and that a + gR gA > 0,
   Now, assume that for all t there exists ht > 0 that solves S    t

              ~t
which ensures S 0 (h ) > 0 because
                    t                          [zt (ht )] is strictly increasing in ht . We prove below that

these assumptions hold on a balanced growth path (BGP). Then Assumption 4 is satis...ed.

It follows that ht de...nes a human capital threshold such that at time t all individuals with

human capital below ht are in full-time education and all individuals with human capital above

ht work full-time.

   Next, suppose the economy is on a BGP. The no arbitrage condition for capital accumulation

implies that on a BGP where the interest rate is constant gR =                              gq . Therefore, on a BGP

a + gR gA = a        K,   which is strictly positive by Assumption 3.i. It follows that a + gR gA > 0

on a BGP as assumed above.
           ~t (ht ) = 0 implies the human capital threshold on a BGP satis...es
   Setting S


                                           [zt (ht )]     b+ L           ( + )
                                                        =                               ;                        (31)
                                       1     [zt (ht )]      a               K

showing that zt (ht ) = z must be constant on a BGP which proves equation (11) in Lemma 1.

Di¤erentiating (8) with respect to time while holding zt (ht ) constant then yields


                                                      _ =
                                                      h       K
                                                                  :
                                                        t
                                                              a

Therefore, in order to keep their human capital rising at the same rate as ht , individuals that

are in the labor force must choose labor supply ` = 1                            K =a   as claimed in equation (10) of

Lemma 1.

   At time t any individuals with human capital above ht work full-time. Consequently, on a

BGP it is not possible for individuals to have human capital above ht since ht is growing over

time. Given this observation, the remaining properties of the unique BGP can be derived as

in the discussion following Lemma 1 in the paper. In particular, equation (16) gives the real



                                                          9
interest rate on the BGP and substituting (16) into (31) gives (18), which determines the BGP

value of . Assumption 3.iii ensures the discount rate is su¢ ciently large that dynastic utility is

...nite on the BGP. Finally, since gR =         gq and the real interest rate satis...es (16), Assumption
                                                                                  ~t (ht ) = 0.
3.ii guarantees that, as assumed above, for all t there exists ht > 0 that solves S

     This completes the proof that there exists a unique BGP. In our working paper Grossman et

al. (2017b) we analyze the stability of the BGP and show that the BGP is locally saddle-path

stable in a calibrated version of the model.


Proof of Proposition 2

Di¤erentiating equation (18) with respect to              K       yields


                    1      @             1 b                  (        1)(   L    + ba    K)      +   +
                         2
                              =                                                             2
                                                                                                          :
               (1       ) @ K      a        K    a                                (a      K)

The ...rst term on the right hand side is negative when                      > 1 since Assumption 2 imposes b > .

The second term on the right hand side is negative by Assumption 3.iii which guarantees ...nite

utility on the BGP. It follows that an increase in                K    reduces        or, equivalently, that a reduction

in   K   reduces labor's share of income.

     Di¤erentiating equation (18) with respect to                  L   yields


                                            1         @                       1
                                                              =                   ;
                                       (1       )2   @    L            a      K

which is negative if and only if       > 1. Thus, a reduction in                      L   increases   and lowers labor's

share of income.




                                                          10
