Good-Bye Original Sin, Hello Risk On-Off, Financial Fragility, and Crises?
Joshua Aizenman, Yothin Jinjarak, Donghyun Park, and Huanhuan Zheng
NBER Working Paper No. 27030
April 2020, Revised in September 2020
JEL No. F21,F31

                                          ABSTRACT

We analyze the sovereign bond issuance data of eight major emerging markets (EMs) - Brazil,
China, India, Indonesia, Mexico, Russia, South Africa and Turkey from 1970 to 2018. Our
analysis suggests that (i) EM local currency bonds tend to be smaller in size, shorter in maturity,
or lower in coupon rate than foreign currency bonds; (ii) EMs are more likely to issue local-
currency sovereign bonds if their currencies appreciated before the global financial crisis of 2008
(GFC); (iii) inflation-targeting monetary policy increases the likelihood of issuing local-currency
debt before GFC but not after; and (iv) EMs that offer higher sovereign yields are more likely to
issue local-currency bonds after GFC. Future data will allow us to test and identify structural
changes associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and its aftermath.


Joshua Aizenman                                  Donghyun Park
Economics and SIR                                Economics and Research Department
University of Southern California                Asian Development Bank
University Park                                  Manila, Philippines
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043                       dpark@adb.org
and NBER
aizenman@usc.edu                                 Huanhuan Zheng
                                                 Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy
Yothin Jinjarak                                   National University of Singapore
School of Economics and Finance                  Singapore
Victoria University of Wellington                arwenzh@gmail.com
PO Box 600
23 Lambton Quay, Wellington
New Zealand
yothin.jinjarak@vuw.ac.nz
    Good-Bye Original Sin, Hello Risk On-Off, Financial Fragility, and Crises?


    J. Aizenman (USC and NBER), Y. Jinjarak (VUW), D. Park (ADB), and H. Zheng (NUS) *

                                          September 2020


                                             Abstract

        We analyze the sovereign bond issuance data of eight major emerging markets (EMs) -
Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Mexico, Russia, South Africa and Turkey from 1970 to 2018. Our
analysis suggests that (i) EM local currency bonds tend to be smaller in size, shorter in maturity,
or lower in coupon rate than foreign currency bonds; (ii) EMs are more likely to issue local-
currency sovereign bonds if their currencies appreciated before the global financial crisis of 2008
(GFC); (iii) inflation-targeting monetary policy increases the likelihood of issuing local-currency
debt before GFC but not after; and (iv) EMs that offer higher sovereign yields are more likely to
issue local-currency bonds after GFC. Future data will allow us to test and identify structural
changes associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and its aftermath.


JEL codes F21, F31
Keywords Original sin, emerging market, sovereign bond, local-currency bond, financial crisis




*We thank anonymous referees for their insightful comments and constructive suggestions.
Financial support from the Asian Development Bank, University of Southern California and NUS startup
grant are gratefully acknowledged. Donglai Luo provides excellent research assistance.

Joshua Aizenman is from Economics and SIR USC, University Park Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043 and
NBER, email: aizenman@usc.edu.
Yothin Jinjarak is from School of Economics and Finance, Victoria University of Wellington, PO Box
600 23 Lambton Quay, Wellington New Zealand, email: yothin.jinjarak@vuw.ac.nz.
Donghyun Park is from Economics and Research Department, Asian Development Bank, Manila,
Philippines, email: dpark@adb.org.
Huanhuan Zheng is with Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy National University of Singapore
(NUS), 469C Bukit Timah Rd, Singapore 259772, email: sppzhen@nus.edu.sg.

                                                  1
1. Introduction

        The financial opening of emerging markets (EM) in the 1990s provided them with greater

access to the global financial system. While access to external finance delivered benefits, mostly

front-loaded, it led to significant and growing foreign debt, mostly in hard currency. The wave of

sudden stop crises that a dozen EMs suffered in the second half of the 1990s revealed the sizable

downside risk associated with significant balance sheet exposures and over-borrowing syndrome

related to non-pecuniary externalities. These crises are typically linked to the bailouts of systemic

private sector players, thereby socializing their losses and exacerbating the public debt-overhang.

More broadly, these developments brought to the fore the hard currency borrowing constraints that

emerging markets face: they cannot effectively borrow in their local currency abroad, or even long

term domestically. Eichengreen and Hausmann (1999) refer to this phenomenon as the 'Original

Sin.'


        However, a remarkable adjustment of EM took place in the late 1990s and 2000s. They

adopted managed exchange rate flexibility, inflation targeting policy, precautionary management

of international reserves, and macroprudential policies. These adjustments helped cushion most

EMs during the turbulent Global Financial Crisis of 2008 (GFC). In response to GFC, the US

Federal Reserve drastically cut short-term policy interest rates and pursued unconventional

monetary expansion, including quantitative easing (QE). QE policies included the Fed's purchase

of longer-term bonds, aimed at flattening the yield curve.


        These policies turned out to be a game-changer for the US, eurozone (EZ), and emerging

markets. The sharp decline of interest rates drastically reduced the sovereign spreads of GIIPS.

The negative policy interest rates of the EZ (including on most public debts of core EU countries,


                                                  2
i.e., Belgium, France, Germany, and the Netherlands), and the sharp drop in the yields on US bonds

have encouraged a global search for returns, reducing thereby the sovereign spreads of most EMs

to single digits. OECD institutional investors embarked on purchasing the local currency bonds

of many EMs. These developments mitigated the 'Original Sin,' allowing an increasing number of

EMs to borrow both in foreign (hard) and domestic (local) currencies. 1 The resulting expansion of

EMs' external debt led to an unprecedented increase in their debt to GDP ratios, bringing to the

fore concerns about growing debt overhang and fragility, as well as the fiscal dominance. 2


         The patterns of sovereign spreads and the interest rate costs of local-currency and hard-

currency external borrowing for EM public and private sectors have shifted in recent decades.

There are possible cross effects associated with improved EM access to hard currency and local

currency external borrowing, creating conditions under which the cross effects are positive or

negative, possibly exacerbating fragility over time. Specifically, while shifting from hard-currency

borrowing to local-currency borrowing may reduce sovereign spreads on the former, it may

increase the interest rate on the latter. These effects may be non-linear, and their direction may

reverse overtime for a sufficiently large debt overhang. Thus, the growing access of EMs to more

elastic external borrowing in hard- and local currency imposes new debt management challenges,

possibly increasing their fragility down the road and thus putting a premium on proper

management of their financial and macroeconomic policies. The unconventional monetary policies




1
  The share of local currency is estimated at 87.1 percent of total EM debt, amounting to $21.9 trillion, in 2017. Local
currency debt outstanding has increased from 40 percent of GDP in the early 2010s to almost 60 percent of GDP
recently (IMF, 2018).
2
 See Aizenman (2004) for further discussion on the ambiguous impact of greater financial integration of EM. Recent
analysis of the impact of local currency borrowing on the spreads of local and hard currency debts include Miyajima
et al. (2015), Du and Schreger (2016), Engel and Park (2019). Park et. al. (2019), and Amstad et al. (2020).


                                                           3
adopted by the US Fed and ECB may be the 21st-century incarnations of financial repression, as

succinctly pointed out in Reinhart (2012). While financial repression may postpone adjustment of

the global leverage buildup, future instability associated with the exit from debt overhang is a tail

risk, heightening EM financial fragility and perhaps even triggering future EM crises. See also

Diaz-Alejandro (1985) for the seminal paper on financial repression, economic vulnerability, and

crisis trade-offs, and the Appendix for recent evidence of financial fragility of large EMs, focusing

on BRIC (Brazil, Russia, India, and China).


        In this paper, we seek to understand the patterns of sovereign bond issuance by

investigating the micro evidence grounded in bond-level information. Our primary focus is the

choice of the currency denomination of the sovereign bonds. Traditionally, EMs were not able to

raise funds in their own currency in the foreign markets. While some EM sovereign borrowers

target domestic investors, others prioritize raising funds in the international market. In recent years,

they are increasingly capable of doing so as the global demand for EM asset increases. The choice

of currency denomination is then not only driven by issuers' preferences and domestic factors on

the supply side, but also the demand of investors. However, a formal estimation of the causal

effects of demand and supply factors requires more structural configuration and empirical details,

which remains a challenge in the international finance literature. Nevertheless, our analysis aims

to uncover the sailient associations in the data, highlighting the patterns found in the sovereign

debts of large emerging-markets economies.


        Based on the sovereign bond issuance data from the Thomson Reuters Eikon database, we

focus on eight major EM sovereign borrowers, namely Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Mexico,

Russia, South Africa, and Turkey. The evidence suggests the following. First, the EM sovereign

borrowers are more likely to issue local-currency bonds when the local currency appreciates

                                                   4
particularly before the GFC. We conjecture that currency appreciation increases the prospective

returns on local-currency denominated assets, which then increases the demand from investors.

The stronger demand for local-currency denominated assets encourages sovereign borrowers to

issue more local-currency denominated bonds. The result remains robust after we control for bond

characteristics such as maturity and coupon types, country-specific economic fundamentals such

as international reserves and current account balance, and global factors such as global liquidity

and risk appetite.


       Second, we find that inflation targeting countries, which generally have more credible

monetary policies and are less likely to inflate away their public debt burden (Engel and Park,

2019), tend to issue local-currency denominated bonds before but not after GFC. This finding

echoes with Hale, Jones and Spiegel (2020), who show that firms from countries with a history of

stable inflation are more capable of issuing local-currency bonds, and generalize their conclusion

to the context of sovereign bond issuance. The insignificant roles of inflation targeting after GFC

is largely driven by the fading concerns on inflation worldwide.


       Third, we find that EMs which offer higher sovereign yields after the GFC are more likely

to issue local-currency denominated bonds. This finding is consistent with the global search for

returns after the Fed and ECB cut the interest rate to almost zero, resulting in negative yields in

some advanced markets. Finally, we also find that EM local currency bonds tend to be smaller in

size, shorter in maturity, or lower in coupon rate than foreign currency bonds.




                                                 5
2. Data and Methodology

2.1 Data


          We collect sovereign bond issuance data for eight EMs from the Thomson Reuters Eikon

database for the period of 1970-2018. Our analysis focuses on Brazil, China, India, Indonesia,

Mexico, Russia, South Africa and Turkey due to their relative importance in the EM bond markets

and data availability. The sovereign debt of these eight EMs accounts for 89% of the total

outstanding sovereign debts in EMs at the end of 2018 according to Arslanalp and Poghosyan

(2014).


          Our study focuses on the issuance of sovereign bond from the government's perspective,

which is different from those that focuses on the domestic and foreign holdings of sovereign bonds

from the investor's perspective (see for example Lane and Shambaugh, 2010, and Benetrix, Lane,

and Shambaugh 2015). While knowing whether the local-currency and foreign-currency bonds are

held by foreign or domestic investors are extremely valuable, we have no access to such data. To

optimize debt structure, governments would consider the expected demand of sovereign bonds

when choosing their currency denomination. Note that high returns and low risk attract investors,

we can then form expectation on the demand of sovereign bonds issued by EM governments

through bond yields, currency valuation, coupon rate and inflation risk.


2.2       Summary Statistics


          We first present the summary statistics for local- and foreign-currency denominated bonds

in Table 1. The average bond size - i.e. issue amount in USD per issuance - of foreign-currency

denominated bond is larger than that of local-currency denominated bond, with the exception of

China and India. Note that there are no records of foreign-currency denominated bond issuance in
                                                  6
India in our dataset. The frequency of local-currency denominated bond issuance is higher than

that of foreign-currency denominated bond issuance. If we exclude India from the sample, the ratio

of local-currency bonds to the total size of bonds issued during the sample period is the highest for

China (99.67%) and lowest for Russia (85%). The dominance of local-currency bonds emerges

and persists in recent years. Figure 1 plots the time series of local- and foreign-currency

denominated bonds issued in a particular year, with the former outpacing the latter especially after

the global financial crisis across all EMs in our sample.


       The percentage of local-currency bond relative to all bonds issued in a particular year is

larger than that based on external debt because it includes the local-currency bonds held by

domestic investors. Our dataset covers bond-level currency denomination but cannot differentiate

foreign investors from domestic investors. Although we do not have data on who is holding the

bond, we do know the market of issuance for each bond. Traditionally bonds issued onshore mainly

target domestic investors, while those issued offshore target foreign investors. However, the recent

development in the debt market has enabled foreign investors to purchase more bonds issued

locally and domestic investors to participate more in the offshore market. Delving into the market

of issuance, we show in Panel B and C that most bonds issued onshore are denominated in local

currency while most bonds issued offshore are still denominated in foreign currency. China is the

only EM that had issued a larger number of local-currency bonds than foreign-currency bonds on

the offshore markets in our sample. The size of local-currency bonds issued in offshore markets is

not sufficient to justify the rapid growth in foreign holdings of local-currency debts documented

in Arslanalp and Poghosyan (2014) and Zheng (2020). It implies rising foreign holdings of local-

currency bonds issued onshore, which is also documented by Miyajima et al. (2015). Thus both

onshore and offshore local-currency bond issuance contribute to the dissipation of original sin,


                                                  7
characterized by a falling share of foreign-currency bonds in external debt. It justifies our focus on

the currency denomination rather than the issuance market of sovereign bonds.


2.3    Methodology


       To understand what matters for the choice of currency denomination upon sovereign bond

issuance, we estimate the following baseline probit model:


         ,, = 1 =  , +  S,, +  +  + ,, ,                                     (1)


where  ,, = 1 if bond  in country  at period  is issued in local currency and 0 otherwise. The

set of key country-specific variable is , , which captures variations in the attractiveness of local-

currency denominated bonds in country  at period . It takes the value of (i) , , the rate of

currency appreciation relative to USD in country  at period  ; (ii) , is yield difference

between 10-year local-currency sovereign bond in country  and the US at period ; and (iii) , ,

a dummy variable that equals 1 if country  is pursuing inflation targeting at period . From the

investors' perspective, higher value of , indicates higher return while , = 1 means lower

inflation risk for holding local-currency sovereign bonds in EMs. Given that risk-averse investors

are return chasing, we expect the coefficients of , and , to be both positive and

statistically significant. The rise in currency valuation , increases the returns for foreign

investors holding local-currency bonds, but reduces the returns for domestic investors holding

foreign-currency bonds, both of which increase the demand of local-currency bonds and therefore

encourage governments to issued more local-currency bonds. We therefore expect local currency

appreciation to increase the likelihood of local-currency bond issuance such that the coefficient of

, is positive and statistically significant.


                                                  8
We also control for a set of bond-specific variable S,, . It includes log(,, ), the logarithm of

the issued amount of bond  in country  at period  , log(,, ) , the logarithm of the

maturity of bond  in country  at period , and Zero,, , and a dummy that equals to one if the

bond  in country  at period  is a zero-coupon bond. These bond characteristics are determined

by the issuers and capture the supply-side information in the bond market. The issuance of each

sovereign bond is driven by a specific funding need. The bond size, maturity and coupon rate

reflect such funding needs of governments. Governments need to consider the market demand of

their bonds upon issuance. The coupon rate captures by Zero,, reflects the micro-level

repayment arrangement, which could also be an important determinant of bond yields that affect

the demand of the bonds. The variable  and  are country and year fixed effects, respectively,

and ,, is the error term clustered by country.


3. Empirical Results

We explore the likelihood of issuing local-currency denominated bond using bond-level data in

this section. We hypothesize that EMs are increasingly capable of issuing local-currency

denominated bond because of (i) rising currency valuations that deliver additional returns to local-

currency bonds, which encourages investors to hold local-currency bonds; (ii) risk-on exposures

to EM as investors seek high yields since sovereigns bond in advanced markets are offering very

low or negative yields;and (iii) inflation targeting that increases the credibility of EM's monetary

policy and reduces the probability of currency debasement (Engel and Park, 2019).




                                                 9
3.1 Baseline Results


       Table 2 summarizes the baseline probit regression results. Column 1 suggests that the

appreciation of the local currency, characterized by a positive , , is significantly associated with

a higher probability of issuing a sovereign bond in local currency. Based on the marginal effects

reported in Appendix Table 1, a 10% appreciation in local currency relative to USD is associated

with 1.8% higher probability of issuing local-currency bonds. Appendix Table 2 shows that the

positive association between currency valuation and the likelihood of local-currency bond issuance

remains the same when we replace , with its one-year lag. Due to the autocorrelation in

currency valuation, controlling for additional lags does not add value to the model performance.

The finding that local-currency bond issuances are more likely when the local currency appreciates

provides empirical support to the theoretical results in Ottonello and Perez (2019). Given that

lower credit spreads in local-currency bonds encourage governments to issue more local-currency

bonds, our finding is also consistent with Hofmann, Shim and Shin (2019), who document that

local currency appreciation reduces credit risk premium and subsequently sovereign bond spreads

in EMs.


       Higher yield in local-currency sovereign bonds increases their attractiveness. The rising

demand by investors is expected to encourage more issuance of local-currency bonds. However

we find no evidence to support such a hypothesis based on the full sample. The result in column 2

shows that, the yield spread between country  and the US, , , does not seem to change the

likelihood of local-currency denominated bond issuance. Investors' preference over the risk-return

tradeoff may vary over time, especially when the market shifts to the new normal of ultra low

interest rate. We take into account of the changing market environment in the next section to

further explore the role of yield searching on the currency denomination of sovereign bond.
                                                 10
        Inflation targeting reduces the inflation risk in EMs, which is expected to increase the

demand of local-currency bonds that enables governments to issue more local-currency bonds.

Column 3 shows that the coefficient of inflation targeting dummy , is positive but not

statistically significant. It appears that inflation targeting increases the probability of issuing local-

currency denominated bonds. The result is, however, not statistically significant. The roles of

inflation risk may have shifted after a decade's stable inflation in most countries including EMs.

We account for the fading concerns on inflation after GFC in the next section.


        The result in column 4 shows that controlling for inflation targeting does not affect the

roles of currency valuation on the probability of issuing local-currency bonds. 3 Consistent with

the summary statistics in Table 1, bonds that are smaller in size, shorter in maturity, or lower in

coupon rate are more likely to issue in local currency. Similar evience on the negative association

between bond size and the likelihood of local-currency bond issuance is found in the context of

corporate bonds by Hale, Jones, and Spiegel (2020).


3.2 Robustness Checks


        We check whether the positive relation between currency appreciation and the likelihood

of issuing local-currency bond is robust in this section. To address the concern of omitted variables,

we further control for a number of domestic variables that could possibly affect the choice of bond

denomination. A strong current account (CA) balance may increase a country's capacity to repay

the debt and reduce the default risk. The result in Column 1 of Table 3 suggests that higher CA

balance may enable the government to issue more local-currency bond. However, the positive



3We experiment with CIP deviation but the results are not significant, possibly due to the lack of hedging tools to
hedge typically long-term sovereign bonds.


                                                        11
relation between currency appreciation and the likelihood of issuing local-currency bond is not

driven by CA balance. The coefficient of FX remains positive and statistically significant after

controlling for CA balance (see Column 1).


       Column 2 of Table 3 accounts for the effect of domestic investment, showing its positive

and significant association with local-currency bond issuance. Note that incomes generated by

domestic investments are in local currency, which tends to depreciate in economic recessions and

appreciate in booms. Financing domestic with local-currency bond provides a natural hedge to

income risk and mitigates the problem of current mismatch (Ottonello and Perez, 2019,

Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza, 2007). Thus governments are motivated to issue more local-

currency bond issuance to finance stronger domestic investment.


       Column 3 of Table 3 shows that countries with higher GDP per capita growth is more likely

to issue foreign-currency bonds. GDP per capita growth is typically faster for less developed

economies, whose financial market is less matured and more volatile. The high risk associated

with the local-currency denominated assets may disable these EMs from raising funds in their own

currency, and motivates governments to issue foreign-currency bonds to meet their funding needs.

Column 4 of Table 3 shows that countries with a higher international reserve are more likely to

issue foreign-currency bonds. Reserve provides an efficient buffer against foreign exchange rate

shock, which mitigates the risk of foreign-currency debt and encouarges the issuance of foreign-

currency bonds.


       The results remain robust when we control for all the domestic factors mentioned above

(see Column 5 of Table 3). Despite the fact that the relation between these domestic factors, which

affect the choice of bond currency denomination, and currency valuation may affect our results,


                                                12
the positive relation between currency appreciation and the likelihood of local-currency bond

issuance remain robust after controlling for these domestic factors. Appendix Table 3 show that

even after controlling for the fiscal position and government expenditure, the key result remains

robust. Note however that the coefficients of fiscal position and government expenditure are not

statistically significant.


In the baseline regression, we control for year fixed effects which absorb any global factors that

affect the emerging markets' choice of bond currency denomination. It would be interesting to see

how the global financial cycle and international financial market conditions affect EM's bond

issuance behavior. Table 5 reports the estimation results that replace year fixed effects with various

global factors to check the robustness of our main findings and understand their role in the choice

of sovereign bond currency denomination. Regardless of the specific global factor that we control

for, the positive relation between currency appreciation and the likelihood of local-currency bond

issuance remains robust. We find that the global risk appetite indicator VIX, measured by the log

return of the CBOE volatility index, has little influence on the choice of bond currency

denomination. If global liquidity is abundant, as indicated by a lower value of Ted, the interest

difference between 3-M LIBOR based on US dollars and 3-M US Treasury bill, EMs are more

likely to issue local-currency bonds. When the global liquidity is constrained and the market is in

a risk-off mode, investors prefer USD assets over EM currency asses, which reduces the demand

of EM local-currency bonds and subsequently discourages governments from issuing local-

currency bonds.


        By the same logic, the shock of higher oil prices, measured by the log return in the crude

oil price, would push global financial markets to a risk-off mode, which would trigger more

demand for USD-denominated assets and less demand for local-currency EM bonds. There is no

                                                  13
evidence that global policy uncertainty, measured by the log return of the global Economic Policy

Uncertainty Index, affects the EMs' choice of bond currency denomination. Global factors add

new information on the bond currency denomination, but they do not affect our main findings.


          One may argue that the market environment accommodative for issuing local currency

bonds tends to be more favorable for issuing short maturity and smaller bonds as well. 4 To address

such a concern, we control for factors that may simultaneously affect the choice of currency

denomination, size and maturity of bonds. Throughout all regressions in Table 3 and 4, the

coefficients of log(Size) and log(Maturity) are negative and statistically significant, while that of

Zero is negative and statistically significant, which is consistent with the basline result that smaller,

shorter, and lower-coupon bonds are more likely to be issued in local currency. It therefore

mitigates the concern that our baseline results on the relation between bond characteristics and the

likelihood of local-currency bond issuance is not driven by the common factors.


          Running probit regressions with fixed effects can lead to biased estimation because of the

incidental parameters problem. We follow Hahn and Newey (2004) to use an analytical bias

correction motivated by large time periods and re-estimate the probit model. The estimation results

presented in Appendix Table 4 shows that the positive association between currency appreciation

and the likelihood of local-currency bond issuance remain significant after correcting the bias

caused by incidental parameters problem.




4 We   thank an anonymous reviewer for pointing out this alternative explanation.


                                                          14
3.3 Heterogeneity analysis


       Du and Tepper (2016) and Du, Tepper and Verdelhan (2018) show that the international

debt market shows different patterns after the global financial crisis (GFC). In particular, covered

interest rate parity (CIP) no longer holds after GFC in both AMs and EMs. The deviation from

CIP may change bond issuers' preferences for local vis-a-vis foreign currency denomination. To

explore whether sovereign bond issuance patterns changed after GFC, we extend Equation (1) to

account for the interaction between the key independent variables and GFC, a dummy that equals

1 after 2007 and 0 otherwise.


       Table 5 shows that the GFC indeed reshaped bond issuance patterns. The result in column

1 suggests that before GFC a government is more likely to issue local-currency denominated bonds

when the local currency appreciates, the relation is reversed after GFC. The coefficient of the

interaction between FX and GFC is negative and statistically significant and its magnitude exceeds

that of the coefficient of FX. The sum of the coefficients of FX and its interaction with GFC is -

23, which is statistically different from 0 at a significance level of 1% (2 = 10.538). It suggests

that, after GFC, domestic currency appreciation is associated with a lower probability of issuing

local-currency bonds. The result could potentially be driven by the concern on the potential risk

underlying the currency appreciation caused by quantitative easing in the US and the potential

reversal associated with i.e. sudden stops, which downplays the attractiveness of local-currency

denominated bond.


       The association between , and the likelihood of local-currency bond issuance varies

before and after GFC, as shown in Column (2) of Table 5. It turns out that the previous result of

the limited association between yield difference between local and US bond and the likelihood of


                                                 15
local-currency bond issuance is driven by mixed effects in different market regimes. Before GFC,

the government is less likely to issue local-currency bond when , is positive - i.e. it is more

costly to issue local-currency bonds. The results reflect rationally minimizing funding costs by

raising funds in a less costly way. Summing the coefficients of , and its interaction with

GFC yields 0.88, which is statistically significant at 1%. It suggests that, after GFC, the

government is more likely to issue local-currency bonds when local yields are higher than the US,

which is consistent with the deviation from CIP in emerging markets documented by Du and

Tepper (2016).


       It is puzzling that EMs issue more local-currency denominated bonds even though they are

more expensive. A possibility is the growing desire of EMs to strengthen their resilience to external

shocks through risk-sharing and currency matching. The benefits from such strengthening may

well exceed the additional funding costs that exceed the USD-denominated bonds. EMs were

traditionally unable to raise funds in their own currency, which exposed them to substantial

external shocks, especially when the USD appreciates relative to local currency. As investors

search for yield in the post-GFC low interest environment and EM inflation fell in recent years,

the demand for EM-currency bonds rose, which allowed EMs to issue local-currency bond more

easily. It seems that the demand of international investors for local-currency denominated EM

bonds dominates the decision-making process on the choice of issuance currency after GFC. Our

results suggest that the low interest-environment after GFC provides an opportunity for EMs to

issue bonds denominated in their own currency, especially bonds that offer higher yield relative to

US bonds.


       We find that inflation targeting increases the likelihood of issuing local-currency bonds

before but not after GFC (see Column (3) of Table 5). Again, such mixed results are driving the

                                                 16
insignificant relation between inflation targeting and the likelihood of local-currency bond

issuance in Table 2. A country can increase its money supply significantly to inflate away the debt

burden. EM inflation was thus a serious concern for international investors. Adopting inflation

targeting restrains central banks from printing money to erode their debt, and thereby increases the

credibility of their monetary policy. As such, inflation targeting mitigates the perceived risk of

investing in EM's local-currency denominated bond and attracts more demand from investors.

Inflation targeting therefore enables EMs to issue local-currency bonds more easily. Our results

provide similar evidence with Hale, Jones and Spiegel (2020), who document that a history of

stable inflation enables firms to issue more local-currency bonds, in the context of sovereign bonds.

Our estimation results before GFC confirm that inflation targeting enables EMs to issue more

local-currency bonds, which is also consistent with the theoretical implication in Engel and Park

(2019).


          However, we find that inflation-targeting countries no longer enjoy such a privilege after

GFC, when inflation rate remained low despite massive quantitative easing in major advanced

economies. When low inflation becomes the norm, commitment to keep inflation low is no longer

as valuable. There are two possible explanations for the negative relation between inflation

targeting and the likelihood of issuing local-currency bond. First, inflation-targeting countries offer

a lower yield compared to non-inflation targeting countries. Second, currency appreciates more in

inflation-targeting countries than non-inflation-targeting countries after GFC. The result in column

(4) shows that, after controlling for currency valuation and yield difference, the role of inflation

targeting fades away. It suggests that either currency valuation or yield difference or both have

absorbed the effects of inflation targeting.




                                                  17
4. Concluding Remarks


         Both advanced countries and emerging markets have substantially expanded their public-

sector borrowing as a share of GDP since the global financial crisis. This trend was driven by the

secular decline of risk-free interest-rates, a process that was magnified by the unconventional

monetary expansions of the US Fed and ECB. The GFC led to public sector bailouts of financial

institutions, and the large-scale socialization of their private losses. Quantitative expansion (QE)

and other expansionary monetary policies resulted in the secular decline of interest rates, and

growing fiscal dominance. This may be the modern incarnation of financial repression, as

articulated by Reinhart (2012). 5 According to this view, the post-GFC monetary policies of the

US and eurozone drastically reduced the cost of servicing sovereign debt, in ways that reflect

political economy factors. These effects propagated the unprecedented post-GFC EM leverage

buildup, funded this time by both hard and domestic currency external borrowing.


         The history of financial repression suggests that it may act as a pain killer, delaying the

adjustment required to address the debt build-up, and providing the illusion of stability. With luck,

a gradual exit strategy from the debt overhang will allow the US and eurozone to spread the



5
  "One of the main goals of financial repression is to keep nominal interest rates lower than would otherwise prevail.
This effect, other things being equal, reduces governments' interest expenses for a given stock of debt and contributes
to deficit reduction. However, when financial repression produces negative real interest rates and reduces or liquidates
existing debts, it is a transfer from creditors (savers) to borrowers and, in some cases, governments. This amounts to
a tax that has interesting political-economy properties. Unlike income, consumption, or sales taxes, the repression tax
rate is determined by factors such as financial regulations and inflation performance, which are opaque--if not
invisible--to the highly politicized realm of fiscal policy. Given that deficit reduction usually involves highly
unpopular spending cuts and/or tax increases, the stealthier financial-repression tax may be a more politically palatable
alternative. Key factors underlying the high incidence of negative real interest rates after the crisis are aggressively
expansive stance of monetary policy and heavy central bank intervention in many advanced and emerging economies.
This raises the broad question of whether current interest rates are more likely to reflect market conditions or whether
they are determined by the actions of large official players in financial markets. A large role for nonmarket forces in
interest-rate determination is a central feature of financial repression." Reinhart (2012).


                                                           18
adjustment over a decade or more, possibly by means of higher economic growth and inflation.

Indeed, this was the post-WWII exit strategy of the US during 1945-1955, eventually reducing the

public debt to GDP from about 110% to about 50% [Aizenman and Marion (2011)]. Yet exits

from the debt overhang may also induce deflationary spells and lower growth rates [Lo and Rogoff

(2012), Reinhart et al. (2012)]. Even a relatively fast exit from higher inflationary and leverage

spells by OECD countries may destabilize EMs with less developed financial markets and

relatively small tax bases. 6 The exposure of EM to this tail risk associated with the advanced

economies' exit from debt overhangs remains a source of potential EM fragility and may even

trigger future crises, possibly well before the actual OECD countries exit from the present debt

overhang.

        Our empirical analysis of sovereign bond issuance data from eight major emerging markets

(EMs) in 1970-2018 lends further weight to such concerns. Our analysis is centered on delving

into micro data to identify the key determinants of local-currency sovereign bond issuance. We

find that EM bonds which are smaller in size, shorter in maturity, or lower in coupon rate are more

likely to be issued in local currency. Our evidence indicates that there have been structural changes

in the determinants of EMs' local-currency sovereign bond issuance since GFC. More specifically,

we find that EMs are more likely to issue local-currency sovereign bonds if (1) domestic currencies

appreciate, but only before GFC, (2) the monetary policy regime is inflation targeting, before but

not after GFC, and (3) bonds offer a higher yield, but only after GFC. Taken together, these

findings suggest that even EMs with less robust fundamentals are more able to issue local-currency

sovereign bonds in the post-GFC period.



6To recall, Paul Volcker's disinflationary policies in the US during 1979-1983 triggered the EM lost decade. See
Aizenman et al. (2019) for further analysis of EM fragility and fiscal space.


                                                      19
       In addition, the devastating COVID-19 health and economic crisis is likely to significantly

increase the borrowing requirements of EM public sectors. Therefore, the risk of financial

turbulence in EMs is likely to remain substantial despite their overcoming the Original Sin. EMs'

enhanced ability to borrow abroad in local currency integrates them more closely into the global

financial system. Closer financial integration yields significant benefits for EMs but also renders

their financial stability more vulnerable to events in advanced economies, such as their exit from

their debt overhang.. Finally, future data will allow us to test and identify structural changes

associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and its aftermath.




                                                20
References


Ahmed, R., Aizenman, J., & Jinjarak, Y. (2019). Inflation and Exchange Rate Targeting
     Challenges Under Fiscal Dominance (No. w25996). National Bureau of Economic
     Research.

Aizenman, J., & Marion, N. (2011). Using inflation to erode the US public debt. Journal of
      Macroeconomics, 33(4), 524-541.

Aizenman, J., Jinjarak, Y., Nguyen, H. T. K., & Park, D. (2019). Fiscal space and government-
      spending and tax-rate cyclicality patterns: A cross-country comparison, 1960­
      2016. Journal of Macroeconomics, 60, 229-252.

Amstad, M., Packer, F., & Shek, J. (2020). Does sovereign risk in local and foreign currency
      differ? Journal of International Money and Finance, 101, 102099.

Arslanalp, M. S., & Tsuda, M. T. (2014). Tracking global demand for emerging market sovereign
       debt (No. 14-39). International Monetary Fund.

Blanchard, O. (2004). Fiscal dominance and inflation targeting: lessons from Brazil (No. w10389).
      National Bureau of Economic Research.

Costa, M., & Marçal, E. F. (2019). Deviations from Covered Interest Parity: The Role Played by
       Fundamentals, Nancial and Political Turmoils and Market Frictions. Financial and
       Political Turmoils and Market Frictions.(April 23, 2019).

Diaz-Alejandro, C. (1985). Good-bye financial repression, hello financial crash. Journal of
      development Economics, 19(1-2), 1-24.

Du, W., Im, J., & Schreger, J. (2016). Local Currency Sovereign Risk. The Journal of Finance,
      71(3), 1027­1070. https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12389.

Du, W., Im, J., & Schreger, J. (2018). The U.S. Treasury Premium. Journal of International
      Economics, 112, 167­181. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinteco.2018.01.001

Eichengreen, B., & Hausmann, R. (1999). Exchange rates and financial fragility (No. w7418).
      National bureau of economic research.

Eichengreen, B., Hausmann, R., and Panizza, U., 2007, "Currency Mismatches, Debt Intolerance,
      and the Original Sin: Why They are Not the Same and Why it Matters," in Capital Controls
      and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies, Practices and Consequences,
      Edwards, S. (ed.), University of Chicago Press, pages 121-169.

                                               21
Engel, C., & Park, J. (2019). Debauchery and Original Sin: The Currency Composition of
       Sovereign Debt. https://doi.org/10.3386/w24671.

Hahn, Jinyong, and Whitney Newey. "Jackknife and analytical bias reduction for nonlinear panel
       models." Econometrica 72.4 (2004): 1295-1319.

Hale, G. B., Jones, P. C., & Spiegel, M. M. (2020). Home currency issuance in international bond
       markets. Journal of International Economics, 122, 103256.

Hofmann, Boris and Shim, Ilhyock and Shin, Hyun Song (2020). Bond Risk Premia and the
     Exchange Rate. BIS Working Paper No. 775, Available at SSRN:
     https://ssrn.com/abstract=3355016

International Monetary Fund (2018), Recent Developments on Local Currency Bond Markets in
        Emerging Economies, Staff Note for the G20 IFAWG, June 15.

Lo, S and Rogoff, K (2015), "Secular stagnation, debt overhang and other rationales for sluggish
       growth, six years on", BIS Working Paper No. 482.

Miyajima, K., Mohanty, M. S., & Chan, T. (2015). Emerging market local currency bonds:
      diversification and stability. Emerging Markets Review, 22, 126-139.

McCauley, R.N., 2012. "Risk-on/risk-off, capital flows, leverage and safe assets," Public Policy
     Review, Policy Research Institute, Ministry of Finance Japan, vol. 8(3), pages 281-298.

Ottonello, P., & Perez, D. J. (2019). The currency composition of sovereign debt. American
       Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 11(3), 174-208.

Park, D., Shin, K., & Tian, S. (2019). Do Local Currency Bond Markets Enhance Financial
       Stability? Some Empirical Evidence. Emerging Markets Finance and Trade, 1-29.

Reinhart, C.M., 2012, "Financial Repression Has Come Back to Stay," Peterson Institute for
       International Economics, Op-eds.

Reinhart, C. M., Reinhart, V. R., & Rogoff, K. S. (2012). Public debt overhangs: advanced-
       economy episodes since 1800. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(3), 69-86.

Zheng, H. (2020). Original Sin and Deviations from Covered Interest Parity. NUS working paper.
       Available at SSRN 3661239.




                                               22
Figure 1. Local- and foreign-currency bond issuance comparison in annual total value

                                                        Issuance Split in Local/Foreign Currency (Billion USD) - Brazil                                                                                                                                                                   Issuance Split in Local/Foreign Currency (Billion USD) - China


                                      500                                                                                                                                   500                                                                                         800                                                                                                                                                        800
                                                                              Foreign currency                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Foreign currency
                                      450                                                                                                                                   450
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        700                                                                                                                                                        700
                                                                              Local currency                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Local currency
                                      400                                                                                                                                   400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        600                                                                                                                                                        600
 Annual Foreign-currency Issuance




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Annual Foreign-currency Issuance
                                      350                                                                                                                                   350




                                                                                                                                                                                        Annual Local-currency Issuance




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Annual Local-currency Issuance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        500                                                                                                                                                        500
                                      300                                                                                                                                   300


                                      250                                                                                                                                   250                                                                                         400                                                                                                                                                        400


                                      200                                                                                                                                   200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        300                                                                                                                                                        300

                                      150                                                                                                                                   150
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        200                                                                                                                                                        200
                                      100                                                                                                                                   100

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        100                                                                                                                                                        100
                                           50                                                                                                                               50


                                            0                                                                                                                               0                                                                                               0                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                1968
                                                        1971
                                                               1974
                                                                      1977
                                                                             1980
                                                                                    1983
                                                                                           1986
                                                                                                  1989
                                                                                                         1992
                                                                                                                1995
                                                                                                                       1998
                                                                                                                              2001
                                                                                                                                     2004
                                                                                                                                            2007
                                                                                                                                                    2010
                                                                                                                                                            2013
                                                                                                                                                                    2016




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1968
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1971
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1977
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1983
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1986
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1989
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1995
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2016
                                                       Issuance Split in Local/Foreign Currency (Billion USD) - Indonesia                                                                                                                                                              Issuance Split in Local/Foreign Currency (Billion USD) - India


                                           35                                                                                                                               35                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                400
                                                                               Foreign currency                                                                                                                                                                                                                Foreign currency

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              350
                                           30                                  Local currency                                                                               30                                                                                                                                 Local currency


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              300
                                           25                                                                                                                               25
        Annual Foreign-currency Issuance




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Annual Foreign-currency Issuance
                                                                                                                                                                                  Annual Local-currency Issuance




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Annual Local-currency Issuance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              250
                                           20                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              200

                                           15                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              150

                                           10                                                                                                                               10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              100


                                            5                                                                                                                               5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              50


                                            0                                                                                                                               0                                                                                               0                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                1968
                                                        1971
                                                               1974
                                                                      1977
                                                                             1980
                                                                                    1983
                                                                                           1986
                                                                                                  1989
                                                                                                         1992
                                                                                                                1995
                                                                                                                       1998
                                                                                                                              2001
                                                                                                                                     2004
                                                                                                                                             2007
                                                                                                                                                     2010
                                                                                                                                                             2013
                                                                                                                                                                     2016




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1968
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1971
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1977
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1983
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1986
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1989
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1995
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2016




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         23
                                                       Issuance Split in Local/Foreign Currency (Billion USD) - Mexico                                                                                                                                                                                                       Issuance Split in Local/Foreign Currency (Billion USD) - Russia


                                          600                                                                                                                                                   600                                                                                                            60                                                                                                                                     60
                                                                              Foreign currency                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Foreign currency


                                                                              Local currency                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Local currency
                                          500                                                                                                                                                   500                                                                                                            50                                                                                                                                     50
 Annual Foreign-currency Issuance




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Annual Foreign-currency Issuance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Annual Local-currency Issuance




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Annual Local-currency Issuance
                                          400                                                                                                                                                   400                                                                                                            40                                                                                                                                     40




                                          300                                                                                                                                                   300                                                                                                            30                                                                                                                                     30




                                          200                                                                                                                                                   200                                                                                                            20                                                                                                                                     20




                                          100                                                                                                                                                   100                                                                                                            10                                                                                                                                     10




                                            0                                                                                                                                                   0                                                                                                               0                                                                                                                                     0
                                                1968
                                                       1971
                                                              1974
                                                                     1977
                                                                             1980
                                                                                     1983
                                                                                             1986
                                                                                                     1989
                                                                                                             1992
                                                                                                                     1995
                                                                                                                              1998
                                                                                                                                       2001
                                                                                                                                                2004
                                                                                                                                                         2007
                                                                                                                                                                  2010
                                                                                                                                                                           2013
                                                                                                                                                                                     2016




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1968
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1971
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1977
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1983
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1986
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1989
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1995
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2016
                                                       Issuance Split in Local/Foreign Currency (Billion USD) - Turkey                                                                                                                                                                                                Issuance Split in Local/Foreign Currency (Billion USD) - South Africa


                                          60                                                                                                                                                60                                                                                                                 80                                                                                                                                     80
                                                                                             Foreign currency                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Foreign currency

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               70                                                                                                                                     70
                                                                                             Local currency                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Local currency
                                          50                                                                                                                                                50

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               60                                                                                                                                     60
       Annual Foreign-currency Issuance




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Annual Foreign-currency Issuance
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Annual Local-currency Issuance




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Annual Local-currency Issuance
                                          40                                                                                                                                                40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               50                                                                                                                                     50


                                          30                                                                                                                                                30                                                                                                                 40                                                                                                                                     40


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               30                                                                                                                                     30
                                          20                                                                                                                                                20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20                                                                                                                                     20

                                          10                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10                                                                                                                                     10


                                           0                                                                                                                                                0                                                                                                                   0                                                                                                                                     0
                                                1968
                                                       1971
                                                              1974
                                                                     1977
                                                                            1980
                                                                                    1983
                                                                                            1986
                                                                                                    1989
                                                                                                            1992
                                                                                                                    1995
                                                                                                                            1998
                                                                                                                                     2001
                                                                                                                                              2004
                                                                                                                                                       2007
                                                                                                                                                                2010
                                                                                                                                                                         2013
                                                                                                                                                                                  2016




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1968
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1971
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1977
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1983
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1986
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1989
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1995
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2016




Table 1. Summary statistics
This table reports the average bond size in million USD and the number of bond issuances,
denominated in local and foreign currency respectively, for eight emerging markets during 1970-


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      24
2018. Local/Total is the total amount (number) of bond issued in local currency relative to the
total amount (number) of bond issuances in the sample.

                                  Average bond size (Million $)                Number of Bond

 Country     Country ISO     Local currency      Foreign currency   Local currency    Foreign currency

 Panel A: All bonds
 Brazil          BRA               570.08            1981.94             6302               110
 China           CHN              4270.22             548.24             1129                29
 Indonesia       IDN               621.67            1579.02              365                76
 India           IND              1132.28              NA                2388                0
 Mexico          MEX              1408.93            1534.74             1764               180
 Russia          RUS               881.67            4380.77              215                37
 Turkey          TUR               529.35             941.66              796               193
 South
                 ZAF               392.74                694.84          1645                46
 Africa
                 Total            1033.06                1499.2          14604              671

 Panel B: Bonds issued onshore
 Brazil          BRA               570.36                   0            6298                0
 China           CHN              4828.77                   0            1062                0
 Indonesia       IDN               622.98                300.47           365                5
 India           IND              1132.28                  0             2388                0
 Mexico          MEX              1409.72                147.24          1763                13
 Russia          RUS               917.73                 2297            214                2
 Turkey          TUR               529.35                878.56           796                56
 South
                 ZAF               408.79                 1.96           1644                   1
 Africa
                 Total            1061.71                743.01          14530               77

 Panel C: Bonds issued offshore

 Brazil          BRA               930.16            1981.94              4                 110
 China           CHN               414.62             566.03              67                 28
 Indonesia       IDN                 0               1670.67              0                 71
 Mexico          MEX                1.68             1642.75              1                 167
 Russia          RUS               2592.3            4499.84              1                  35
 Turkey          TUR                 0                967.46              0                 137
 South
                 ZAF                 0                   710.24            0                 45
 Africa
                 Total             467.05            1600.03              73                593




                                                    25
Table 2: Baseline probit regression results
This table reports the estimation results from the following probit regression:

                              , , = 1 =   , + S, , +  +  + , , (1),

where  ,, = 1 bond  in country  at period  is issued in local-currency. The key country-specific variable is
, , which takes the value of (i)  , , the currency appreciation of country  at period  relative to USD; (ii)
 , 10-year sovereign bond yield difference between country  and US at period ; and (iii)  , , a dummy
variable that equals 1 if country  is pursuing inflation targeting at period . The vector of bond-level control
variable S ,, covers (i) log( ,, ), the logarithm of the issued amount of bond  in country  at period ; (ii)
log( ,, ), the logarithm of the maturity of bond  in country  at period ; and (iii) Zero ,, , a dummy
that equals to one if the bond  in country  at period  is a zero-coupon bond. The variable  and  are
country and year fixed effects respectively. Standard errors reported in the parenthesis are clustered by
country. ***, ** and * denote significance level at 1%, 5% and 10%.




                                                    Dependent variable:  ,, = 1
                                          (1)               (2)             (3)                   (4)
FX                                     4.236***                                                4.287***
                                       (1.464)                                                 (1.462)
Yield                                                     -0.018
                                                         (0.027)
IT                                                                         0.077                 0.113
                                                                          (0.110)               (0.111)
log(Size)                             -0.253***          -0.182***       -0.245***             -0.253***
                                       (0.016)            (0.020)         (0.015)               (0.016)
log(Maturity)                         -0.384***          -0.324***       -0.380***             -0.386***
                                       (0.038)            (0.052)         (0.038)               (0.038)
Zero                                   1.055***          1.909***        1.101***              1.061***
                                       (0.112)           (0.296)         (0.112)               (0.111)
Constant                               8.574***          7.703***        13.672                8.567***
                                       (0.518)           (1.045)      (10,696.730)             (0.518)
Observations                           15,072             12,297          15,271                15,072
Log Likelihood                       -1,191.020          -637.551       -1,274.029            -1,190.495
Country fixed effects?                   Yes               Yes              Yes                   Yes
Year fixed effects?                      Yes               Yes              Yes                   Yes



                                                    26
Table 3: Controlling for additional domestic factors
This table reports the estimation results from the probit regression:
                              , , = 1 =   , + S, , +  , +  +  + ,, ,
where  ,, = 1 bond  in country  at period  is issued in local-currency.  , is the currency appreciation of
country  at period  relative to USD. The domestic factor  includes (i) CA Balance, the current account balance
normalized by GDP; (ii) Investment, the domestic investment normalized by GDP; (iii) Growth, the GDP per capita
growth rate; and (iv) Reserve, the international reserve normalized by GDP. The vector of bond-level control
variable S ,, covers (i) log( , , ), the logarithm of the issued amount of bond  in country  at period ; (ii)
log( ,, ), the logarithm of the maturity of bond  in country  at period ; and (iii) Zero ,, , a dummy that
equals to one if the bond  in country  at period  is a zero-coupon bond. The variable  and  are country and
year fixed effects respectively. Standard errors reported in the parenthesis are clustered by country. ***, ** and *
denote significance level at 1%, 5% and 10%.
                                                 Dependent variable:  ,, = 1

                                     (1)                       (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)
FX                                 5.048**                    4.166*      5.125***      4.687**      9.507***
                                   (2.317)                   (2.289)       (1.516)      (2.370)      (1.813)
log(Size)                         -0.214***                 -0.219***     -0.261***     -0.237***    -0.194***
                                   (0.018)                   (0.018)        (0.017)      (0.019)      (0.016)
log(Maturity)                     -0.348***                 -0.375***     -0.365***     -0.379***    -0.206***
                                   (0.039)                   (0.041)        (0.039)      (0.041)      (0.036)
Zero                               0.976***                  1.008***     1.091***      0.991***     1.298***
                                   (0.115)                   (0.117)       (0.115)      (0.116)      (0.117)
CA Balance                         0.036**                                                            0.025**
                                   (0.016)                                                            (0.011)
Investment                                                   0.007***                                0.018***
                                                             (0.002)                                 (0.001)
Growth                                                                    -0.026**                   -0.054***
                                                                           (0.012)                    (0.010)
Reserve                                                                                 -0.542*      -0.369**
                                                                                        (0.322)      (0.165)
Constant                           7.868***                  7.872***     8.590***      8.933***     5.754***
                                   (0.830)                   (0.981)       (0.530)      (0.984)      (0.406)

Observations                       14,517                     13,319       14,563        13,918       12,403
Log Likelihood                   -1,093.170                 -1,026.425   -1,129.459     -993.694    -1,087.018
Country fixed
                                     Yes                       Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
effects?
Year fixed effects?                  Yes                       Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes




                                                       27
Table 4: Controlling for global factors
This table reports the estimation results from the following probit regression

 ,, = 1 =  , +  S,, +  +  + ,, , (1)

where  ,, = 1 bond  in country  at period  is issued in local-currency. , is the currency
appreciation of country  at period  relative to USD. The global factor  includes (i) VIX, the
log return of the CBOE volatility index; (ii) Ted Spread, the interest difference between 3-M
LIBOR based on US dollars and 3-M US Treasury bill; (iii) Oil Price Shock, the log return in the
crude oil price; and (iv) Policy Uncertainty, the log return of the global Economic Policy
Uncertainty Index. The vector of bond-level control variable S,, covers (i) log(,, ), the
logarithm of the issued amount of bond  in country  at period  ; (ii) log(,, ), the
logarithm of the maturity of bond  in country  at period ; and (iii) Zero,, , a dummy that equals
to one if the bond  in country  at period  is a zero-coupon bond. The variable  and  are
country and year fixed effects respectively. Standard errors reported in the parenthesis are
clustered by country. ***, ** and * denote significance level at 1%, 5% and 10%.
                           Dependent variable: ,, = 1

                                (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)
FX                            9.814***     9.696***     10.343***      4.641**       4.725**
                              (1.002)      (1.001)       (1.016)       (1.834)       (1.941)
log(Size)                    -0.165***     -0.165***    -0.168***     -0.157***     -0.160***
                              (0.011)       (0.011)      (0.012)       (0.014)       (0.014)
log(Maturity)                -0.294***     -0.302***    -0.301***     -0.279***     -0.296***
                              (0.033)       (0.033)      (0.033)       (0.037)       (0.038)
Zero                          1.062***     1.048***      1.054***     1.201***       1.170***
                              (0.106)      (0.106)       (0.105)      (0.130)        (0.129)
VIX                            -0.243                                                 1.340
                              (0.833)                                                (1.325)
Ted Spread                                 -0.163*                                   -0.280**
                                           (0.095)                                    (0.117)
Oil Price Shock                                         -2.596***                     -1.110
                                                         (0.897)                     (1.049)
Policy Uncertainty                                                      0.550         -0.051
                                                                       (0.930)       (1.209)
Constant                      7.198***     7.338***      7.335***     6.934***       7.257***
                              (0.355)      (0.364)       (0.361)      (0.419)        (0.439)


                                              28
 Observations                     15,072         15,072          15,072         14,162          14,162
 Log Likelihood                 -1,353.824     -1,352.496      -1,349.734     -1,080.347      -1,076.830
 Country fixed effects?             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
 Year fixed effects?                No             No              No             No              No




 Table 5: Heterogeneity before and after Global Financial Crisis (GFC)
 This table reports the estimation results from the following probit regression

 ,, = 1 =  , +  ,   + S,, +  +  + ,, , (1)

 where ,, = 1 bond  in country  at period  is issued in local-currency.  is a dummy variable that
 equals to 1 after 2007 and 0 otherwise. The country-specific variable is , , which takes the value of (i)
 , , the currency appreciation of country  at period  relative to USD; (ii) , 10-year sovereign
 bond yield difference between country  and US at period ; and (iii) , , a dummy variable that equals 1
 if country  is pursuing inflation targeting at period . The vector of bond-level control variable S,, covers
 (i) log(,, ) , the logarithm of the issued amount of bond  in country  at period  ; (ii)
 log(,, ), the logarithm of the maturity of bond  in country  at period ; and (iii) Zero,, , a
 dummy that equals to one if the bond  in country  at period  is a zero-coupon bond. Chi-squared and the
 p-value are from the test of null hypothesis that the sum of FX (yield, IT) and its interaction with GFC is
 0. The variable  and  are country and year fixed effects respectively. The wald test oStandard errors
 reported in the parenthesis are clustered by country. ***, ** and * denote significance level at 1%, 5% and
 10%.



                                  (1)                    (2)                      (3)
FX                                5.251***
                                  (1.477)
Yield                                                    -0.093***
                                                         (0.034)
IT                                                                                0.304**
                                                                                  (0.125)
FX*GFC                            -28.594***
                                  (6.511)
Yield*GFC                                                0.162***
                                                         (0.050)
IT*GFC                                                                            -0.720***
                                                                                  (0.194)
GFC                               0.738**                -1.451                   -4.031


                                                    29
                         (0.332)               (0.907)           (10,696.720)
                               ***                   ***
log(Size)                -0.255                -0.181            -0.242***
                         (0.016)               (0.020)           (0.015)
log(Maturity)            -0.395***             -0.323***         -0.380***
                         (0.038)               (0.052)           (0.038)

Zero                     1.074***              1.954***          1.103***
                         (0.113)               (0.300)           (0.111)
Constant                 8.729***              8.273***          13.579
                         (0.522)               (1.051)           (10,696.720)
Observations             15,072                12,297            15,271
Log Likelihood           -1,181.284            -631.928          -1,266.973
Country fixed effects?   Yes                   Yes               Yes
Year fixed effects?      Yes                   Yes               Yes
                         FC+FC*GFC             Yield+Yield*GFC   IT+IT*GFC
Chi-squared              10.538                11.828            2.955
p-value                  2.267×10-5 ***        7.381×10-6 ***    0.052**




                                          30
Online Appendix
A1. Introduction
        In addition to the Fed policies, the eurozone sovereign debt crisis and the ensuing sovereign
debt crises of Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain (GIIPS) induced the ECB to adopt Mario
Draghi's version of unconventional monetary policies. Draghi's ECB tenure: Saving the euro,
faltering on inflation, FT 10/20/19 concisely summarized these policies. Mario Draghi, then the
ECB President, "expanded the ECB's policy toolbox to include generous subsidised lending to
banks to help shore up their balance sheets, negative rates to lower borrowing costs and sovereign
bond purchases to bring down the market interest rates faced by the bloc's most troubled
economies." Consequently, "The ECB has subsequently accumulated 2.6tn of assets,
including nearly a quarter of member states' outstanding bonds. Critics in northern
Europe complained that these programmes were beyond the bank's mandate, while others warned
that the negative side-effects outweighed the benefits." "In the eurozone, government bond yields
measure investors' perception of risk -- the more likely the markets think it is that a country will
crash out of the bloc, the wider the spread between its yields and those of Germany, the single
currency's largest economy. During Mr Draghi's tenure, peripheral countries' spreads shot up to
historic highs as investors became fearful that they would be unable to finance their rising debt
levels or stimulate their struggling economies. The bloc's banks are large holders of their home
nations' debt, so the sovereign debt crisis soon evolved into a banking crisis, and that in turn hit
lending to households and businesses. The subsequent retrenchment in eurozone bond spreads
demonstrated that Mr Draghi's use of unconventional monetary policy had worked, economists
say. `It is widely agreed that [his] pledge to make the ECB the de facto lender of last resort to
governments was the key to arresting the euro crisis,' said Christian Odendahl, chief economist at
the Centre for European Reform."
         On the issue of fiscal dominance, this possibility can arise when debt/GDP constrains the
conduct of monetary policy by forcing the central bank to pay attention to reducing the costs of
servicing the public debt and external debt [see Blanchard (2004) for an overview, and also Ahmed
et al. (2019) for a recent cross-country evidence in the context of inflation targeting regimes and
fiscal dominance]. The distinction between fiscal and monetary dominance regimes is due to
Sargent and Wallace (1981). If the government adjusts the primary deficit to limit debt
accumulation, the central bank is not forced to inflate away the debt, allowing the central bank to
focus on inflation targeting, in line with monetary dominance. However, long periods of large
fiscal deficits and high public debt-to-GDP ratios raises the specter of fiscal dominance by
tightening the links between fiscal policy, monetary policy and government debt management.
When higher policy interest rates or depreciating currencies raise concerns about debt
sustainability, monetary independence is compromised. Possible manifestations of these concerns
include the `fear of floating,' fiscal pressure against policy interest rate hikes, financial repression,
and the like.
        Applying the public finance logic of the second-best, the mitigation of a constraint like the
'Original Sin' revives borrowing opportunities: it furthers the integration of EMs into global
financial markets. However, it may also induce secondary effects with more ambiguous welfare
effects. Indeed, the resulting increase in the external debt of EMs raises concerns that volatile
sovereign spreads and interest rates may drive EMs' fiscal vulnerability. Such fragility is evident
in growing susceptibility to confidence crises when a seemingly moderate level of aggregate
                                                   31
external debt/GDP ratio may push a country into a foreign debt crisis, i.e., the presence of multiple
equilibria. Lower global risk tolerance in the risk-off environments, also known as a flight to
quality, deteriorating growth prospects of EMs can sharply widen sovereign spreads and risk
premia, inducing capital flight and exacerbating roll over difficulties. These events may put in
motion self-fulfilling confidence crises of increasing sovereign spreads, leading to a sudden stop
and capital flight crisis within just a few quarters. The end game frequently saddles the public
sector with a massive debt overhang associated with bailing out the financial system and prime
corporate borrowers, sometimes in the context of IMF stabilization packages [see Aizenman et al.
(2019)].




                                                 32
Appendix Table 1: Marginal effect Baseline results
This table reports the estimation marginal effects from the following probit regression:

                               , , = 1 =   , + S, , +  +  + , , (1),

where  ,, = 1 bond  in country  at period  is issued in local-currency. The key country-specific variable is
, , which takes the value of (i)  , , the currency appreciation of country  at period  relative to USD; (ii)
 , 10-year sovereign bond yield difference between country  and US at period ; and (iii)  , , a dummy
variable that equals 1 if country  is pursuing inflation targeting at period . The vector of bond-level control
variable S ,, covers (i) log( ,, ), the logarithm of the issued amount of bond  in country  at period ; (ii)
log( ,, ), the logarithm of the maturity of bond  in country  at period ; and (iii) Zero ,, , a dummy
that equals to one if the bond  in country  at period  is a zero-coupon bond. All regression control for  and
 , the country and year fixed effects respectively. Standard errors reported in the parenthesis are clustered by
country. ***, ** and * denote significance level at 1%, 5% and 10%.

                                        Dependent variable:
                                             (1)                (2)            (3)              (4)

 FX                                     0.183***                                          0.185***

                                        (0.063)                                           (0.063)
 Yield                                                     -0.001
                                                           (0.001)
 IT                                                                       0.003           0.004
                                                                          (0.005)         (0.005)

 log(Size)                              -0.011***          -0.005***      -0.011***       -0.011***

                                        (0.001)            (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.001)

 log(Maturity)                          -0.017***          -0.009***      -0.018***       -0.017***


                                        (0.002)            (0.001)        (0.002)         (0.002)

 Zero                                   0.039***           0.034***       0.043***        0.039***

                                        (0.004)            (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.004)




                                                      33
Appendix Table 2: Controlling for lagged currency valuations.
 This table reports the estimation results from the following probit regression:
                                     , , = 1 =   , + S, , +  +  + ,,
where  ,, = 1 bond  in country  at period  is issued in local-currency. The key country-specific variable is , ,
which takes the value of , , the currency appreciation of country  at period  relative to USD and its one- and two-
year lags, L1.FX and L2.FX. The vector of bond-level control variable S, , covers (i) log( ,, ), the logarithm of
the issued amount of bond  in country  at period ; (ii) log( ,, ), the logarithm of the maturity of bond  in
country  at period ; and (iii) Zero ,, , a dummy that equals to one if the bond  in country  at period  is a zero-
coupon bond. The variable  and  are country and year fixed effects respectively. Chi-squared and the associated p
value from the Wald Test on the joint significance of currency appreciation related variables are reported in the bottom
row of this table. Standard errors reported in the parenthesis are clustered by country. ***, ** and * denote significance
level at 1%, 5% and 10%.

                                (1)                 (2)                   (3)                     (4)
FX                                                                        1.885                   1.383
                                                                          (1.808)                 (1.919)


L1.FX                           3.883***            4.559***              3.075**                 3.842**
                                (1.126)             (1.546)               (1.372)                 (1.850)


L2.FX                                               -1.307                                        -1.111
                                                    (1.440)                                       (1.477)


log(Size)                       -0.253***           -0.240***             -0.254***               -0.241***
                                (0.016)             (0.017)               (0.016)                 (0.017)


log(Maturity)                   -0.375***           -0.369***             -0.377***               -0.370***
                                (0.038)             (0.038)               (0.038)                 (0.038)


Zero                            1.054***            1.057***              1.050***                1.055***
                                (0.112)             (0.112)               (0.112)                 (0.112)


                                8.691***            8.326***              8.757***                8.376***
Constant                        (0.480)             (0.470)               (0.485)                 (0.475)



Observations                    15,041              14,961                15,041                  14,961
Log Likelihood                  -1,177.820          -1,160.718            -1,177.288              -1,160.460
Wald test Chi-Squared           11.894              5.590                 6.508                   3.920
Wald test p-value               0.001***            0.004***              0.001***                0.008***
Country fixed effects?          Yes                 Yes                   Yes                     Yes
Year fixed effects?             Yes                 Yes                   Yes                     Yes


                                                             34
Appendix Table 3: Controlling for fiscal position and government expenditure
This table reports the estimation results from the probit regression:
                             , , = 1 =   , + S, , +  , +  +  + ,, ,
where  ,, = 1 bond  in country  at period  is issued in local-currency.  , is the currency appreciation of
country  at period  relative to USD. The domestic factor  includes (i) Fiscal surplus, the fiscal position
normalized by GDP; (ii) government expenditure, the government spending normalized by GDP; (iii) Investment,
the domestic investment normalized by GDP; and (iv) Growth, the GDP per capita growth rate. The vector of bond-
level control variable S ,, covers (i) log( ,, ), the logarithm of the issued amount of bond  in country  at
period ; (ii) log( , , ), the logarithm of the maturity of bond  in country  at period ; and (iii) Zero , , , a
dummy that equals to one if the bond  in country  at period  is a zero-coupon bond. The variable  and  are
country and year fixed effects respectively. Standard errors reported in the parenthesis are clustered by country. ***,
** and * denote significance level at 1%, 5% and 10%.


                                    (1)                     (2)                   (3)
                                          **                      **
FX                               7.599                   6.617                  7.337**
                                 (3.383)                 (3.007)                (3.540)
log(Maturity)                    -0.200***              -0.219***              -0.200***
                                 (0.021)                 (0.019)                (0.021)
log(Size)                        -0.465***              -0.366***              -0.464***
                                 (0.052)                 (0.041)                (0.052)

Zero                             0.836***                1.014***              0.837***
                                 (0.160)                 (0.118)                (0.160)


Fiscal surplus                    6.926                                          6.268
                                 (7.088)                                        (7.556)


Government
                                                          0.426                 -0.152
Expenditure
                                                         (0.481)                (0.581)

Growth                           -0.037*                  -0.012                 -0.035
                                 (0.021)                 (0.017)                (0.022)

Investment                       0.006***                0.007***              0.005***
                                 (0.002)                 (0.002)               (0.002)

Constant                         8.063***                7.550***              8.139***
                                 (0.886)                 (1.017)               (0.931)
Observations                      10,860                  12,904                10,860
Log Likelihood                   -695.605               -982.928               -695.571
Country fixed effects?             Yes                     Yes                    Yes
Year fixed effects?                Yes                     Yes                    Yes


                                                          35
Appendix Table 4: Addressing incident parameter problem with bias correction.
This table reports the probit regression that corrects for the bias caused by incident parameter problem foll
owing Hahn and Newey (2004) based on the following model:

                              , , = 1 =   , + S, , +  +  + , , (1),

where  ,, = 1 bond  in country  at period  is issued in local-currency. The key country-specific variable is
, , which takes the value of (i)  , , the currency appreciation of country  at period  relative to USD; (ii)
 , 10-year sovereign bond yield difference between country  and US at period ; and (iii)  , , a dummy
variable that equals 1 if country  is pursuing inflation targeting at period . The vector of bond-level control
variable S ,, covers (i) log( ,, ), the logarithm of the issued amount of bond  in country  at period ; (ii)
log( ,, ), the logarithm of the maturity of bond  in country  at period ; and (iii) Zero ,, , a dummy
that equals to one if the bond  in country  at period  is a zero-coupon bond. The variable log( , , ) is
dropped in the estimation due to computational matrix singularity. All regression control for  and  , the
country and year fixed effects respectively. Standard errors reported in the parenthesis are clustered by
country. ***, ** and * denote significance level at 1%, 5% and 10%.




                                                       Dependent variable:  ,, = 1

                                           (1)                   (2)              (3)               (4)

FX                                      4.156***                                                  4.138***
                                         (1.135)                                                  (1.128)
Yield                                                          -0.020
                                                              (0.024)
IT                                                                              0.182*            0.179*
                                                                                (0.101)           (0.103)
log(Maturity)                           -0.388***            -0.260***         -0.395***         -0.389***
                                         (0.035)              (0.051)           (0.034)           (0.035)
Zero                                    1.050***               2.273***
                                                                                1.036***          1.058***
                                         (0.111)              (0.320)           (0.109)           (0.110)

Observations                             12,724                9,949            12,882            12,724
Average individual effect                3.649                 3.371             8.081             3.688
Country fixed effects?                    Yes                   Yes               Yes               Yes
Year fixed effects?                       Yes                   Yes               Yes               Yes




                                                      36
