                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                            BIG G

                                          Lydia Cox
                                        Gernot Müller
                                        Ernesto Pastén
                                       Raphael Schoenle
                                        Michael Weber

                                      Working Paper 27034
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27034


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2020




We acknowledge outstanding research assistance by Jiacheng Feng. We thank Klaus Adam,
Regis Barnichon, Christian Bayer, Benjamin Born, Gabriel Chodorow-Reich, Zeno Enders,
Emmanuel Farhi, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Edward Knotek, Ludwig Straub and conference and
seminar participants at the Banco Central de Chile Heterogeneity in Macroeconomics
Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, PUC Santiago, the University of Tuebingen,
and the VfS Monetary Meeting Frankfurt for valuable comments. Weber also thanks the Fama-
Miller Center at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business for financial support.
Schoenle and Weber also gratefully acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation
under grant number 1756997. The views expressed herein are solely those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the Central Bank of Chile, the Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Lydia Cox, Gernot Müller, Ernesto Pastén, Raphael Schoenle, and Michael Weber.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Big G
Lydia Cox, Gernot Müller, Ernesto Pastén, Raphael Schoenle, and Michael Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 27034
April 2020
JEL No. E32,E62

                                          ABSTRACT

Big G typically refers to aggregate government spending on a homogeneous good. In this paper,
we open up this construct by analyzing the entire universe of procurement contracts of the US
government and establish five facts. First, government spending is granular, that is, it is
concentrated in relatively few firms and sectors. Second, relative to private expenditures its
composition is biased. Third, procurement contracts are short-lived. Fourth, idiosyncratic
variation dominates the fluctuation of spending. Last, government spending is concentrated in
sectors with relatively sticky prices. Accounting for these facts within a stylized New Keynesian
model offers new insights into the fiscal transmission mechanism: fiscal shocks hardly impact
inflation, little crowding out of private expenditure exists, and the multiplier tends to be larger
compared to a one-sector benchmark aligning the model with the empirical evidence.

Lydia Cox                                        Raphael Schoenle
Harvard University                               Brandeis University
lcox@nber.org                                    Department of Economics
                                                 415 South Street
Gernot Müller                                    Waltham, MA 02454
University of Tuebingen and CEPR                 and CEPR
Mohlstr. 36,                                     schoenle@brandeis.edu
72074 Tuebingen,
Germany                                          Michael Weber
gernot.mueller@uni-tuebingen.de                  Booth School of Business
                                                 University of Chicago
Ernesto Pastén                                   5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Central Bank of Chile                            Chicago, IL 60637
Agustinas 1180                                   and NBER
Santiago                                         michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu
Chile
and Toulouse School of Economics
epasten@bcentral.cl




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27034
1       Introduction

What is "Big G"? In the national accounts G refers to "government spending"--the part of
GDP that comprises government expenditures. This convention possibly helps explain why
research on fiscal policy typically entertains a somewhat crude notion of government spending
as a homogeneous good, isomorphic to GDP. In empirical and theoretical work, we frequently
refer to it as Big G, and the literature assumes policy makers can freely adjust it over time--in
response to the business cycle, or for other reasons. The recent "renaissance of fiscal research"
survey by Ramey (2019) has changed little in this regard. A number of recent contributions
have started to study the role of heterogeneity for the fiscal transmission mechanism but focus
exclusively on heterogeneity on the household side (McKay and Reis, 2016; Auclert et al., 2018;
Hagedorn et al., 2019).
        Starting point of our paper is the observation that Big G itself is fundamentally
heterogeneous. Government spending is not simply one large transaction. It is composed of
a large number of smaller transactions whose composition differs from the other components
of aggregate demand. Empirically, we first establish five facts about government spending by
characterizing the underlying components of Big G. In the second part of the paper, we then
study the role of these facts for the fiscal transmission mechanism through the lens of a stylized
two-sector New Keynesian model. Accounting for the heterogeneity of government spending has
first-order effects on the transmission mechanism aligning the model prediction with empirical
evidence.
        We construct our empirical anatomy of Big G using a database that has only recently
become accessible: USASpending.gov. The database provides detailed information on the entire
universe of procurement contracts by the US federal government since 2001. These data capture
about half of federal consumption expenditures which, in turn, account for about one half of
general government spending. For each year, the database records several million government
procurement transactions. We establish five facts on the basis of detailed analysis of these data.1
        The first of our five facts is government spending is granular in the sense of Gabaix (2011).
Few firms and sectors supply a large share of government consumption: (i) The largest 20% of
suppliers supply 99% of government consumption. (ii) The top 10 firms--or the top 0.01% --
among all firms supplying goods and services to the federal government receive more than 35% of
all procurement contracts by value and the top 0.1% of firms receive almost 60%. (iii) The most
important suppliers to the federal government are concentrated in few sectors: firms in the largest
three out of the roughly 20 two-digit NAICS industries supply more than 60% of all government
    1
    Defense spending accounts for more than one half of the transactions by value in our data set. We replicate
the five facts separately for defense and non-defense spending in Online Appendix A.5.



                                                      1
                      Figure 1: Consumption Shares: Government vs Household




                                                         0.15
                                                                          q
                                                                                               q   Total Federal
                                                                                                   Federal Defense
                                                                                                   Federal Non-Defense


                         Government Consumption Shares

                                                         0.10




                                                                 q
                                                                          q
                                                                                              q
                                                         0.05




                                                                                                               q
                                                                  q


                                                                      q
                                                                              q         q

                                                                                                                          q
                                                             q        q
                                                                          q
                                                                          qq                               q
                                                                   q         q
                                                                  q q
                                                                  q q q q
                                                                   qq  q       q
                                                                   qq
                                                                    q     qq           q
                                                                  qqqqq
                                                                  q
                                                                  qq                    q
                                                                   q
                                                                   q
                                                         0.00




                                                                  qq
                                                                   qq q
                                                                    q              q
                                                         q        q
                                                                  qq
                                                                   q
                                                                   q
                                                                   q
                                                                   q
                                                                  qq
                                                                  q
                                                                  qq
                                                                  q
                                                                  q
                                                                  qqq
                                                                   q
                                                                   q
                                                                   q
                                                                   q
                                                                  qqq
                                                                    q
                                                                    q
                                                                    q
                                                                    q
                                                                    q
                                                                   qqq
                                                                     q
                                                                     q
                                                                     qq
                                                                      q
                                                                      qqq   q q                    q




                                                                 0.00                       0.05                   0.10       0.15

                                                                                            Private Consumption Shares




Notes. This figure shows the fraction of government spending in a certain sector on the y-axis and the fraction
of private spending in a certain sector over total private spending on the x-axis. We separate total federal
spending (blue circles) into defense spending (red asterisks) and non-defense spending (green triangles). We use
the BEA Use Table to calculate private consumption shares. The sample represents averages over the period
between 2001 and 2018.



contracts and the top 1 percent of just over 1,000 six-digit NAICS industries make up around
40% of all government spending. Decomposing the total cross-sectional variance of government
contracts, we find almost 100% of the variation is "within" firms or sectors and almost none
is "across" firms or sectors providing further evidence of the granular nature of government
spending. The underlying cross-sectional size distribution of contracts is characterized by fat
tails, providing the basis for these facts.
     The second fact is the existence of a sectoral bias in government spending: the share of
government spending in each sector differs substantially from the share consumers spend on
the goods and services of that sector. Figure 1 shows the share of government spending in a
certain sector on the vertical axis, and the same ratio for private consumption on the horizontal
axis. We separate total federal spending (blue circles) into defense spending (red asterisks)
and non-defense spending (green triangles). Both for overall federal spending, but also for
both subcomponents, a substantial difference in the spending patterns of consumers and the
government exists. Some sectors that are negligible for the government make up about 14% of
private consumption, whereas sectors that are unimportant for consumers are big suppliers to the


                                                                                                       2
government. This sectoral bias also holds for non-defense spending. Hence, government spending
varies across sectors and does not purely mimic consumer spending. In earlier work, Ramey and
Shapiro (1998) stressed the importance of sectoral bias for the fiscal transmission mechanism.
Until now, however, no data was available to establish the sectoral bias of government spending
systematically.
    Third, we show government contracts have a short duration and are often modified. The
median contract has a duration of 36 days, 80 percent of contracts last less than one year, and
about 30 percent of contract transactions represent modifications to initial contracts. Hence,
the government does not tend to enter long-term contracts with suppliers. Only few contracts
lasts very long. The median firm supplying goods to the government is in the dataset for 2
years, while the firm with the median value of average annual obligations is in the dataset for
only 1 year.
    Fourth, idiosyncratic shocks dominate the fluctuations in government spending over time
­ rather than in the cross section (which the first fact studies). To establish this fact, we
decompose growth rates following Gabaix (2011) and Foerster et al. (2011) and find idiosyncratic
shocks, both at the firm and the sectoral level, are again key drivers of variation in government
spending over time. In addition, when we estimate AR(1) processes for government spending
at the sectoral level and study the correlations in the residual spending across sectors, we find
aggregate shocks play a negligible role for changes in sectoral government spending over time.
Hence, large variation of government spending over time exists that variation in Big G cannot
account for. Instead, if an innovation occurs, it is idiosyncratic at the sectoral level. These
innovations have both large negative as well as large positive correlations for many sector pairs.
Overall, sectoral government spending is generally relatively persistent, consistent with our
cross-sectional variance decomposition.
    Fifth, government consumption tends to be concentrated in sectors with a relatively high-
degree of price stickiness. The frequency of price changes in the top two two-digit NAICS sectors
is 9% while it is on average 20% for the remaining sectors in the economy. We use the micro
data underlying the producer price index at the Bureau of Labor Statistics to estimate these
frequencies. The average frequency of price adjustment overall is 16% which corresponds to
prices adjusting approximately every 6 months. Our detailed contract data allow us to further
characterize the way in which prices are sticky. The contract data contain information on the
types of contracts between buyer (the government) and sellers. The majority of contracts--over
85 percent-- are "fixed-price" in nature.
    The facts we establish might not appear surprising but so far, no systematic evaluation
exists. To better understand whether they matter from a macro perspective, we feed these facts
into a two-sector New Keynesian model with government spending a la Woodford (2011) and

                                                3
compare the implications of the model to a one-sector benchmark. The model is deliberately
stylized in order to account for the five facts as clearly as possible while only minimally departing
from the conventional one-sector model. Importantly, rather than postulating a process for Big
G, as is commonly done, we model government spending in each sector as a distinct variable.
    Sectoral heterogeneity induces profound changes in the fiscal transmission mechanism in
our two-sector model relative to the benchmark economy. We derive a number of closed-form
results for the limiting case in which prices are completely flexible in one sector. If government
spending is biased towards the flex-price sector, crowding out of private expenditure can be
infinite. Empirically, however, government spending is biased towards the sticky-price sector. An
increase of government spending in the sticky-price sector induces little crowding out of private
expenditure, and hence the output multiplier is considerably larger relative to the one-sector
benchmark.
    We also run model simulations and show the sectoral heterogeneity of government spending
matters quantitatively. Specially, we calibrate the model to capture key features of the data,
including the actual degree of price rigidities as well as the sectoral composition of government
spending and the relative size of sectors. A fiscal shock in the relatively small and sticky-price
sector towards which government spending is biased induces a multiplier effect about three times
larger than a shock in the other sector. Moreover, the multiplier becomes even bigger if prices
are more flexible in the sector in which private expenditure is concentrated. Hence, just like
Barsky et al. (2007) and Barsky et al. (2016) show for the transmission of monetary policy, we
find the degree of price stickiness in the sector in which government spending is concentrated is
essential and not the economy-wide stickiness.
    In the New Keynesian model, monetary policy is also key for the fiscal transmission
mechanism (Woodford, 2011; Christiano et al., 2011; Farhi and Werning, 2016). Government
spending is inflationary and thus (generally) triggers a response of the central bank. The
resulting interest rate increase crowds out private expenditure because of intertemporal
substitution. As a result, the multiplier is smaller than unity--in contrast to the textbook
IS-LM model in which no intertemporal substitution takes place. In related work, Boehm
(2019) distinguishes between government consumption and government investment and finds the
multiplier is particularly small for government investment precisely because the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution of investment demand tends to be high. Auerbach and Gorodnichenko
(2012a,b) and Ramey and Zubairy (2018) discuss empirically whether government spending
multipliers are larger in recessions and periods of low interest rates when monetary policy
might be less responsive to government spending. A number of recent contributions introduce
household heterogeneity and credit frictions in New Keynesian models in order to limit
intertemporal substitution (Gal´
                               i et al., 2007; McKay et al., 2016; Kaplan et al., 2018). As

                                                 4
a result, multipliers tend to be larger.
    We show sectoral heterogeneity in spending by households and the government combined
with sectoral heterogeneity in pricing frictions has a similar effect and as a result, the New
Keynesian model becomes "more Keynesian." In a nutshell, since the government spends in
relatively sticky-price sectors and the private sector spends in relatively flexible-price sectors,
inflation is more responsive to private expenditure than to government spending.              Such
differential heterogeneity in turn dampens the monetary response to a fiscal impulse: less
intertemporal substitution occurs, less crowding out, and the multiplier is larger. We also
show, however, things are turned up-side down at the zero lower bound (ZLB). The ranking
of multipliers across sectors flips: raising government spending in the relatively flexible sector
has now a larger impact because no interest rate response occurs to curb the larger inflationary
pressure and hence more crowding in of private consumption happens.
    Empirically, accounting for sectoral heterogeneity helps the model to generate predictions
that align better with the time series evidence than predictions from the conventional one-sector
model. Many studies have established the response of interest rates, both nominal and real, as
well as the response of inflation to fiscal shocks tends to be weak or even negative (Mountford
and Uhlig, 2009; Corsetti et al., 2012; Ramey, 2016) which is exactly what our model generates.
Once we modify the model to account for the evidence on government spending at the micro
level, the model also gets the macro evidence right. Our data also allow studying whether fiscal
multipliers differ for defense versus non-defense spending but we leave a systematic analysis of
fiscal multipliers for future work.
    Our paper is related to recent work on the effect of regional fiscal policies in monetary
unions (Gal´
           i and Monacelli, 2008; Nakamura and Steinsson, 2014; Hettig and M¨
                                                                            uller, 2018). In
this literature, government spending is concentrated in some spatial partition of the economy,
and its composition is biased relative to the composition of private expenditures. Just like in our
analysis, the effects of fiscal policy turn out to be highly sensitive to the conduct of monetary
policy. In contrast to this earlier work, we model private expenditure as being determined at the
aggregate level rather than at the regional/ sectoral level. Chodorow-Reich (2019) surveys the
recent empirical work on government spending multipliers based on cross-sectional data. Last,
we also share modeling features with a number of recent papers that account for heterogeneity
on the production side across sectors and firms, tracing out the implications for the business
cycle (Acemoglu et al., 2012; Pasten et al., 2019a,b; Baqaee and Farhi, 2019; Ozdagli and Weber,
2017). Bouakez et al. (2018), in particular, study theoretically the transmission of fiscal policy
shocks in a rich model featuring heterogeneity in sector size and input-output structure.




                                                5
2       Data

2.1     Background on USASpending

In the first part of this paper, we undertake a comprehensive analysis of the USASpending.gov
database--the official source for federal spending data.2 We first detail and define several
fundamental concepts before we move on to analyze the data. The database was created in
response to the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act (FFATA), which was
signed into law on September 26, 2006. FFATA requires federal contract, grant, loan, and
other financial assistance awards of more than $25,000 are publicly accessible on a searchable
website, in an effort to provide transparency to the American people on how the government
spends their tax dollars. In accordance with FFATA, federal agencies are required to collect
and report data on federal procurement. Agencies must report award data--contracts, grants,
loans, and other financial assistance-- on a monthly basis through various government systems
such as the Federal Procurement Data System (FPDS-NG) for contract data and the Data Act
Broker for grant, loan, and other financial assistance data. Some agencies report frequently
during a month, while others report once a month or even less frequently if they do not issue
awards on a monthly basis. The USASpending.gov database which the Treasury Department
hosts, compiles the data from the various government reporting systems. In addition to directly
uploading the information which the federal agencies report to systems like the FPDS-NG, the
site also utilizes information collected from the recipients of the awards themselves. Though
FFATA was not signed into law until 2006, data are available back to 2001 through an external
organization.


2.2     What are Government Contracts?

Our data focus on a subset of federal spending--spending on goods and services via government
contracts. The Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) defines "Contract actions" as "any oral or
written action that results in the purchase, rent, or lease of supplies or equipment, services, or
construction using appropriated dollars over the micro-purchase threshold, or modifications to
these actions regardless of dollar value." The micro-purchase threshold is in general $3,500.
As the definition suggests, the goods and services that the government consumes through
contracts span a wide range, from janitorial services for federal buildings to IT support services
to airplanes and rockets. Contracts can be short-term--e.g., a one-month contact awarded by
the Department of Agriculture Rural Housing Service to Sikes Property And Appraisal Service
    2
     Demyanyk et al. (2019) and Auerbach et al. (2019) also rely on this database but their focus is on estimating
fiscal multipliers. They rely exclusively on contracts awarded by the Department of Defense. On average, these
account for about half of the transactions in the database by count and for about two thirds by value. Appendix A.2
provides an overview of other similar data that have been used in the literature.


                                                        6
for single family housing appraisals in September 2008--or longer-term relationships--e.g., the
43 year and 10 month contract awarded by the Department of Energy to Leland Stanford Junior
University for the operation and management of the SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory.
In awarding contracts, federal agencies must abide by the guiding principles set forth in the
FAR. The FAR includes directives on every aspect of contracting, from how contracts should be
structured and priced, to how they should be solicited to promote competition and encourage
small business participation.


2.2.1   Type of Awards

The government can use different types of awards to procure services. The majority of federal
spending through contracts is done through either a definitive contract action (DCA) or a
delivery order. A DCA is a legally binding agreement obligating the seller to furnish certain
supplies or services and the buyer to pay for them. For example, on April 27, 2018, Lockheed
Martin was awarded an $828,724,214 contract to build Guided Multiple Launch Rocket Systems
for the Department of the Army. Funds for the project were obligated at the time of the award,
and the expected time of completion is September, 2021.
    A delivery order, on the other hand, is a contract that does not specify a firm quantity, but
provides issuance of orders for the delivery of goods or services during the period of the contract.
For example, on January 21, 2015, a company called Ace Maintenance & Services, Inc. was
awarded a $13,663,688 contract for janitorial services at Naval Support Activity Bethesda. The
work to be performed under the contract included all labor, supervision, management, tools,
materials, equipment, facilities, incidental engineering, and other items necessary to provide
janitorial services. The initial contract action was for a base period of one year and one month,
with the option of four additional years. The contract stipulated a maximum dollar amount for
the base period and four option years of $69,698,540. DCAs tend to be used for larger, one-time
purchases, while delivery orders are used for smaller and more frequent purchases. We provide
additional details on different types of awards see in Online Appendix Section A.3.1.


2.2.2   Type of Contract Pricing

In addition to the type of award, a wide selection of contract pricing are available to the
Government and contractors. Contract types are grouped into two broad categories: fixed-price
contracts and cost-reimbursement contracts. Within those categories, specific contract types
vary according to the degree of risk placed on the contractor for the execution costs of the
contract, and the nature of the incentives offered to the contractor for their performance. The
most common type of contract is a firm-fixed-price contract, which details a price that is not


                                                 7
subject to any adjustment, regardless of the contractor's actual cost experience in executing the
contract. Fixed-price contracts can also include provisions for economic adjustment or incentive
payments, somewhat reducing the risk placed on the contractor.
    Cost-reimbursement contracts are also frequent, and typically include a negotiated fixed fee
or an award amount on top of the reimbursement payment. We discuss in further detail what
the data on contract pricing look like when we discuss our fifth fact in the next section.
    The pricing structure of a contract depends on many factors--price competition, the
complexity and urgency of the requirement, and the length of the contract, to name a few.
Many contracts are complex and require hybrid pricing structures--the Multiple Launch Rocket
System contract mentioned above, for example, is a "cost-plus-fixed-fee, firm-fixed-price, and
fixed-price-incentive" hybrid. According to the FAR, "the objective is to negotiate a contract
type and price (or estimated cost and fee) that will result in reasonable contractor risk and
provide the contractor with the greatest incentive for efficient and economical performance."


2.2.3   Competition

Federal regulations generally require contracting officers to promote full and open competition in
soliciting offers and awarding government contracts. In most cases, agencies are directed to use
sealed bids, competitive proposals or some combination of competitive procedures to solicit and
issue awards. Ultimately, about half of the awarded contracts were fully and openly competitive
via negotiated proposals. The Ace Maintenance & Services, Inc. contract for janitorial services,
for example, was solicited using the Navy Electronic Commerce Online website, and seven
proposals were received.
    A number of cases, however, exist, in which full and open competition is not required. Some
contracts are deemed "not available for competition," in which case agencies are authorized by
statute to solicit bids from only one source. Solicitation from one source is authorized if, for
example, the supplies or services required by the agency are available from only one responsible
source or, for the Department of Defense, NASA, and the Coast Guard, from only one or
a limited number of responsible sources. Supplies can also be deemed available from only the
original source if the contract is a follow-on to an existing contract for the continued development
or production of a major system or highly specialized equipment. The Lockheed Martin contract
for Guided Multiple Launch Rocket Systems is an example for the latter.
    Finally, for smaller awards--those below a certain dollar threshold--federal agencies are
required to use "Simplified Acquisition Procedures (SAPs)," which reduce administrative costs,
increase efficiency, and improve opportunities for small and minority-owned businesses.




                                                 8
2.3     Scope of the Dataset

The dataset we use includes the universe of federal government contract transactions from fiscal
years 2001 through 2018.3 On average, 3.2 million individual contract transaction records exist
each year--with almost 5 million annual contracts toward the end of the sample period. The
contracts are awarded to over 160 thousand recipient parent companies each year, spanning over
1000 six-digit NAICS sectors. The median transaction value is just under $2,300, while the mean
transaction value is just under $140,000, suggesting the distribution is heavily right skewed. The
majority of contract transactions (82 percent) represent positive obligations from the government
to firms, but also transactions with negative value exist, or deobligations, which occur when a
modification to an initial contract is performed (see section 3.3 for details). Figure 2a shows
contract obligations are roughly equivalent to total federal government purchases of intermediate
goods and services plus gross investment (from the National Income and Product Accounts).4
Contract obligations represents 12 to 18 percent of general government spending, or about 2 to
4 percent of GDP over the sample period, see Figure 2b.
       Each observation in the data traces a contract action from its origin (the parent agency) to
the recipient firm (which can be a subsidiary of a parent firm) and the sector and zip code within
which the award is executed (see figure A.3 in Appendix ?? for a schematic representation of
the data). Six variables uniquely identify each observation: (1) an award identification number,
(2) a modification number, (3) a transaction number, (4) a parent award identification number,
(5) an awarding sub-agency code, and (6) a parent award modification number.
       In our analysis, we outline a number of facts of what we refer to as individual transactions
(the observation level of the data), firm-level statistics--for which we aggregate by the recipient
parent firm, and sector-level statistics--for which we aggregate by NAICS sectors. The value
of each contract transaction, or obligation, is given by the "federal action obligation"--the
government's liability for an award transaction. Each transaction is associated with a start
and end date for the period of performance of that transaction (barring any subsequent
modifications), which we use to calculate "duration."                  Finally, a transaction will have a
"modification number" if it represents an action that makes a change to an initial award. In
Section 3, we use these detailed data to document five facts about the nature of this portion of
government spending.
   3
      Data for fiscal years 2008-2018 can be downloaded from the "Award Data Archive" on the USASpending.gov
site. Prior to fiscal year 2008, we use the Custom Award Data download to obtain all prime award contracts for
fiscal years 2001 through 2007.
    4
      Federal government purchases of intermediate goods and services are equal to federal government consumption
expenditures minus compensation of employees and consumption of fixed capital. This number is also equivalent
to the gross output of general government minus value added (NIPA Tables 3.9.5 and 3.10.5). Government gross
investment consists of spending by the government for fixed assets that directly benefit the public (e.g., highway
construction) or that assist government agencies in production activities (e.g., purchases of military hardware).



                                                        9
3     Facts on Government Spending

Government spending is conventionally viewed as a homogeneous good--a relatively constant
fraction of GDP that is determined by an ethereal government entity, "G." In this section, we
describe five facts about government spending that illustrate government spending is in fact
heterogeneous in nature. The granularity in government spending echoes the recent focus on
granularity in the firm-size distribution and the input-output structure of the economy but is
distinct from it as we show below (Gabaix (2011) and Acemoglu et al. (2012)).


3.1     Granularity

This subsection presents our first and most fundamental fact, government spending is "granular".
We use different methods to illustrate this fact. A common definition of granularity proposes a
few sectors or firms are disproportionately larger than others. A stricter definition of granularity
is in terms of fat tails (see for example Gabaix (2011)): When the size distribution of sectors or
firms exhibits fat tails, then some firms or sectors are disproportionately large and granular at
any level of disaggregation.
      Government spending is granular according to two definitions. First, it is concentrated
among a few firms and sectors. Second, a log-normal distribution approximates the government
spending distribution well at the transaction level.

Fact 1 Government spending is "granular:"

    1. The top 1% of firms receive 80% of all contract obligations and the top 1% of six-digit
        sectors receive 40% of all contract obligations (where we define rank in terms of firm or
        sector sales). The top 0.01% of firms receive 30% of contract obligations.

    2. Nearly 100% of cross-sectional variation in contract spending is within firms or sectors,
        rather than across.

    3. The size distribution of contracts has fat tails -- in particular, it is approximately log-
        normal.


3.1.1     Spending is Concentrated Among Few Firms and Sectors

The first sense in which government consumption is granular is that it is highly concentrated
among few firms and sectors. The ten largest suppliers of goods and services to the government
(or top 0.01%) account for about one third of total government consumption, and the top 0.1%
of firms account for just under one half of total government consumption. Figure 3 illustrates



                                                 10
this unequal distribution in the left panel. To put this into perspective, we note on average some
140,000 firms exists in our sample.
    A similar spending concentration exists among sectors. The right panel of Figure 3 shows
over 60% of contract obligations are directed toward the top three (of roughly 25) two-digit
NAICS sectors: 33--manufacturing; 54--professional, scientific, and technical services; and
56--administrative and waste management. The middle panel of Figure 3 shows similar patterns
at the more disaggregated sector level--the top 1% (of roughly 1200) six-digit sectors account
for about 40% of government consumption, while the top 10% of six-digit sectors account for
over 80% of government consumption. Figure 3 also shows the concentration of spending among
firms and sectors has been fairly stable over time.


3.1.2   Large Contracts and Firms Drive Cross-sectional Variance

Another way to look at the granular nature of government spending is by looking at a
decomposition of the variance of government contracts into the variation that occurs within
firms, and the variation that occurs across firms and similarly for sectors. The first decomposition
starts with the contract transaction level as the smallest unit of observations, the second with
the firm. Specifically, we first calculate:


                                     ¯t )2 =
                            (gif,t - g                           ¯f,t )2 +
                                                        (gif,t - g                            ¯t )2
                                                                                       gf,t - g
                                                                                      (¯
                   f   if                      f   if                        f   if

                                                   Within Firm                   Across Firm


    where gif,t is the total spending amount on individual contract i at firm f in year t, g
                                                                                           ¯f,t is the
firm average in year t, and g
                            ¯t is the overall average in year t. Figure 4 shows this decomposition
for all contracts in the left panel, for the top 20% of contracts (which represent 97% of the total
value of contracts) in the middle panel, and for the bottom 80% of contracts in the right panel.
When we look at the within-firm versus across-firm breakdown for all firms, almost 100% of the
variation is "within"--meaning substantial variation exists in the range of contract sizes that
an individual firm receives, which completely outweighs any variation in the size of contracts
across different firms. The fat right tail of the contracts data fully drives this result.
    The empirical variance at the granular level is large and dominates the decomposition. The
left panel of Figure 5 shows the density of the log of individual contracts, the density of the log
of the average contract amount by firm, and the log of the average contract amount overall. The
fat right tail of individual contracts is apparent, and is averaged out at the firm level, creating
the high within-firm variation. Looking at the middle and right panels of Figure 5, the top 20%
of contracts fully determine this within result. When we restrict our attention to the bottom
80% of contracts, the fat tails are absent and both within- and across-firm variations are present.

                                                         11
    Granularity across firms also has implications for the variance decomposition within and
across sectors. Instead of looking at the variance of the size of individual contracts within and
across firms, we can sum contracts up to the firm level, and decompose the overall variance into
the within-sector and across-sector components. Specifically, we calculate:


                                       ¯t )2 =
                             (gf s,t - g                             ¯s,t )2 +
                                                           (gf s,t - g                             ¯t )2
                                                                                            gs,t - g
                                                                                           (¯
                   s   f s                       s   f s                         s   f s

                                                     Within Sector                   Across Sector


where gf s,t is the total amount given to firm f in sector s in year t, g
                                                                        ¯s,t is the sector average in
year t, and g
            ¯t is the overall average in year t. Figure A.4 in the Online Appendix shows "within
sector" variation dominates across all parts of the distribution. Hence, larger variation exists
across firms within a sector, than across sectors within the economy.
    Just as in the firm-level exercise, the fat right tail in the data again drives this result.
Figure A.5 in the Online Appendix shows the density of firm size has a fat right tail in the case
of the full dataset (left panel) and top 20% of firms (middle panel) but a fat left tail in the case
of the bottom 80% of firms. In all cases, the fat tail is averaged out at the sector level, creating
the high within-sector variation that we see across the board.


3.1.3   The Size Distribution of Contracts Has Fat Tails

Government spending is granular in a statistical sense: The distribution of government contracts
is fat-tailed and, in particular, well approximated by a log-normal distribution.                          A simple
way to illustrate this point is to look at a Q-Q (quantile-quantile) plot, in which we plot
the actual quantiles of the log transaction values against a set of quantiles from a simulated
log-normal distribution with the same mean and variance. If both sets of quantiles come from
the same distribution, the plotted points should line up along the 45-degree line. Figure 6
shows that this is the case -- the scatter points roughly follow the 45-degree line across the
entire distribution. Figure 7 shows the actual density of transaction values and the density
of a simulated variable that is log-normally distributed with the same mean and variance,
confirming the log-normal distribution appears to be a good fit in the tails. While a log-normal
distribution is the best fitting fat-tailed distribution for the full sample of government contracts,
we show in Appendix A.4.1 that a Pareto distribution, as in Gabaix (2011), also provides a good
approximation to the right tail of the distribution.




                                                            12
3.2      Sectoral Bias: Differential Granularity

The second fact we present establishes government consumption is special compared to household
consumption. The composition of government spending across sectors is distinct from the
composition of the private consumer basket, which is a natural benchmark for economic activity.
The most important firms and sectors as suppliers to the government differ substantially from
the most important firms and sectors supplying to private households.

Fact 2 Government spending is "sectorally biased."

  1. The top 0.01% of recipients of government obligations account for 17% of average annual
        government consumption, but only 2% of average annual sales.5

  2. The sector with the largest share in government spending (NAICS 33 -- manufacturing)
        receives 31% of government obligations, but accounts for only 6% of value added. The
        sector with the largest share in private consumption (NAICS 53 -- real estate, rental, and
        leasing) accounts for 13% of value added, but less than 1% of government obligations.

       We illustrate this fact in Figure 1. The vertical axis measures the share of a (six-digit) sector
                                      Gk
k , in total government spending,     G .   The horizontal axis measures the share of the same sector
                             Ck
in private consumption       C .   In the figure we also distinguish between total federal spending
(blue circles), defense spending (red asterisks) and non-defense spending (green triangles).
       For overall federal spending and each of its subcomponents, the public and private sectoral
                                                     Gk       Ck
spending shares differ substantially, that is,       G    =   C .   Some sectors that are big suppliers
to the government are almost negligible for private consumers. Sector 541300--Architectural,
Engineering, and Related Services, for example, accounts for 15% of government consumption
but less than one percent of private consumption. The converse is also true.
       In a similar vein, Appendix Table A.1 shows for 2017 as an example that the bias in
government spending runs both ways.6 Manufacturing (NAICS 33), for example, accounted for
over 30% of government consumption in 2017, but under 7% of value added. Conversely, in
the same year, real estate, rental, and leasing (NAICS 53) accounted for 13% of value added,
but less than 1% of government consumption. Finally, this feature holds at the firm level as
well--Table A.2 compares the top 35 firms in terms of average annual contract obligations to the
top 35 non-oil firms from Compustat in terms of average annual sales between 2001 and 2018.
Little overlap exists in the firm lists, with only a few firms like Boeing and General Electric
showing up in both lists, albeit in very different orders. Taken together, the evidence indicates
  5
      Based on sales of all firms in Compustat.
  6
      Value added shares come from the National Income and Product Accounts.



                                                     13
the government spending varies across sectors and its composition does not mimic that of private
consumption.


3.3    Short Duration

We now turn to the variation of spending over time. The third fact we establish is that
government contracts tend to be relatively short lived. Moreover, they are frequently modified.

Fact 3 Government spending is characterized by short contract durations:

  1. The median contract has a duration of 36 days.

  2. 80% of contracts last less than 1 year.

  3. The firm with the median value of average annual obligations is in the dataset for only 1
       year.

      To arrive at the first two results, we study the difference between transactions and the
overarching contract structure. Each "contract" can consist of a bundle of transactions--the
observation level of the data. Some simple purchases may be made with a single transaction,
while others may have hundreds of transactions over the life of the contract that continuously
modify the order or relationship.7 Each transaction is associated with an action date--the
date when the reported action was issued, a period of performance start date--the date that the
transaction begins, and a period of performance end date--the current date when the transaction
ends (barring subsequent modifications). We calculate the "duration" of a transaction as the
difference between the period of performance start date and the current end date. Similarly, we
calculate the duration of a contract as the difference between the period of performance start
date of the earliest underlying transaction and the current end date of the latest underlying
transaction.
      Durations of transactions and contracts can range from 0 days--this might be a transaction
that makes an administrative change, closes out an order, or represents a one time purchase
of a commercially manufactured good--to over a decade--a contract funding research and
development, for example. The length of the transaction depends entirely on the nature of
the relationship and the provided product or service. Overall, however, contracts tend to have
short lifespans. Over the entire sample, the median contract has a duration of only 36 days.8
      Figure 8 shows in each year, about 80% of contracts have durations of less than one year.
The figure and Appendix Table A.3 also show the distribution at the transaction level is almost
  7
    About 80 percent of "contracts" are made up of a single transaction.
  8
    Note, for this analysis we keep transactions with durations between 1 and 5500 days (15 years). These
contracts represent more than 95% of the total value of obligations.


                                                   14
identical.9 The similar statistics at the transaction and contract level implies that only very
large contracts include multiple transactions.
       In addition to being relatively short, contracts are frequently modified. An observation in
the data will have a "modification number" if it represents a transaction that makes a change to
an initial award. 20 different types of modifications exist, some of which reflect no change to the
initial value of the contract, like a change of address, and some of which reflect either additional
obligations or deobligations, like an order for additional work. Figure 9 shows the time series
of spending summing only modification spending, as well as the series of spending summing the
disjoint non-modification spending. Spending through modification transactions is substantial,
and is in fact higher than spending from initial (non-modification) transactions.
       Occasionally, modifications are used to correct data entry errors. In these cases, we see
(sometimes large) obligations that are almost immediately followed by a de-obligation of similar
magnitude, under the same award identification number and directed to the same recipient. For
example, Figure A.6 in the Online Appendix shows the individual transactions that made up
a contract given by the Department of the Army to Emerson Construction Company for the
construction of the Army Reserve Center in Fort Worth, Texas. Line 1 shows an obligation
of $13,917,176,427 was made on September 29, 2008. Line 2, however, shows that on January
7, 2009, most of this was offset by a $13,901,924,427 de-obligation. The description of the
de-obligation transaction says the modification was made to "correct subclins", or sub-contract
line item numbers. In other words, it sounds like an administrative error was made. Netting these
two roughly $13 billion transactions, and combining the sum with the rest of the transactions
associated with that contract, it appears that a total of $16.3 million was ultimately obligated to
Emerson Construction Company. The Emerson Construction Company website advertises that
they completed the construction of the Army Reserve Center for exactly this amount.10 Over
the entire sample period, there are about 1 million observations (or less than 2% of observations)
that are part of these "offsetting transaction pairs."
       Our general approach to deal with such errors is the following: in cases in which two
potentially offsetting contracts are within 0.5% of each other, we combine the two transactions
into one, and apply the net amount to the date of the earlier of the two offsetting transactions.11
   9
     Though it may be surprising that contracts appear to be shorter than transactions based on the summary
statistics, a simple example can explain the discrepancy. Consider a contract that is made up of 3 individual
transactions. The initial transaction begins on January 1 and lasts for a period of 1 year, ending on December
31. A modification is made to the contract on April 1, in a transaction that still has an end-date of December 31
(a duration of 274 days). A final modification is made on September 1, in a transaction that still has an end-date
of December 31 (a duration of 121 days). The duration of this contract is 364 days. However, when we look at
summary statistics of the transactions, we include transactions with durations of 274 days and 121 days which
drives up the moments of the transaction-level distribution relative to the contract-level distribution.
  10
     http://www.eccinc.com/projects/army-reserve-center-fort-worth
  11
     Applying the net amount to the earlier or later action date makes no difference.



                                                       15
      The short persistence of firms in the dataset further highlights the short durations of
government spending. We illustrate these results in Figure A.7 in the Online Appendix. The
figure shows the fraction of firms in the data for a certain number of years. Looking at the
entire dataset, one can clearly see that most firms are in the data for periods of time. In
fact, the median number of years a firm is in the dataset is 2 years while the firm with the
median value of average annual obligations is in the dataset for only 1 year. Among the large
firms, such as the top 0.1% of firms, firms tend to be in the data throughout the sample. A
handful of such firms exists, and very few of their contracts last very long. They are mostly
related to facilities management and investment around the government. They span information
technology, professional, scientific, and technical services, administrative and support and waste
management and remediation services, as well as manufacturing. The appendix provides details
on the identity of these firms and sectors.


3.4     Idiosyncratic Shocks Drive Aggregate Variation over Time

The fourth fact we establish is idiosyncratic (rather than aggregate) shocks drive the variation
in spending over time. At the aggregate level, we show that granularity of firms and sectors is
an important origin for the growth rate of aggregate government spending, consistent with our
previous fact on granularity: A few firms or sectors drive the dynamics of aggregate government
spending.

Fact 4 Idiosyncratic shocks drive aggregate variation over time:

  1. The "granular residual" explains more than 50% of aggregate government spending growth.


3.4.1    Granular Origin of Government Spending Fluctuations

We use the notion of granularity to show idiosyncratic shocks matter if we want to account for
the growth of aggregate government spending, instead of getting washed out in the aggregate.
We follow Gabaix (2011) and Foerster et al. (2011) to establish this fact.


Granular Residual Approach            First, as in Gabaix (2011), we calculate the "granular
residual", t , to show shocks to the top suppliers of government consumption drive the
fluctuations in aggregate government spending. To see this, let gi,t be the total obligations
to recipient firm i in year t. Then, the growth rate of obligations is given by:


                                    zi,t = ln(gi,t ) - ln(gi,t-1 )




                                                 16
    The granular residual is then given by:

                                                       K
                                                            gi,t-1
                                             t =                   (zi,t - z
                                                                           ¯t )                                             (1)
                                                            Gt-1
                                                      i=1

                                                                                                               Q
                                                                ¯t = Q-1
    where Gt is aggregate government consumption in year t, and z                                              i=1 zi,t   is the
average growth rate over the top Q firms. In other words, the granular residual is the weighted
difference in growth rates for the top K firms relative to the average growth rate for the top Q
firms, where Q  K .
    As in Gabaix (2011), we run a regression of aggregate growth--Zt = ln(Gt ) - ln(Gt-1 )--on
the granular residual and its lags. The granular hypothesis suggest idiosyncratic shocks, captured
by the granular residual, account for a large part of the aggregate movement of government
spending. Specifically, we estimate:


                                       Zt = 0 + 1 t + 2 t-1 + 3 t-2


    We estimate this specification for K = 100, Q = 100 and Q = 1000 firms, and on one
and two lags of the granular residual term. We see in Table 1 the granular residual explains
about 50% of the variation in aggregate government consumption across specifications. These
results are in line with the estimates of Gabaix (2011) for the explanatory power of the granular
residual for the top firms on GDP growth.


Decomposition of Government Consumption Growth Second, as in Foerster et al.
(2011), we perform a different set of exercises to decompose changes in aggregate government
spending growth into components arising from aggregate and idiosyncratic (sector-specific)
shocks. This second approach delivers results that are consistent with the results we find using
the granular residual approach of Gabaix (2011). Using the methodology of Foerster et al.
(2011), we decompose aggregate government consumption growth, Zt , as follows:

                   N                            N                N                         N
                                         1                                   1
            Zt =         i,t zi,t =                 zi,t    +         ¯i -
                                                                                  zi,t +         (i,t - ¯ i )zi,t           (2)
                                         N                                   N
                   i=1                       i=1                i=1                        i=1

                   (1) Actual         (2) Equal Weights         (3) Granular Residual      (4) Share Deviation


                                                                        N
where i denotes firms or sectors. The term (1/N )                       i=1 zit   weights each sector equally. If zit
are uncorrelated, this component has a variance proportional to N -1 . The second term, the
                                      N
"granular residual term,"             i=1 [it   - (1/N )]it will be large if the cross-sectional variance of
sectoral shares is large at date t.
    Figure 10 plots the individual components of equation (2) over time. In Foerster et al.

                                                                17
(2011), the equally weighted component tracks the series for aggregate industrial production
growth more closely than the granular residual term. In our case, both series exhibit fluctuations
of a similar magnitude to the aggregate growth rate, indicating that both idiosyncratic shocks
and covariance across sectors are important drivers of aggregate growth.
      Furthermore, we show in Online Appendix Section A.4.2 at the sectoral level that aggregate
time fixed effects explain little of sectoral government spending dynamics. Instead, idiosyncratic
innovations drive changes in sectoral spending which can have large positive and negative
correlations across sectors.


3.5    Government Consumption is Concentrated in Sticky Sectors

The fifth fact documents a new fact about government consumption and pricing frictions:
Government consumption tends to be concentrated in "sticky" sectors--that is, sectors in which
price changes are relatively less frequent. We document this result in two complementary ways.
We use micro data underlying the producer price data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS) to construct frequencies of price adjustments for the sectors from which the government
purchases. An important caveat of this analysis is the assumption that the frequency of price
adjustment for private and government consumption are identical. Therefore, we also study the
pricing structure of government contracts directly. "Fixed-price" contracts are dominant and
reflect the stickiness at the micro level of the individual contracts.

Fact 5 Government spending is concentrated in sticky sectors

  1. The monthly frequency of price changes in the top two supplying sectors to the government
       is 9% while it is 20%, on average, for the remaining sectors.

  2. 80% of all contracts are fixed-price in nature.

Our main result for this fifth fact is government spending is concentrated in sticky-price sectors.
Figure 11 shows the average annual share of government spending in each two-digit sector
(x-axis) plotted against the frequency of price changes in those sectors from the BLS. The size
of the bubble corresponds to the average sectoral share of annual aggregate spending--a larger
bubble means the sector supplies a larger proportion of government consumption. The figure
shows the government spends the vast majority of dollars in sectors with low frequencies of price
adjustment. The frequency of price changes in the largest 2 sectors is 9% while it is 20% on
average.
      This finding is consistent with the type of contracts firms use to set their prices. Table ??
summarizes our findings. It shows the distribution by both count and value of pricing types for


                                                 18
government contracts. The first two columns show the distribution for all firms, while the last
two columns show the distribution of pricing type for the top 10 firms.
      By count, the majority of contracts are "firm fixed price" contracts--the pricing type that
places all of the risk on the contractor. Fixed price contracts with economic adjustment follow.
The total share of contracts that are fixed-price is over 85%. No comparable benchmark for the
private sector exists to the best of our knowledge.
      By value, a similar picture emerges: a somewhat larger share of contracted funds are cost-
reimbursement contracts (cost plus an award fee or cost plus a fixed fee), but fixed-price type
contracts still dominate the contracting environment. Larger transactions are relatively more
likely to be awarded under a cost-reimbursement contract, while smaller award transactions are
relatively more likely to be fixed price. Still, the total share of spending under some form of
fixed price agreement amounts to over 62%. This finding justifies using a sticky-price setting to
model the effect of government spending.


4     A New Keynesian Model with Sectoral Government Spending

We now develop a two-sector New Keynesian model to assess the relevance of the five facts we
document. The model is deliberately stylized departing as little as possible from the one-sector
textbook model. Sectors potentially differ along three dimensions: First, the shares of private
and public spending and hence, their size; second, the degree of price rigidity; third, the incidence
of shocks. Rather than postulating a process for "big G", we model government spending in
each sector as distinct variables. In what follows we outline the setup in general terms and
derive a number of theoretical results. We then calibrate the model to capture the five facts we
established above and study the quantitative importance.


4.1     Setup

We focus on the key equations of the model because it is a simple extension of the textbook
version of the New Keynesian model (Woodford, 2003; Gal´
                                                       i, 2015). A representative household
chooses consumption and labor effort in order to solve an infinite horizon problem subject to a
budget constraint and the labor endowment which we normalize to unity:

                                                        C 1-
                                                      C1 ,t 2,t          L1+ 
                                                                                 L1+
              max                E0         t   ln                 - 1    1t
                                                                              - 2 2t + f (G1t , G2t ) ,
      {C1t ,C2t ,L1t ,L2t }t=0                         (1 -  )1-         1+      1+
                                      t=0




                                                             19
subject to


        W1t L1t + W2t L2t + t + It-1 Bt-1 = Bt + P1t C1t + P2t C2t + P1t G1t + P2t G2t
                                      L1t + L2t  1.


Here, Ckt and Gkt denote private and public consumption of sector-k goods, with k = {1, 2},
respectively. Gkt is determined exogeneously. Lump-sum taxes finance government consumption
for which we substitute in the household budget constraint. Government spending provides
utility, but independently of private consumption and leisure. Pkt is the price index in sector k .
Lkt and Wkt are labor employed and wages paid in sector k . Our specification assumes sectoral
segmentation of labor markets. Below, we set parameters k to ensure a symmetric steady state
across all firms. Households own firms and receive net income, t , as dividends. Bonds, Bt-1 ,
pay a nominal gross interest rate of It-1 and we rule out Ponzi schemes.
    The optimal allocation of consumption expenditures across sectors requires:

                                              -1                                           -1
                                     P1t                                        P2t
                      C1t =                        Ct and C2t = (1 -  )                         Ct ,             (3)
                                     PCt                                        PCt

              P 1- is the consumer price index.
where PCt = P1 t 2t
    The household first-order conditions determine labor supply and define the Euler equation:

                               Wkt
                                           = k Lkt Ct for k = {1, 2} ,                                           (4)
                               PCt
                                                                  -1
                                                           Ct+1              PCt
                                      1 = Et                           It         .                              (5)
                                                            Ct              PCt+1

    Total demand for sectoral output is:


                                                   Ykt = Ckt + Gkt .                                             (6)


Sectoral output, in turn, is defined as a CES aggregate of differentiated goods indexed by
j  [0, n] in sector 1 and j  (n, 1] for sector 2:

                                                                                                        
                                 n                                                     1                -1
                       -1/             1- 1         -1
                                                                             -1/             1- 1
              Y1t  n                 Yj 1t  dj           , Y2t  (1 - n)                    Yj 2t  dj         .   (7)
                             0                                                     n

Cost minimization implies the demand for differentiated goods:

                                               -                                           -
                                      Pj 1t                                    Pj 2t
                      Yj 1t = n                     Y1t , Yj 2t = (1 - n)                       Y2t              (8)
                                      P1t                                      P2t



                                                           20
and defines the sectoral price indices:

                                                      1                                      1
                                     n                                      1               1-
                         1                  -
                                                     1-            1               -
                   P1t =                 Pj11 t dj        , P2t =               Pj11 t dj        .          (9)
                         n       0                                1-n       n

Differentiated goods are produced according to: Yjkt = Ljkt . Firms are constrained in their
ability to set prices. With probability k , which may differ across sectors, a firm may not adjust
its price in the next period. The pricing problem of firm j in sector k is:

                                         
                                                   s
                         max Et             Qt,t+s k Pjkt Yjkt+s - Ct+s (Yt+s|t ) .
                         Pjkt
                                      s=0


Here Qt,t+s is the stochastic discount factor between periods t and t + s and Ct+k (·) are costs of
production. The first order condition is:

                                
                                                         
                                         Qt,t+ k Yjkt+ [Pkt - Mkt+ ] = 0,                                  (10)
                                 =0

                                                                                         
where Yjkt+ is the total production of firm jk in period t +  , M                       -1 denotes the desired
markup and t+k = Ct+k (Yt+k ) are marginal costs. The optimal                              , is the same for all
                                                                                  price, Pkt
firms in a given sector. Thus, aggregating all prices within a sector yields:
                                                                             1
                                                1-      1-                  1-
                                Pkt = (1 - k ) Pkt + k Pkt-1                      .                        (11)


    We define (nominal) GDP as follows:


                                             PY t Yt  P1t Y1t + P2t Y2t ,                                  (12)

             n P 1-n is the GDP deflator.
where PY t  P1  2
    Analogously, we define aggregate government spending ("Big G") as:


                                            PGt Gt  P1t G1t + P2t G2t .                                    (13)


Assuming the average weight of sector 1 in total government spending is  , we define the deflator
                                  1-
for government spending as PGt  P1 P2 .
    Lastly, we close the model by specifying an inflation target (of zero):

                                                            P Yt
                                                  Yt =           = 0.                                      (14)
                                                           PYt-1

In the spirit of Svensson (2003), we assume monetary policy adjusts short term interest rates to


                                                           21
meet the inflation target at all times.


4.2    Approximate Equilibrium Conditions

We now consider an approximation of the equilibrium conditions around a symmetric steady
state in which relative prices are unity and inflation is zero (see Appendix A.1.1 for details). Let
 denote the fraction of government spending in sector 1 in the steady state:  = G1 /G.  , in
turn, is the steady-state ratio of consumption to output:  = C/Y , such that 1 -  = G/Y .
      The steady-state sizes of sector 1 and 2 are then given by the weighted average of each
sector's share in private and public spending, respectively:


                                  n =  +  (1 -  )                                              (15)
                              1 - n = (1 -  ) + (1 -  )(1 -  ).                                (16)


We state the equilibrium conditions in terms of deviations from steady state with lowercase
letters denoting percentage deviations from steady state. Market clearing in each sector implies:


                       ny1,t = - (1 -  )t + ct + (1 -  )g1,t                                   (17)
                 (1 - n)y2,t = (1 -  )t + (1 -  )ct + (1 -  )(1 -  )g2,t .                     (18)


where t = p1,t -p2,t are the terms of trade. In deriving the expressions we use p1,t -pt = (1- )t .
      The New Keynesian Phillips curves in each sector are given by:


                        1 1,t = 1 Et 1,t+1 + (1 - 1 )(1 - 1 )1t                                (19)
                        2 2,t = 2 Et 2,t+1 + (1 - 2 )(1 - 2 )2t ,                              (20)


where marginal costs, kt , are in real terms (deflated with the producer price in each sector).
After substituting for the real wage we have:


                                  1t = ct + y1,t - (1 -  )t                                    (21)
                                  2t = ct + y2,t + t .                                         (22)


An approximation of the Euler equation yields:


                                  ct = Et ct+1 - (it - Et ct+1 )                               (23)
                                 ct   = 1,t + (1 -  )2,t ,                                     (24)




                                                22
where the second equation is consumer price inflation. Equations (12) and (13) and the definition
of the deflators for GDP and government spending imply the following equations for real GDP
and real aggregate government spending:


                                    yt = ny1,t + (1 - n)y2,t                                   (25)
                                    gt = g1,t + (1 -  )g2,t .                                  (26)


Regarding monetary policy, the inflation target (14) requires:


                                             yt = 0.                                           (27)


For government spending we assume an exogenous AR(1) process for both sectors:


                                     g1,t = 1 g1,t-1 + 1,t                                     (28)
                                     g2,t = 2 g2,t-1 + 2,t ,                                   (29)


where k,t are sector specific spending shocks and parameters k  [0, 1) capture the persistence
of the spending processes.


4.3    Results

In this section, we derive a number of closed-form results. We focus on the effect of an exogenous
variation in government spending, that is, we state the solution in terms of g1t and g2t . The goal
is to illustrate how idiosyncratic variation in government spending at the sectoral level impacts
the aggregate economy. To facilitate the algebra we assume 1 = 0, that is, prices are fully
flexible in sector 1. We relax this assumption when we present numerical results in Section 4.4
below. We do not restrict the extent of price rigidity in sector 2. Instead we have 2  [0, 1].
      To solve the model, we first derive the solution for the terms of trade that are the only
endogenous state variable in the model. Intuitively, since prices are (potentially) sticky in sector
2, the adjustment to even purely transitory shocks takes time and dynamics of the terms of
trade govern the adjustment process. Inflation targeting implies yt = n1,t + (1 - n)2,t = 0.
This equations allows us to rewrite the Phillips curve in sector 2 (equation (20)) as:


                          n(t - t-1 ) = n (Et (t+1 - t )) - 2 2t .                             (30)




                                                23
    Marginal costs in sector 2 drive the dynamics of the terms of trade, which are:

                        (1 -  )                (1 -  )                              
        2t =       1+               ct + 1 +                  t + (1 -  )(1 -  )       g2,t .   (31)
                        1-n                    1-n                                 1-n

We use the market clearing condition in equation (18) to substitute for output in equation
(22). To substitute for consumption, we exploit the fact that firms in sector 1 are fully flexible
in setting their prices and hence, charge a constant markup over marginal costs. As a result,
marginal costs are constant in real terms and we obtain the following expression for consumption:

                                                        -1
                                                                    
                         ct = (1 -  )t - 1 +                 (1 -  ) g1t .                      (32)
                                                   n                n

Intuitively, this expression captures the dynamics of the labor market. Higher government
spending induces upward pressure on wages as production and the demand for labor rise. For
real marginal costs to remain constant in equilibrium, labor supply must also increase. An
increase in the marginal utility of wealth, or equivalently, a drop in consumption delivers the
increase in labor supply. This effect accounts for the negative impact of government spending
on consumption in expression (32) for given terms of trade.
    Using equation (32) in equation (31) and substituting in equation (30) we obtain a second-
order difference equation in the terms of trade:

                                                   A2                 
    {(1 +  ) + A2 } t - t-1 - Et t+1 =                  (1 -  )g1t -     (1 -  )(1 -  )g2,t , (33)
                                                   A1 n              1-n

                               (1- )                   
where   2 /n, A2 = 1 +         1-n     and A1 = 1 +    n .    The A coefficients increase with the
weight of a sectors' share in private consumption as well as with its size. We solve equation (33)
to obtain a solution for the terms of trade in government spending. The following proposition
summarizes our first result.

Proposition 1 (Solution for terms of trade) Assuming prices in sector 1 are fully flexible
(1 = 0) and monetary policy targets producer price inflation (yt = 0), the solution for the
terms of trade is given by:


                      t = 0 t-1 + 1 (1 -  )g1,t - 2 (1 -  )(1 -  )g2,t ,                        (34)


where 0  (0, 1) and 1 , 2  0.

Proof. See Appendix A.1.3
The intuition for this case is straightforward: government spending in sector 1 increases the
prices of sector 1, thereby raising the terms of trade, while spending in sector 2 reduces the

                                               24
terms of trade.
       We now substitute in expression (32) for the terms of trade using equation (34) and obtain
our second result. Government spending crowds out private consumption--independently of the
sector in which spending occurs.

Proposition 2 (Crowding out of consumption) Assuming prices in sector 1 are fully
flexible (1 = 0) and monetary policy targets producer price inflation (yt = 0),
(1) the solution for consumption is given by


                          ct = 0 t-1 - 1 (1 -  )g1,t - 2 (1 -  )(1 -  )g2,t                                    (35)


where 0  (0, 1);
(2) 1  [0, ), and 2  [0,  -1 ), that is, government spending in either sector crowds out
private consumption. The limiting case 1   occurs if n  0, while 2   -1 obtains if
1 - n  0;
(3) if    , then 1 > 2 , that is, crowding out is stronger in response to sector 1 spending.
Also, if   0, 1 > 0 and 2 = 0.

Proof. See Appendix A.1.3


       Expression (35) shows, all else equal, higher terms of trade imply higher consumption
(0 > 0). Intuitively, since the terms of trade reduce marginal costs in the flex-price sector,
constant marginal costs require consumption to go up in order to put upward pressure on the
real wage.
       Next, we observe from expression (35) government spending tends to crowd out private
consumption, since both 1 and 2 are non-negative. To understand this result, note an increase
in government spending in either of the two sectors raises production and employment as well as
marginal costs in the sector.12 As a result, upward pressure on inflation occurs, which induces
monetary policy to raise interest rates and, in turn, induces households to reduce their current
consumption in both sectors. Put differently, a shock in one sector spills over to the other sector
because monetary policy can only manage aggregate demand rather than demand in a specific
sector.
       This result clarifies why 2  0 as   0.   0 implies prices are completely sticky in the
limit. Hence, government spending in sector 2 does not generate inflationary pressure. Monetary
policy remains unresponsive, and private consumption is invariant to the fiscal impulse. For the
  12
    Utility that is linear in labor ( = 0) is an exception. In this case, marginal costs are independent of the level
of production and 1 = 2 = 0.



                                                         25
same reason, crowding out is stronger in the flex-price sector (1 > 2 ) provided    , that
is, whenever private consumption is relatively concentrated in the flex-price sector which is the
empirically relevant case (facts #2 and #5). This condition also holds in the absence of sectoral
bias, that is, when  =  . Intuitively, consumption drops more in response to an increase
of government spending in sector 1, because the higher flexibility in prices results in stronger
inflationary pressure. Hence, the monetary authority has to raise interest rates by more to keep
inflation in check.
     Theoretically, crowding out of consumption in response to sector 1 spending can be
arbitrarily large. Specifically, we find 1   if n  0 (which also implies that   0).
Assuming the weight of sector 1 approaches zero, private consumption is concentrated in the
sticky sector. Given the inflationary impact of government spending in the flex-price sector, the
reduction in consumption necessary to offset the impact on inflation becomes arbitrarily large
because inflation is relatively inelastic to changes in sticky-sector consumption, both public and
private. Instead, when 1 - n  0, the crowding out of consumption in response to sector 2
spending, captured by 2 , does not exceed  -1 . At this point, the drop in consumption matches
the increase of government spending such that marginal costs, and hence inflation, remains
constant. This happens for a relatively modest reduction of consumption because inflation is
very elastic to changes in both public and private spending in the flexible sector.
     Finally, we establish the effect of government spending on output.

Proposition 3 (Output multipliers) Assuming prices in sector 1 are fully flexible (1 = 0)
and monetary policy targets producer price inflation (yt = 0), the solution for output is given
by
                          yt = 0 t-1 + 1 (1 -  )g1,t + 2 (1 -  )(1 -  )g2,t                                 (36)

where 0  (0, 1), and
                                     1 = 1 -  1 and 2 = 1 -  2 .                                            (37)

Moreover, we find 0  (0, 1), 1 has full support in (-, 1], and 2 has full support in (0, 1].

     In expression (36), the effect of the lagged terms of trade on output is positive (0 > 0)
because, as discussed above, their effect on consumption is also positive (see Proposition 2). The
coefficients 1 and 2 directly capture the impact multiplier of government spending on output,
that is, the change in output divided by the change in government spending.13 Also, equation
(37) shows the sum of the direct effect of higher spending on output and the indirect effect on
private consumption, which is negative, determine the overall multiplier.
  13
     While gk,t measures the percentage deviation of government spending from its steady-state level, multiplying
with (1 -  ) and (1 -  )(1 -  ), in turn, transforms this into units of steady-state output.



                                                       26
      Given our results regarding 1 and 2 , stated in Proposition 2, it follows immediately 1
may actually be negative, while 2 is bounded from below by zero, just as in the one-sector New
Keynesian model. Moreover, we also stress the multiplier may not exceed unity, again, just like
in the one-sector model unless the zero lower bound on interest rates binds (Woodford, 2011).


4.4    The Quantitative Relevance of Granular Government

In this section, we explore to what extent the departure from the one-sector model matters
quantitatively for the fiscal transmission mechanism. We calibrate the model to capture the five
facts in a stylized way. Before doing so, we fix three parameters that are independent of the
five facts. Specifically, we assume that a period in the model corresponds to one month and set
 = 0.997. Next, we set  = 4, in line with estimates for the Frisch elasticity of labor supply
(Chetty et al., 2011). Lastly, we assume government spending accounts for 20 percent of GDP
and set  = 0.8.
      We proceed as follows. First, we account for granularity by assuming that government
spending is concentrated in sector 2. To determine the steady-state weight of sector 1 in the
government's consumption basket, we turn to Table 2 which reports the relevance of sectors
for government consumption, starting with the most important sector. We assume sector 2 in
the model represents the three most important suppliers to the government: they account for
approximately 69 percent of government consumption. Hence, we set the weight of sector 1 in
government spending to  = 0.31. Next, Table 2 also shows these sectors account for only about
16 percent of value added. Hence, we set the size of sector 1 to n = 0.84. Given these parameter
values, restriction (15) implies  = 0.9725. As a result, we account for fact #2 (sectoral bias):
private spending is concentrated in sector 1, while public spending is concentrated in sector 2.
      We capture the third fact ("Short durations") as follows. To pin down the shock process
for government spending we estimate AR(1) processes (28) and (29) at the sectoral level and
report results again in Table 2. We find a value for  of approximately 0.3 if we look at the
three most important sectors (captured by sector 2 in the model) and thus set 2 = 0.3. The
value for the other sectors (reported in column "average rho out") is also about 0.3, and hence
we fix 1 accordingly. Fact #4 documents idiosyncratic shocks drive the aggregate variation
in government spending which we account for by modelling distinct shocks in the two sectors
rather than a shock to Big G itself.
      Lastly, we account for fact #5: the government mainly spends in sectors with a low
frequency of price adjustment. We set the 1 = 0.78 and 2 = 0.9, in line with the evidence
in Table 2. These parameters imply an average duration of price spells of about 4.5 months in
sector 1 and of 10 months in sector 2. In other words, the average duration of prices is more



                                               27
than twice as high in sector 2.
    We display the impulse responses of selected variables to government spending shocks in
Figure 12. In the figure, we measure the percentage deviation from steady state due to the shock
along the vertical axis. The horizontal axis measures time in months. The solid lines represents
the scenario in which government spending increases in sector 1, while the dashed lines refers
to the responses to a spending shock in sector 2. In both cases, we normalize the size of the
shock such that aggregate government spending ("Big G"), upper-left panel, increases by one
percent of GDP. Since government spending is exogenous and the persistence parameter k are
identical across sectors, the dynamics of G are the same for both shock scenarios. The output
responses, upper-right panel, differ considerably. Output increases only mildly in response to a
shock in sector 1. Instead, the impact response is more than 4 times as large in case the shock
originates in sector 2. We measure output and government spending in the same units and hence
the output response provides a direct measure of the (impact) multiplier.
    The crowding out of private expenditure determines the size of the multiplier. We show
the response of consumption in the lower-left panel of the figure. Strong crowding out occurs
in response to the spending shock in sector 1. Instead, crowding out is substantially smaller if
the spending increase takes place in sector 2. The necessary monetary policy response to keep
inflation in check rationalizes the difference in the crowding out across cases. In the figure we
report the response of the interest rate in terms of annualized percentage points. Intuitively,
the interest rate responds strongly because the shock is very short-lived. But the response of
the interest rate is particularly strong when the shock originates in sector 1. The higher degree
of price flexibility results in a larger inflationary response which requires a larger monetary
response to stabilize inflation.
    The degree of price stickiness shapes the extent of crowding out, and hence the multiplier.
We contrast the results for our baseline scenario to a counterfactual in which we assume
homogeneous pricing frictions across sectors to investigate this issue in more detail. Specifically,
we set 1 = 2 = 0.9, that is, we increase the overall amount of price rigidity in the economy.
We report results in Figure 13. The lines with circles refer to the counterfactual economy with
homogeneous pricing fictions and the thin lines reproduce the results for our baseline calibration.
    The output response to both shocks is similar--but, perhaps surprisingly, now the response
is almost as weak as in response to a sector 1 shock in the baseline calibration. The reduced
impact of the fiscal impulse obtains even though price stickiness is now higher than in the
baseline. What matters for the transmission of sectoral shocks, however, is precisely in which
sector prices are sticky. In fact, the multiplier of a shock arising in sector 2 increases if prices in
sector 1 become more flexible.
    Higher price stickiness in sector 1, instead, implies monetary policy must generate a larger

                                                  28
reduction of private consumption in order to stabilize inflation, given the inflationary impact
of higher spending in sector 2. This effect, in turn, means more crowding out and a smaller
multiplier. Hence, it is not the degree of overall stickiness that determines the size of the fiscal
multiplier but the relative price stickiness in the relevant sectors and the incidence of shocks.
       Figure A.11 in the Online Appendix illustrates this mechanism in a more systematic way.
We plot the output multiplier on impact in case the shock originates in sector 1 (red solid line)
and in case the shock originates in sector 2 (blue dashed line). Throughout, we assume the
pricing friction is unchanged in sector 2 (2 = 0.9), but we vary the Calvo parameter in Sector
1 along the horizonal axis--all the way from zero (left) to one (right). Intuitively, raising the
pricing friction in sector 1, also raises the multiplier in response to a sector 1 shock. However,
it lowers the multiplier in response to a sector 2 shock. When we raise 1 above the level of
our baseline calibration (0.78), we increase the overall price stickiness in the economy and yet
the multiplier in response to a sector 2 shock declines. The mechanism which underlies this
result is straightforward. As sector 1 becomes more sticky, monetary policy has to compress
consumption by more in order to stabilize inflation.


4.4.1     The Role of Monetary Policy and the Zero Lower Bound

Until now we have maintained the assumption monetary policy follows a strict inflation target.
Section A.4.3 of the Online Appendix discusses results for a Taylor rule. Overall, monetary
policy under the Taylor rule is more accommodating than under the targeting rule but results
are qualitatively similar in both cases.
       Nevertheless, monetary policy and, in particular, its interaction with the degree of price
stickiness, is key for the fiscal transmission mechanism, especially when the zero lower bound
on interest rates binds. In this case, higher government spending does not trigger an increase in
interest rates. As a result, private consumption is crowded in and the fiscal multiplier larger is
than in normal times--a result well known from one-sector models (Eggertsson, 2011; Christiano
et al., 2011).
       We now investigate the role of monetary policy and the ZLB in our multi-sector model.
We assume a shock to the time-discount factor increases households' desire to save and, as a
result, pushes the economy into the ZLB. We then contrast the effect of government spending
shocks in sector 1 and 2.14 We show results in Figure 14 for the case of a Taylor rule (result look
very similar in case of inflation targeting). The blue solid lines show the adjustment to a shock
originating in Sector 1, whereas the red dashed lines plot the responses to a shock originating
in Sector 2. The lower-right panel shows the response of the policy rate: it is not responding
  14
   We solve the model while allowing for an occasionally binding ZLB-constraint using the OccBin toolkit of
Guerrieri and Iacoviello (2015).


                                                    29
during the first 3 month because the ZLB binds.15 As a result, private consumption is now
increasing on impact in response to both shocks (lower-left panel) and the multiplier slightly
exceeds unity just as in the one-sector model.
       The novel result is the ranking of the multipliers across sectors flips at the ZLB. The
spending shock in sector 1 has now a larger effect on output than a shock in sector 2: the
impact multiplier is about 1.2 in case of a sector 1 shock, the sector with more flexible prices,
and just slightly above one in case of a sector 2 shock. The multiplier is larger in sector 1, because
higher government spending in this sector has a stronger inflationary impact. In normal times,
the inflationary pressure would trigger a stronger monetary contraction, which does not take
place at the ZLB. The stronger inflationary impulse therefore translates into a stronger drop in
the real interest rate and, eventually, a stronger crowding-in of private consumption.


4.4.2     The Role of Heterogeneity

In order to further illustrate to what extent sectoral heterogeneity matters for the fiscal
transmission mechanism, we contrast the dynamic adjustment to an aggregate government
spending shock across two model specifications. In each case, we raise government spending
by the same amount, namely by one percent of steady state output and proportionally to the
steady-state levels of spending in each sector. In the first scenario, we mimic a one-sector model
as we let sector 1 "take over" the economy:  =  = n = 1. In this case, we set 1 = 0.9, equal
to 2 in the two-sector baseline economy. In the second scenario, we study the adjustment of
the baseline economy to an aggregate spending shock.
       Figure 15 shows the results. The solid lines correspond to the case of the one-sector economy,
the dashed lines correspond to our baseline economy. The dynamics differ markedly across
scenarios. In particular, the output effect of the aggregate shock is stronger in our baseline
model and the crowding out is weaker. To understand this result, recall our baseline calibration
implies that sector 2 accounts for a larger share of government spending (1 -  = 0.69). For this
reason, it also accounts for a larger fraction of any additional government spending (assuming,
as we do, that spending is raised in equal proportions across sectors). At the same time, sector
2 is the sector in which prices are more sticky. Put differently, an aggregate shock is similar
to a shock that originates in sector 2. The output multiplier is still a bit smaller than in case
of a genuine sector 2 shock (Figure 12) simply because in our baseline model only 69 (rather
than 100) percent of the additional expenditure is spent on sector 2 goods. The multiplier of an
aggregate shock in the two-sector model is, however, about 3 times as large as in the one-sector
  15
    The fiscal impulse is small enough and does not change the duration for which the ZLB binds even though,
in principle, the exit from the ZLB is endogenous and may be quicker if the fiscal stimulus is large (Erceg and
Lind´e, 2014).



                                                      30
model, even though the overall extent of pricing frictions is lower. Again, what matters is in
which sector pricing frictions are large, not the overall extent: the multiplier tends to be large if
the additional spending occurs in sectors in which the pricing frictions are high relative to the
other sectors, rather than merely in absolute terms.


5     Conclusion

In this paper, we dissect the anatomy of Big G. A systematic analysis of the entire universe
of procurement contracts of the US federal government allows us to establish five basic facts
regarding the nature of government spending. To summarize, the five facts are:

    1. Government spending is granular;

    2. Government spending has a sectoral bias;

    3. Contracts are characterized by short duration;

    4. Idiosyncratic shocks at the firm/ sectoral level drive aggregate variation; and

    5. Government spending is concentrated in sectors with relatively sticky prices.

     We believe accounting for these facts is important and will improve our understanding of
how fiscal policy works. As a first step in this direction, we calibrate a simple two-sector New
Keynesian model that captures the five facts in a stylized fashion.
     The fiscal transmission mechanism in the micro-founded two-sector model differs consider-
ably depending on which sector the shock originates in. Importantly, while private expenditure
is crowded out independently of where the shock originates, the crowding out can become
arbitrarily large if the shock hits the sector in which private expenditure is concentrated and
prices are flexible. Crowding out, instead, is limited in the case in which the shock hits the
sticky sector. In this case, the output multiplier is also considerably larger, by a factor of four.
We leave a more systematic quantitative exploration for future work.




                                                 31
References
Acemoglu, D., V. M. Carvalho, A. Ozdaglar, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2012). The network origins
  of aggregate fluctuations. Econometrica 80 (5), 1977­2016.
Auclert, A., M. Rognlie, and L. Straub (2018). The intertemporal keynesian cross. mimeo.
Auerbach, A. J. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2012a). Fiscal multipliers in recession and expansion.
  In Fiscal policy after the financial crisis, pp. 63­98. University of Chicago Press.
Auerbach, A. J. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2012b). Measuring the output responses to fiscal policy.
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4 (2), 1­27.
Auerbach, A. J., Y. Gorodnichenko, and D. Murphy (2019, January). Local Fiscal Multipliers
  and Fiscal Spillovers in the United States. NBER Working Papers 25457, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, Inc.
Baqaee, D. and E. Farhi (2019). Productivity and misallocation in general equilibrium. Technical
  report, forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Barsky, R., C. L. House, C. Boehm, and M. S. Kimball (2016). Monetary policy and durable
  goods.
Barsky, R. B., C. L. House, and M. S. Kimball (2007, June). Sticky-price models and durable
  goods. American Economic Review 97 (3), 984­998.
Boehm, C. E. (2019). Government consumption and investment: Does the composition of
  purchases affect the multiplier? Journal of Monetary Economics .
Bouakez, H., O. Rachedi, and E. Santoro (2018). Sectoral heterogeneity, production networks,
  andthe effects of government spending. mimeo.
Chetty, R., A. Guren, D. Manoli, and A. Weber (2011). Are micro and macro labor supply
  elasticities consistent? a review of evidence on the intensive and extensive margins. American
  Economic Review 101 (3), 471­75.
Chodorow-Reich, G. (2019, May). Geographic cross-sectional fiscal spending multipliers: What
  have we learned? American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 11 (2), 1­34.
Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2011). When is the government spending
  multiplier large? Journal of Political Economy 119 (1), 78 ­ 121.
Cohen, L., J. Coval, and C. Malloy (2011). Do powerful politicians cause corporate downsizing?
  Journal of Political Economy 119 (6), 1015­1060.
Corsetti, G., A. Meier, and G. J. M¨    uller (2012, November). Fiscal Stimulus with Spending
  Reversals. The Review of Economics and Statistics 94 (4), 878­895.
Demyanyk, Y., E. Loutskina, and D. Murphy (2019). Fiscal stimulus and consumer debt. The
  Review of Economics and Statistics 101 (4), 728­741.
Eggertsson, G. B. (2011, June). What Fiscal Policy is Effective at Zero Interest Rates? In NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual 2010, Volume 25, NBER Chapters, pp. 59­112. National Bureau of
  Economic Research, Inc.
Erceg, C. and J. Lind´  e (2014). Is there a fiscal free lunch in a liquidity trap? Journal of the
  European Economic Association 12 (1), 73­107.
Farhi, E. and I. Werning (2016). Fiscal multipliers. In J. B. Taylor and H. Uhlig (Eds.), Handbook
  of Macroeconomics, Volume 2, Chapter 31, pp. 2417­2492. Elsevier.
Foerster, A. T., P.-D. G. Sarte, and M. W. Watson (2011). Sectoral vs aggregate shocks: A
  structural factor analysis of industrial production. Journal of Political Economy 119 (1), 1­38.
Gabaix, X. (2011). The granular origins of aggregate fluctuations. Econometrica 79 (3), 733­772.
Gal´
   i, J. (2015, March). Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction

                                               32
  to the New Keynesian Framework and Its Applications Second edition. Number 10495 in
  Economics Books. Princeton University Press.
Gal´i, J., J. D. L´
                  opez-Salido, and J. Vall´  es (2007). Understanding the effects of government
  spending on consumption. Journal of the European Economic Association 5 (1), 227­270.
Gal´i, J. and T. Monacelli (2008, September). Optimal monetary and fiscal policy in a currency
  union. Journal of International Economics 76 (1), 116­132.
Guerrieri, L. and M. Iacoviello (2015). Occbin: A toolkit for solving dynamic models with
  occasionally binding constraints easily. Journal of Monetary Economics 70, 22 ­ 38.
Hagedorn, M., I. Manovskii, and K. Mitman (2019). The fiscal multiplier. mimeo.
Hettig, T. and G. J. M¨ uller (2018). Fiscal policy coordination in currency unions at the effective
  lower bound. Journal of International Economics 115 (C), 80­98.
Kaplan, G., B. Moll, and G. L. Violante (2018, March). Monetary policy according to hank.
  American Economic Review 108 (3), 697­743.
Liebman, J. B. and N. Mahoney (2017). Do expiring budgets lead to wasteful year-end spending?
  evidence from federal procurement. American Economic Review 107 (11), 3510­49.
McKay, A., E. Nakamura, and J. Steinsson (2016, October). The power of forward guidance
  revisited. American Economic Review 106 (10), 3133­58.
McKay, A. and R. Reis (2016). The role of automatic stabilizers in the u.s. business cycle.
  Econometrica 84 (1), 141­194.
Mountford, A. and H. Uhlig (2009). What are the effects of fiscal policy shocks? Journal of
  Applied Econometrics 24 (6), 960­992.
Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2014, March). Fiscal stimulus in a monetary union: Evidence
  from us regions. American Economic Review 104 (3), 753­92.
Ozdagli, A. and M. Weber (2017). Monetary policy through production networks: Evidence
  from the stock market. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Pasten, E., R. Schoenle, and M. Weber (2019a). Price rigidities and the origins of aggregate
  fluctuations. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago .
Pasten, E., R. Schoenle, and M. Weber (2019b). Production networks and the propagation of
  monetary policy shocks. Journal of Monetary Economics (forthcoming) .
Ramey, V. A. (2016). Macroeconomic Shocks and Their Propagation. NBER Working Papers
  21978, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Ramey, V. A. (2019). Ten years after the financial crisis: What have we learned from the
  renaissance in fiscal research? Journal of Economic Perspectives 33 (2), 89­114.
Ramey, V. A. and M. D. Shapiro (1998). Costly capital reallocation and the effects of government
  spending. In Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Volume 48, pp. 145­194.
  Elsevier.
Ramey, V. A. and S. Zubairy (2018). Government spending multipliers in good times and in
  bad: evidence from us historical data. Journal of Political Economy 126 (2), 850­901.
Svensson, L. E. O. (2003, June). What is wrong with taylor rules? using judgment in monetary
  policy through targeting rules. Journal of Economic Literature 41 (2), 426­477.
Woodford, M. (2003). Interest and Prices. Princeton University Press.
Woodford, M. (2011). Simple analytics of the government expenditure multiplier. American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3 (1), 1­35.




                                                33
6                                 Figures and Tables

                       Figure 2: Comparison of USASpending Data with General Government Expenditures
                                                 1400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5
                                                 1200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                 1000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Percent of GDP

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                 800
                         Billion Dollars

                                                 600




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                       q        q                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                               q                             q
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                     q                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q     q
                                                 400




                                                                                                            q

                                                                                            q

                                                                                 q
                                                                        q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                              q
                                                 200




                                                                                                                Federal Govt Consumption Expendit. & Gross Investment (CE&GI)
                                                                                                                Purchases of Int. Goods & Services + Gross Investment
                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                Total Contract Obligations (USASpending)


                                                         2002                   2004                2006                   2008             2010                 2012                           2014                    2016             2018                                                           2001             2003       2005                            2007             2009            2011             2013              2015            2017

                                                                                                                                       Fiscal Year                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Fiscal Year



                                                         (a) USASpending vs NIPA Accounts                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (b) Contracts as a Share of GDP

Note. This figure shows how aggregate contract obligations compare to Government spending as defined in the
National Income and Product Accounts (NIPAs). The left panel shows that total contract obligations are
roughly equivalent to federal government purchases of intermediate goods and services plus gross investment.
The right panel shows that contract obligations account for about 2 to 4 percent of GDP.




                                                                                                            Figure 3: Share of Obligations by Top Firms and Sectors
                                           1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.0




                                                                                 q    q         q       q       q    q     q                             q
                                                                            q                                                      q   q            q            q
                                                                    q                                                                       q
                                                              q
                                                         q
                                                    q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q    q                q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q     q           q                          q    q                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                           0.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                  q    q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q          q     q                           q          q
     Share of Total Obligations




                                                                                                                                                                             Share of Total Obligations




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Share of Total Obligations




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q          q                q                            q               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q                                      q                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                           0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.6
                                           0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.4
                                           0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Top 1
                                                         Top 0.01% (10 Firms)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Top 2
                                                         Top 0.1%                                                                                                                                                       Top 0.1%                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Top 3
                                                         Top 1%                                                                                                                                                         Top 1%                                                                                                                                                   Top 5
                                           0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.0




                                                    q
                                                         Top 10%                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Top 10%                                                                                                                                                  Top 10


                                                  2001       2003       2005         2007           2009            2011       2013        2015         2017                                                    2001         2003        2005         2007       2009                   2011       2013       2015       2017                                             2001       2003       2005       2007       2009       2011        2013       2015       2017

                                                                                                    Fiscal Year                                                                                                                                                  Fiscal Year                                                                                                                                          Fiscal Year




                                                                                (a) Firms                                                                                                                               (b) NAICS 6 Sectors                                                                                                                                    (c) NAICS 2 Sectors

Note. This figure shows the share of contract obligations awarded to the top shares of firms (the left panel)
six-digit NAICS sectors (the middle panel) and two-digit NAICS sectors (the right panel).




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             34
                                                                     Figure 4: Variance Decomposition: Within and Across Firms
                               1.0




                                                                                                                                               1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Within
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Across
                               0.8




                                                                                                                                               0.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.8
     Share of Total Variance




                                                                                                                     Share of Total Variance




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Share of Total Variance
                               0.6




                                                                                                                                               0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.6
                                                                                                           Within                                                                                                           Within
                                                                                                           Across                                                                                                           Across
                               0.4




                                                                                                                                               0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.4
                               0.2




                                                                                                                                               0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.2
                               0.0




                                                                                                                                               0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.0
                                     2001   2003       2005   2007   2009     2011        2013   2015    2017                                        2001        2003   2005   2007   2009     2011        2013   2015    2017                                           2001   2003     2005       2007   2009     2011   2013   2015   2017

                                                                     Fiscal Year                                                                                                      Fiscal Year                                                                                                          Fiscal Year




                                              (a) Full Dataset                                                                                               (b) Top 20 Percent                                                                                           (c) Bottom 80 Percent

Note. This figure shows a decomposition of the variance of government spending into "within-firm" and
"across-firm" variation. Specifically, total variance is given by:

                                                                                                               ¯t )2 =
                                                                                                      (gif,t - g                                                                         ¯f,t )2 +
                                                                                                                                                                                (gif,t - g                                                                                 ¯t )2 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    gf,t - g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (¯
                                                                                     f       if                                                                    f     if                                                      f     if

                                                                                                                                                                         (a) Within Firm                                              (b) Across Firm

where i is an individual contract transaction and f is a firm. We plot each of the two RHS components as a
share of the LHS. Panel (a) shows this decomposition for the full dataset, panel (b) restricts the sample to the
top 20 percent of transactions, and panel (c) shows only the bottom 80 percent of transactions.




                                                                        Figure 5: Density of Variance Decomposition Components
                               0.5




                                                                                                                                               0.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Transactions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Avg. Firm Obligations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Avg. Annual Obligations
                               0.4




                                                                                                                                               0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.4
                               0.3




                                                                                                                                               0.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.3
     Density




                                                                                                                     Density




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Density




                                                                                           Transactions                                                                                                     Transactions
                                                                                           Avg. Firm Obligations                                                                                            Avg. Firm Obligations
                                                                                           Avg. Annual Obligations                                                                                          Avg. Annual Obligations
                               0.2




                                                                                                                                               0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.2
                               0.1




                                                                                                                                               0.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.1
                               0.0




                                                                                                                                               0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.0




                                      -5           0          5         10           15          20         25                                              10                  15                    20                    25                                            -5                    0                   5               10




                                              (a) Full Dataset                                                                                               (b) Top 20 Percent                                                                                           (c) Bottom 80 Percent

Note. This figure shows the density of each of the three components that underly the variance decomposition in
Figure 4. The solid-blue line shows the density of the individual contract transactions--gif,t , the dash-dotted
line shows the density of average firm obligations--¯
                                                    gf,t , and the dashed-black horizontal line shows the average
annual obligations--¯
                    gt . Panel (a) shows these densities for the full dataset, panel (b) restricts the sample to the
top 20 percent of contract transactions, and panel (c) shows only the bottom 80 percent of transactions.




                                                                                                                                                                                      35
  Figure 6: Q-Q Plot: Actual vs. Log-Normal                                                                                                                                  Figure 7: Histogram of Log Transaction Value




                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.25
                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Actual
                                                                                                                                                                    q                                                                                                                 Theoretical
                                         14




                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                    q




                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.20
                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                               q
                                         12




                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                              q
          Actual Quantiles




                                                                                                                             q
                                         10




                                                                                                                            qq




                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.15
                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                               q




                                                                                                                                                                                        Density
                                                                                                             qqq
                                                                                                           qqq
                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                         qqq
                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                   qqq
                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                 qqq
                                                                                                q
                                         8




                                                                                               q
                                                                                               q
                                                                                              q
                                                                                             q




                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.10
                                                                                             q
                                                                                            q
                                                                                           q
                                                                                           q
                                                                                          q
                                                                                         q
                                                                                        q
                                         6




                                                                                       q
                                                                                      q
                                                                                     q
                                                                                    q
                                                                                   q
                                                                                  q




                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.05
                                                                                 q
                                                                                q
                                                                               q
                                                                              q
                                         4




                                                                          q
                                                                      q
                                                                  q
                                                              q
                                                          q

                                                      q




                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.00
                                         2




                                                 2                4                    6               8               10              12                       14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -5         0           5             10             15          20
                                                                                             Theoretical Quantiles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Log Transaction Value


                                                                                                                                                                                 Note. This figure shows a histogram of log
Note. This figure is a Q-Q plot with actual quantiles of                                                                                                                         transaction obligations and the density of those log
log transactions on the y-axis and theoretical quantiles
                                                      obligations. We also plot the density of a theoretical
from a log-normal distribution with the same mean and log-normal distribution with the same mean and
standard deviation plotted on the x-axis.             variance.




Figure 8: Empirical CDF of Contract Durations Figure 9: Initial and Modification Spending
                                                1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    300
                                                0.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    250
                             Cumulative Share

                                                0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Billion Dollars




                                                                                                                            Transactions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    200




                                                                                                                            Contracts
                                                                                                                            Multi-Transaction Contracts
                                                0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    150
                                                0.2
                                                0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    100




                                                              0                  1000           2000           3000           4000           5000                    6000                                                  2001   2003   2005   2007   2009     2011   2013    2015    2017

                                                                                                    Duration (Days)                                                                                                                                    Fiscal Year




Note. This figure shows the empirical cumulative                                                                                                                             Note. This figure shows the levels of initial spending
distribution function of the duration--the number of  (any transaction that is not delineated a modification)
days between the start- and end-date--of transactions and modification spending (transactions that are
and contracts. The dashed black line marks 365 days. classified as modifications.
Contracts with negative durations or durations more                                                                                                                          BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB
than 5500 days (15 years) are excluded.                                                                                                                                      BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB




                                                                                                                                                                            36
                       Figure 10: Decomposition of Sectoral Spending Growth




                                                               0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                   q




                                                               0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                               q




                                                               0.05
                                                                        q


                                  Percent Change
                                                                                                                                                                         q

                                                                                                                                           q

                                                               0.00                                                                                           q




                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                               -0.05



                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                            q
                                                               -0.10




                                                                                                                                                                             Aggregate
                                                                                                                                                                     q       Equal Weights
                                                                                                                                                                             Granular Residual
                                                               -0.15




                                                                                                                                                                             Share Deviation


                                                                       2010                     2011                         2012      2013        2014      2015    2016        2017         2018

                                                                                                                                               Fiscal Year




Note. This figure plots the individual components of government consumption growth, decomposed as in
Foerster et al. (2011) as follows:
                          N                                                                                             N                          N                                               N
                                                                               1                                                                                         1
                   Zt =         i,t zi,t =                                                                                     zi,t            +             ¯i -
                                                                                                                                                                                 zi,t +                (i,t - ¯ i )zi,t
                          i=1
                                                                               N                                    i=1                            i=1
                                                                                                                                                                         N                      i=1

                          (1) Actual                                     (2) Equal Weights                                                         (3) Granular Residual                           (4) Share Deviation




                              Figure 11: Sectoral Spending and Price Rigidity
                                                               0.5




                                                                                        q
                                                               0.4




                                                                                                    q
                                  Frequency of Price Changes




                                                                                                                    q
                                                               0.3




                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                    q




                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                        q




                                                                                                                q
                                                               0.2




                                                                                                        q           q
                                                                                        q




                                                                                            q


                                                                                                                        q

                                                                                                                    q                  q
                                                               0.1




                                                                                                            q



                                                                                                            q
                                                                                q




                                                                                                        q
                                                               0.0




                                                                              0.00                                          0.05       0.10        0.15       0.20       0.25          0.30

                                                                                                                                           Share of Spending




Note. This figure shows the average annual share of government spending in each two-digit sector (x-axis)
plotted against the frequency of price changes in those sectors, based on BLS data. The size of the bubble
corresponds with the average sectoral share of annual aggregate spending.




                                                                                                                                                37
                                                 Figure 12: Dynamic Effect of Sectoral Shocks

                                                                 G                                                       Output
                                              1.2                                                          1
                                                                                                                                   Sector 1 shock
                                                1                                                         0.8                      Sector 2 shock




                             ppts of output
                                              0.8                                                         0.6




                                                                                    ppts
                                              0.6                                                         0.4

                                              0.4                                                         0.2

                                              0.2                                                          0

                                                0                                                  -0.2
                                                     0   2        4       6    8                                0   2        4          6                8


                                                         Private consumption                                            Policy rate
                                              0.2                                                         10

                                                0                                                          8




                                                                                      ppts (annualized)
                         ppts of output




                                              -0.2
                                                                                                           6
                                              -0.4
                                                                                                           4
                                              -0.6

                                              -0.8                                                         2

                                               -1                                                          0
                                                     0   2        4       6    8                                0   2        4          6                8



Note. Impulse responses to government spending shocks in two-sector model: sector 1 (solid line) vs sector 2
(dashed line). The shock is equal to one percent of output. The horizontal axis measures time in months. The
vertical axis measures deviation from steady state in percentage points.




         Figure 13: Dynamic Effect of Sectoral Shocks w/ homogeneous Pricing Friction

                                                                 G                                                       Output
                                              1.2                                                          1
                                                                                                                         Sector 1 shock (baseline)
                                                1                                                         0.8            Sector 2 shock (baseline)
                                                                                                                         Sector 1 shock ( 1 = 0.9)
                             ppts of output




                                              0.8                                                         0.6
                                                                                                                         Sector 2 shock (   1
                                                                                                                                                = 0.9)
                                                                                    ppts




                                              0.6                                                         0.4

                                              0.4                                                         0.2

                                              0.2                                                          0

                                                0                                                  -0.2
                                                     0   2        4       6    8                                0   2        4          6                8


                                                         Private consumption                                            Policy rate
                                              0.2                                                         10

                                                0                                                          8
                                                                                      ppts (annualized)
                         ppts of output




                                              -0.2
                                                                                                           6
                                              -0.4
                                                                                                           4
                                              -0.6

                                              -0.8                                                         2

                                               -1                                                          0
                                                     0   2        4       6    8                                0   2        4          6                8



Note. Impulse responses to government spending shocks in two-sector model: sector 1 (solid line) vs sector 2
(dashed line). The shock is equal to one percent of output. The horizontal axis measures time in months. The
vertical axis measures deviation from steady state in percentage points.




                                                                                   38
                Figure 14: Dynamic Effect of Sectoral Shocks at Zero Lower Bound

                                                                                                        G                                                               Output
                                                                                 1.2                                                      1.2
                                                                                                                                                                                Sector 1 shock
                                                                                  1                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                Sector 2 shock




                                                                ppts of output
                                                                                 0.8                                                      0.8




                                                                                                                            ppts
                                                                                 0.6                                                      0.6
                                                                                 0.4                                                      0.4
                                                                                 0.2                                                      0.2
                                                                                  0                                                                    0
                                                                                       0     2          4       6       8                                  0       2        4         6          8

                                                                                           Private Consumption                                                         Policy rate
                                                                         0.15                                                                          0




                                                                                                                             ppts (annualized)
                                                    ppts of output




                                                                                 0.1                                                             -1

                                                                         0.05                                                                    -2

                                                                                  0                                                              -3

                                                                     -0.05                                                                       -4
                                                                                       0     2          4       6       8                                  0       2        4         6          8



Note. Impulse responses to government spending shocks in two-sector model at zero lower bound: sector 1 (solid
line) vs sector 2 (dashed line). The shock is equal to one percent of output. The horizontal axis measures time
in months. The vertical axis measures deviation from steady state in percentage points. The zero lower bound
binds because of shock to the time discount factor. The model is solved while allowing for occasionally binding
constraints, as in Guerrieri and Iacoviello (2015).




                                                               Figure 15: Dynamic Effect of Aggregate Shock

                                                                                                 G                                                                                Output
                                         1.2                                                                                                           0.8
                                                                                                     One-sector model
                                           1                                                         Baseline model
                                                                                                                                                       0.6
                        ppts of output




                                         0.8
                                                                                                                              ppts




                                         0.6                                                                                                           0.4

                                         0.4
                                                                                                                                                       0.2
                                         0.2

                                           0                                                                                                               0
                                                0                                 2              4          6           8                                      0        2            4               6   8


                                                                                 Private consumption                                                                            Policy rate
                                           0                                                                                                           10

                                                                                                                                                           8
                                                                                                                                   ppts (annualized)




                                         -0.2
                    ppts of output




                                                                                                                                                           6
                                         -0.4
                                                                                                                                                           4

                                         -0.6
                                                                                                                                                           2

                                         -0.8                                                                                                              0
                                                0                                 2              4          6           8                                      0        2            4               6   8


Note. Impulse responses to aggregate shock: one-sector model with  = 0.9 (solid line) vs two-sector model
(dashed line). The shock is equal to one percent of output. The horizontal axis measures time in months. The
vertical axis measures deviation from steady state in percentage points.




                                                                                                                            39
                             Table 1: Explanatory Power of the Granular Residual

                                       Q=1000                           Q=100
                                         (1)         (2)                  (3)                (4)
            Q
            t
              =1000
                                        0.282   
                                                     0.280  

                                       (0.080)      (0.079)
            Q =1000
            t-1                        -0.043       -0.046
                                       (0.080)      (0.079)
            Q =1000
            t-2                         0.089
                                       (0.080)
            Q
            t
              =100
                                                                           0.289            0.278
                                                                          (0.084)          (0.082)
            Q =100
            t-1                                                          -0.030            -0.038
                                                                          (0.083)          (0.083)
            Q =100
            t-2                                                            0.105
                                                                          (0.084)
            Observations                 15          16                   15                 16
            R2                          0.558       0.506                0.539              0.478
                                       
                 p<0.1;      p<0.05;      p<0.01

Note. We run a regression of aggregate growth--Zt = ln(Gt ) - ln(Gt-1 )--on the granular residual and its lags:
                                                                                          gi,t-1
Zt = 0 + 1 t + 2 t-1 + 3 t-2 , where the granular residual is then given by t = K    i=1 Gt-1 (zi,t - z
                                                                                                      ¯t ). Gt is
                                                               Q
                                                ¯t = Q-1
aggregate government consumption in year t, and z              i=1   zi,t is the average growth rate over the top Q
firms.



                      Table 2: Spending Shares and Frequency of Price Changes

 # of Sectors       % of G         % Value Added     Avg. Freq. In          Avg. Freq. Out          Avg.  In     Avg.  Out
       1             30.93              6.29             0.12                    0.14                 0.3           0.28
       2             59.89              13.3             0.09                     0.2                 0.27          0.31
       3             69.14             16.22              0.1                    0.22                 0.29          0.28
       4             76.48             20.39             0.13                     0.2                 0.24          0.36
       5             80.51             24.72             0.14                    0.21                 0.23          0.39
       6             84.13             30.66             0.17                    0.19                 0.3           0.35
       8             89.12              40.5             0.19                    0.15                 0.32          0.29
      12             95.53              55.3             0.17                    0.18                 0.34          0.34
Note. Avg. Freq. In refers to the average frequency of price changes in sectors within the given % of government
spending. Avg. Freq. Out is the average frequency of price changes for all other sectors. The same
interpretation is true for , the persistence parameter of estimates AR1 processes.




                                                       40
