                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      EVIDENCE ON JOB SEARCH MODELS FROM A SURVEY OF UNEMPLOYED
                          WORKERS IN GERMANY

                                       Stefano DellaVigna
                                          Jörg Heining
                                     Johannes F. Schmieder
                                         Simon Trenkle

                                       Working Paper 27037
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27037


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




We would like to thank the Institute for Employment Research (IAB) for funding the survey and
immense logistical support; the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the National Science Foundation
(NSF), and the German Science Foundation (DFG) for generous financial support; Stefan Bender
for helping to kickstart the project; Guilherme Lichand and the MGov team for solving the
logistical challenge of conducting a survey via SMS; many brave RAs at the IAB, Berkeley and
BU; our anonymous sample of UI experts for the Forecasting Survey; as well as Alan Krueger
and Andreas Mueller who gave us the inspiration and many useful tips and advice. We also
would like to thank Isaiah Andrews, Balazs Reizer, David Card, Raj Chetty, Simon Jaeger, Kory
Kroft, Bruce Meyer, Matthew Notowidigdo, Alexandra Roulet, Amelie Schiprowski, Johannes
Spinnewijn, as well as seminar participants at Boston University, the Applied Micro Workshop in
Paris, and Carnegie Mellon, for many helpful comments and suggestions. All errors are our own.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Stefano DellaVigna, Jörg Heining, Johannes F. Schmieder, and Simon Trenkle. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Evidence on Job Search Models from a Survey of Unemployed Workers in Germany
Stefano DellaVigna, Jörg Heining, Johannes F. Schmieder, and Simon Trenkle
NBER Working Paper No. 27037
April 2020
JEL No. D9,J64

                                           ABSTRACT

The job finding rate of Unemployment Insurance (UI) recipients declines in the initial months of
unemployment and then exhibits a spike at the benefit exhaustion point. A range of theoretical
explanations have been proposed, but those are hard to disentangle using data on job finding
alone. To better understand the underlying mechanisms, we conducted a large text-message-based
survey of unemployed workers in Germany. We surveyed 6,800 UI recipients twice a week for 4
months about their job search effort. The panel structure allows us to observe how search effort
evolves within individual over the unemployment spell. We provide three key facts: 1) search
effort is flat early on in the UI spell, 2) search effort exhibits an increase up to UI exhaustion and
a decrease thereafter, 3) UI recipients do not appear to time job start dates to coincide with the UI
exhaustion point. A model of reference-dependent job search can explain these facts well, while a
standard search model with unobserved heterogeneity struggles to explain the second fact. The
third fact also leaves little room for a model of storable offers to explain the spike.


Stefano DellaVigna                                Johannes F. Schmieder
University of California, Berkeley                Department of Economics
Department of Economics                           Boston University
549 Evans Hall #3880                              270 Bay State Road
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                           Boston, MA 02215
and NBER                                          and IZA
sdellavi@econ.berkeley.edu                        and also NBER
                                                  johannes@bu.edu
Jörg Heining
Institute for Employment Research (IAB)           Simon Trenkle
Joerg.Heining@iab.de                              Institute of Labor Economics (IZA)
                                                  Schaumburg-Lippe Str. 5-9
                                                  53113 Bonn, Germany
                                                  and IAB
                                                  trenkle@iza.org




An online Appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27037
1       Introduction

To tell apart different models of job search, the key piece of evidence is typically the path
of the hazard rate from unemployment to employment. The evidence from administrative
data sets suggests three common patterns, from the US (Ganong and Noel, 2019) to Spain
(Domenech and Vannutelli, 2019), from France (Marinescu and Skandalis, 2019) to Slovenia
(Boone and van Ours, 2012): (i) the hazard rate from unemployment typically declines in the
initial months of unemployment; (ii) it increases near expiration; (iii) it declines again following
expiration, creating a spike at UI exhaustion. We find those same patterns in Germany for
recipients with potential unemployment duration ranging from 6 to 15 months (Figure 1a).1
        As well-established as these patterns are, it is not obvious to translate them into job
search models because of the role of unobserved heterogeneity and other confounders. Does
the decline in job finding rate in the initial months reflect workers discouragement, or the
fact that more able workers get jobs faster? Does the spike of the hazard rate at exhaustion
reflect increase search intensity, or previous offers that the workers extended, as in the storable
offer models (Boone and van Ours, 2012)? With aggregate hazard rates, one can attempt to
separate the different models, but the ability to do so is ultimately limited by the fact that we
do not observe the path of search effort within worker, only the aggregate composition. One
would ideally like within-worker measure of search intensity over the spell.
        In this paper, we provide evidence on search intensity from a panel survey of unemployed
workers in Germany. In doing so, we build on the pioneering work of Krueger and Mueller
(2011, KM) who surveyed a panel of unemployed workers in New Jersey in the wake of the
Great Recession. As important as the lessons from KM are, they are limited in the ability to
address the questions above by the repeated UI benefits extensions in their time frame.
        We survey 6,877 unemployed workers in Germany for 18 weeks between November 2017 and
November 2019. Throughout, the economic environment is stable, with the unemployment
rate between 5% and 6%. To disentangle the survey responses from time or cohort effects, we
stagger the start of interview over 20 months, and we randomize the time of contact during
the spell, e.g., in months 2, 5, 8, 11, or 13. We contact groups with 5 different potential benefit
durations (PBD): 6, 8, 10, 12, and 15 months. The variation in PBD of 6, 8, 10, or 12 months
depends on the length of contributions to the UI system, while the difference between PBD
of 12 or 15 months depends on an age discontinuity (as studied by Schmieder and Trenkle,
2020).
        A novel design feature is that, instead of conducting a phone or web survey, we use SMS
    1
        For a recent survey on the effects of UI on job finding rates see Schmieder and von Wachter (2016).


                                                         1
messages, a survey method used to some extent in developing countries (e.g. Ballivian et al.
2015; Hoogeveen et al. 2014; Berkouwer and Dean 2019) and epidemiological research (e.g.
Kuntsche and Robert 2009; Johansen and Wedderkopp 2010) but a novelty, as far as we know,
in our context. This survey feature was chosen to limit exhaustion and attrition. We contact
86,673 unemployed workers with a letter letting them known of the upcoming text message;
a few days later we send text messages asking for consent to participate in a survey. Among
the 7,797 respondents who consent, the 6,877 workers who report still being unemployed
constitute our main sample. The respondents receive text messages twice a week, on Tuesday
and Thursday, with a question on search effort (translated from German): "How many hours
did you spend searching for a job yesterday? For example, looking for job-postings, sending
out applications or designing a cv. Please reply with the number of hours, e.g. "0.5", or "2".
If, for whatever reason, you did not look for a job simply respond with "0" ".
   Our measure of search intensity is the answer to this question for the individuals who report
still being unemployed. Before we turn to our main findings, we document four encouraging
features of this measure. First, the average number of minutes of job search, 81 minutes per
day, is comparable to the average search intensity in the KM survey (70 minutes on weekdays)
and in the Survey of Consumer Expectations supplement (77 minutes, Faberman et al., 2017),
and somewhat higher than in the American Time Use Survey (48 minutes, Krueger and
Mueller, 2010). Second, the measure of search effort displays no obvious time trend and only
limited seasonality, making the use of time controls of limited importance. Third, it responds
strongly to plausible determinants of search intensity: the measure declines by 75 percent
upon receiving a job offer, and by 30 percent on a holiday.
   The fourth validation is the most critical for our design, since it enables us to focus on
within-person search intensity. Compare two groups of survey participants who are unem-
ployed in month 5 of potential duration; the first group was randomized to receive the invi-
tation to participate on month 2, while the second group on month 5. We would like the two
groups to have similar reported search intensity, so that when the survey started, conditional
on month of unemployment and current unemployment status, is not material to the response.
This property could fail because, for example, individuals start off over-reporting the number
of hours search but become more truthful as the survey goes on. We document that in our
sample there is no systematic difference in average search effort between the two groups, that
is, the between-worker and within-worker estimates are comparable. This is a different pattern
than in the KM survey. While we cannot tell for sure, the SMS format, making response easy
and not time-consuming, likely contributed to this pattern in our survey.
   Having established these desirable properties, we turn to three key pieces of evidence from

                                               2
our survey. First, we provide evidence on the path of search effort in the initial months,
far from exhaustion. The standard model predicts an increase, while other models predict a
decrease, say due to discouragement or habituation. Second, we provide evidence on the path
of search effort near exhaustion. The standard model predicts an increase up to exhaustion,
with a constant effort thereafter. A reference-dependent model with backward-looking refer-
ence points (DellaVigna et al., 2017) also suggests an increase up to exhaustion, but a decrease
thereafter. Third, we focus on the role of storable offers. Namely, we test whether individuals
who report getting a job near benefit expiration seem to time the job start date to coincide
with UI exhaustion. For each of these findings, we compare the results (as in DellaVigna and
Pope, 2018 and DellaVigna et al. (2019)) to the average prediction of 35 experts on job search.
   For the first finding, we consider the intensity of search effort from month 2 (as early
as we could survey unemployed respondents) to month 6, excluding the group with 6-month
PBD. On average, the experts expect a 20 percent decrease in search intensity over this
period. Instead, the search intensity stays flat, from 87 minutes in month 2 to 88 minutes
(s.e.=2.8 minutes) in month 6. This contrasts with a sharp decrease in the hazard rate
from unemployment from 12 percent to 7 percent over the same unemployment length. This
suggests that the decline in hazard rates is unlikely to be due to a discouragement effect.
   For the second finding, we focus on search effort around the UI exhaustion. On average, the
experts expect search effort to increase substantially in the months leading to UI exhaustion, as
predicted by most models, other than a pure storable-offer model of the "spike"; interestingly,
they also forecast a similar-sized decline in the 3 months past exhaustion, as predicted under
reference dependence. We find evidence qualitatively consistent with this prediction: search
effort increases by 7 minutes (s.e.: 2.0 minutes) up to expiration, and then decreases by 5.7
minutes (s.e.: 1.9 minutes). Thus the "spike" in hazard is matched by a similar "spike" in
search intensity, even if, in percent terms, the increase in minutes searched is smaller.
   The third finding concerns the storable-offer model. We compute the average number
of days between the (reported) job offer and job start. The experts on average expect this
offer-start gap to be 50 percent larger for individuals starting their job in the month of UI
expiration, versus in other months. Instead, we find the gap to be about the same for the two
groups, and no evidence of storable offers also using an alternative measure.
   We then turn to whether a model of job search can quantitatively explain our findings
on the path of search effort throughout the UI spell, as well as the observed reemployment
hazard. We generate reemployment hazard rates using administrative data for a comparable
population as the survey sample. Using both the search effort and hazard paths as target
moments, we estimate via minimum distance a model with costly search effort and an optimal

                                               3
consumption choice. As far as we know, this is the first estimate of a job search model with
information on both the inputs (the search intensity) and the outputs (the hazards).
   Building on DellaVigna et al. (2017), we compare a standard job search model with un-
observed heterogeneity with a reference-dependent model which allows for loss aversion with
respect to recent income. In the reference-dependent model, unemployed individuals search
especially hard when current consumption lags recent income, for example at UI expiration, as
loss aversion makes unemployment especially painful; over time, however, they get habituated
as the reference point adapts, and thus the search intensity declines.
   Overall, the reference-dependent model fits significantly better. The difference is not due to
the hazard moments, which the two models fit similarly well, but to the search effort moments
near UI expiration. The reference-dependent model fits well the increase and then decrease
of effort near expiration, with the decrease explained by the reference-point adaptation. The
standard model, instead, fits well the increase but cannot explain the subsequent decrease.
Perhaps surprisingly, both models fit quite well the flatness of the search effort in the initial
months. Importantly, while the findings on storable offers are not used in the estimation,
the models match closely the spike at UI expiration, consistent with the data providing little
support for storable offers in the German context.
   We consider informally other models and factors that could affect our conclusions. A
model of worker discouragement (perhaps because of perceived skill depreciation as in Kroft
et al., 2013) could generate a decrease in search effort post expiration, but it would not seem
to explain the flat search profile in the initial months, when discouragement would seem most
likely. A model with a fixed pool of jobs (as discussed in Faberman and Kudlyak, 2019) to
search could generate a decrease in search effort post expiration, as workers sampled most
available jobs by the deadline; however, this model would predict a dip in search effort after
expiration, rather than the observed smooth decrease. Temporary layoffs of workers who are
later recalled (as in Katz, 1986; Katz and Meyer, 1990) could explain the spike in hazards at
expiration, but while such recalls appear important in other settings we show that they are
relatively uncommon in Germany and do not affect the hazard rate.
   The paper is related to other papers measuring search effort over the unemployment spell.
As mentioned above, we build on the survey of unemployed workers in KM, but unlike in
KM we are able to examine search effort at expiration. Two papers measure search effort
with activity on online postings: Marinescu and Skandalis (2019) using data from activity on
the web portal for unemployed workers in France documents a similar increase and decrease
of search effort near expiration; Faberman and Kudlyak (2019) using activity on an online
job search platform in the US cannot study search effort at expiration, but, like us, does not

                                               4
find evidence of a decrease in search effort in the initial months. We view the two forms of
evidence as highly complementary. The survey-based measure is based on a self report, unlike
the administrative measure in the job portals, but has the advantage that it covers all forms
of job search, not just a specific, and infrequent, job search activity.2
    The paper is also related to papers bringing to bear evidence on job search models (e.g.
Card et al., 2007; Nekoei and Weber, 2017; Kolsrud et al., 2018; Belot et al., 2019; Ganong and
Noel, 2019) and the disincentive effects of UI (Rothstein, 2011; Lalive et al., 2015; Johnston
and Mas, 2018; Leung and O'Leary, 2019; Le Barbanchon et al., 2019). The evidence from
within-person search effort complements the traditional information on hazard rates from
unemployment. Indeed, in our context using just the hazard rates we would be unable to
distinguish between models. Our finding of a flat within-person profile in search effort is
consistent with evidence from Mueller et al. (2018) suggesting that the decline in hazard is
more likely due to unobserved heterogeneity than true duration dependence. Our finding
of a spike in search effort around UI expiration is consistent with the reference-dependent
explanation of evidence from a reform in Hungary (DellaVigna et al., 2017), with comparable
degrees of loss-aversion, though a longer adaptation period.
    The paper is also related to evidence on reference dependence using field data (e.g. Sydnor,
2010; Barseghyan et al., 2013; Allen et al., 2017; Rees-Jones, 2018; O'Donoghue and Sprenger,
2018; Barberis, 2018). The paper provides additional evidence pointing in the direction of
backward-looking, adaptive reference points (e.g. Thakral and Tô, forthcoming), for example
because of memory (Bordalo et al., forthcoming).
    Finally, methodologically our paper also highlights the potential benefits of using SMS
messages to run surveys. Respondents in our sample participated twice a week for 4 months,
with relatively low attrition, and at a moderate cost. The trade-off relative to more traditional
methods--phone and online surveys--is that SMS-based survey lend themselves more to cases
with few, simple questions and answers, like ours.


2   Survey Design and Setting

The target group for the survey are prime-age recipients of UI benefits in Germany. The
German UI system has been studied extensively (e.g. Fitzenberger and Wilke, 2010; Schmieder
et al., 2012; Caliendo et al., 2013; Dlugosz et al., 2014; Schmieder et al., 2016; Altmann et
al., Forthcoming). The key features are that individuals who become unemployed and have
   2
     Other related papers provide evidence on the intensity of search activities in response to various reforms,
e.g., Lichter and Schiprowski (2020) and Arni and Schiprowski (2019).



                                                       5
worked at least 12 out of the 30 previous months are eligible to UI benefits at a replacement
rate of 60 percent (67 percent for workers with children). UI claimants can receive benefits up
to the potential benefit duration (PBD), which is determined by the prior work history. While
on UI, unemployed workers regularly meet with caseworkers who provide support, monitor
job search efforts, and may assign workers to active labor market programs (see Schmieder
and Trenkle, 2020, for more details). After UI benefits are exhausted workers may claim a
second tier of benefits called "Unemployment benefits 2" which is a means tested program on
the household level and generally substantially less generous than regular UI benefits.
       The survey was funded and conducted by the Institute of Employment Research
(IAB), the research institute of the German Federal Employment Agency.3 Since the UI
system is overseen by the Federal Employment Agency, the IAB has direct access to the ad-
ministrative data on UI claims and the work history of the claimants. Conducting the survey
closely integrated with the administrative data provides three crucial advantages: a) the ad-
ministrative data allows for a very targeted sample (workers with specific benefit durations ­
potentially with quasi random variation such as age discontinuities; workers close to UI ex-
haustion; etc.) and easy checks for the representativeness of the sample, b) the administrative
data provides extensive and precise background information that does not have to be obtained
via a survey instrument (demographics, past labor market history, UI eligibility, ...) and c)
participants can be followed even after the survey has concluded.
       The first wave of UI recipients was contacted in November 2017 (see Figure 2a for an illus-
tration of the timing). Through the IAB, we were able to obtain the universe of UI recipients
in each month of our survey with about a 3 week delay, i.e. at the beginning of Novem-
ber 2017 we could obtain a snapshot of all UI recipients as of October 15th, 2017, together
with information on mobile phone numbers, demographics and potential UI benefit durations.
Among the UI claimants with recorded cellphone numbers (about 80% of all claimants), we
selected a (stratified) random sample of UI recipients for whom we then obtained addresses
from the administrative UI data. The contacted individuals first received a letter and a flyer
in the mail (see Online Appendix Figure A.1 and A.2) explaining the format of the survey,
the anonymity of the responses, and the incentives we offer for participation (20 euro in form
of Amazon gift vouchers for participating for the full survey duration).4 After receiving the
   3
      The direct costs of conducting the survey was born by the IAB. Additional funding for researcher time
and research assistance positions came from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the German Science Foundation
(DFG) and the US National Science Foundation (NSF).
    4
      Once an individual consents, she receives a 5 Euro Amazon gift voucher (in form of a Code via SMS).
If the individual keeps responding to questions, she receives another 5 Euro voucher after the first 2 months
and a final 10 Euro voucher after completing the entire 18 weeks. About 60% of vouchers were redeemed as
of December 2019, 2 months after the end of the survey (see Online Appendix Table A.1).


                                                     6
letter on a Thursday (approximately), the UI recipients are then contacted on the following
Tuesday directly via SMS.5 This initial SMS contact asks the UI recipients for their consent to
participate in the survey and to allow us to link their responses to the administrative data. If
the person consents to the survey, we then ask her the first question on job search effort. From
then onwards for the next 18 weeks, we contact the participants each Tuesday and Thursday
to ask about their job search activities.
      The sample for this initial (and each subsequent) wave consisted of 2 distinct groups: a set
of 'short-eligibility' workers, with potential benefit durations (PBD) of 6, 8 or 10 months, and a
set of 'long-eligibility' workers, with either 12 or 15 months of PBD. The short-eligibility group
consists of workers age 28 to 55 who have at least 12, but strictly less than 24 contribution
months in the previous 5 years. In this group having at least 16 contribution months increases
PBD from 6 to 8 months and having at least 20 contributions months increases PBD from 8
to 10 months. The long-eligibility group consists of workers between age 45 and 55 at the time
of UI claim who had at least 30 months of UI contributions in the previous 5 years. Workers
within this group who were younger than 50 at the time of UI claiming have 12 months of
PBD while workers 50 or higher have 15 months of PBD.
      The hazard rates for these groups (Figure 1a) display the familiar patterns with decreases
in hazard from month 2 onward, and a spike near expiration. To show that these patterns are
causal and not due to differences in sample composition, Figure 1b shows the regression dis-
continuity estimates of the hazard rate just before vs. just after the age cutoff that determines
whether individuals have 12 or 15 months of PBD, displaying a sizable spike in the hazard
rate near exhaustion. Regression discontinuity estimates comparing durations of 6 versus 8
month, and 8 versus 10 months display similar spikes (Online Appendix Figure A.3).
      Recalls could explain the spike in the hazard at exhaustion if employers strategically choose
recall dates to coincide with benefit expiration (Katz, 1986 and Katz and Meyer, 1990), and
such recalls are important in settings such as the US (50% recall rate, Fujita and Moscarini,
2017) or Austria (35% recall rate, Nekoei and Weber, 2015). In contrast in our sample in
Germany the share of UI recipients returning to their previous employer is only about 10-15%
and the hazard rates excluding recalls are similar (Online Appendix Figure A.4).
      In the survey, in addition to sampling by PBD strata, we also stratify the sample by elapsed
nonemployment duration. For example, for the PBD=12 group, we contact some individuals
at the end of the 2nd month after claiming UI, some at the end of the 5th months, and others
at the end of the 8th, 11th and 13th month of unemployment duration. The weights are
  5
    The technical aspect of sending SMS messages and processing responses was run by Guilherme Lichand
at the University of Zurich and his company 'MGov' (now 'Movva').


                                                  7
chosen to oversample individuals close to the UI exhaustion point. Online Appendix Table
A.2 shows the exact weights for the different cells. We call each of the Wave x PBD x D cells
a "Panel". Figure 2b shows the 5 panels that start in November 2017 for the PBD=12 group,
which each run for 4.5 months until March 2018.
      In each of the following months until the start of the last wave in July 2019, we contacted
new waves of workers following the same design. Thus, the same cohort of workers who had
2 months of unemployment duration in November of 2017 was contacted again in February
2018, now in the D=5 months panel. While we of course do not contact the same individual
more than once, this overlapping panel design allows us to trace out search effort for a
cohort of individuals for much longer than just the 18 survey weeks.
      While the first 2 waves served as a pilot with only about 500 contacted individuals, we
quickly increased this to first 3,000 and, starting in August 2018, to 5,000 contacted individuals
per wave. Online Appendix Table A.3 provides more details for the contact dates and number
of contacted individuals and participants for each of the 22 waves. With 5,000 individuals per
wave we start to be constrained by the total number of individuals that are available in some
of the strata. This is especially an issue in the PBD x D cells close to the exhaustion point,
since those are larger and many people find jobs before exhausting UI benefits. This is a key
reason for splitting the survey in so many waves, but a welcome side effect of this split is that
it allows us to explore the role of calendar effects and time trends.6
      Table 1 shows an overview of our sample. Column 1 shows average characteristics for all
individuals who received UI benefits during our survey period. Workers without prior UI spells
are eligible to exactly 6, 8, 10, 12, or 15 months of UI benefits (or even more if they are older
than 55) at the beginning of their UI spell. Different PBD durations are possible for workers
with prior UI spells and unused UI eligibility that they can carry over, or if workers participate
in job training programs. Since we are interested in how search effort evolves around the UI
exhaustion point, we restrict our sample to UI claimants who, at the time of sampling, have
these exact levels as PBD. We also restrict to individuals with a cellphone number and a valid
address, that are neither sanctioned nor in a training program at time of data retrieval. In
addition, we restrict to age 28 to 55 at time of UI start, and in fact age 45 to 55 for the 12
and 15 PBD groups. Column 2 shows individuals that satisfy these sampling requirements
and column 3 shows the characteristics of the 86,673 individuals contacted with a letter and
then SMS messages. The differences between column 3 and 2 are due to the weights different
PBD x D groups receive in our stratified sample.
  6
   In the KM survey individuals were all contacted in a single wave, so that the UI entry date and the
unemployment duration at survey start are essentially collinear.


                                                  8
       Of the individuals contacted, Column 4 shows that about 9 percent agreed to participate.
Given that individuals may not have read the letter/flyer, may not understand who is contact-
ing them (and how we have obtained their cellphone number), and that we are asking them for
permission to link their responses to sensitive personal information, this response rate strikes
us as reasonable. It is comparable to the initial response rate in the KM survey (reported
in the bottom row in Table 1). Comparing columns 3 and 4 it is clear that participation is
not random. While the age composition is similar, participants are much less likely to be of
foreign nationality (16 percent vs. 27 percent among the contacted), more highly educated
and more likely to be women. The response rate across the different PBD groups is relatively
similar.7 Thus, below we provide robustness results re-weighting by these observables.
       Due to the delay of 3-4 weeks between the most recent snapshot of the UI data to the
contact date, 11.5 percent of participants have already found a job at the time of contact.
We were concerned that participants might respond that they stopped looking for a job /
found a job in order to cut the survey short. For that reason we make it clear that the survey
continues whether or not the participants are employed and we keep everyone in the survey for
the entire 18 weeks. Since we focus on the job search of the unemployed, column 5 shows the
analysis sample of 6,877 participants who are unemployed at the beginning of the survey and
respond to at least one question on job search. Conditional on participating in the first week,
attrition is low: almost 70 percent (4,797) of the participants stay in the survey until week 18
and of those who stay about 61 percent are still unemployed (see column 5).8 Furthermore
the characteristics of individuals who participate initially are very similar to the participants
who still participate at the end of the survey.
       In addition to the biweekly questions on minutes spend on job search, we also ask one
additional question each Tuesday, rotating between 4 questions:

   1. Target wage: Please recall the last job you applied for. What do you think is the
         typical monthly wage for such a job in Euros?

   2. Life satisfaction: Taken all together, how satisfied are you with your life? Please reply
         with a number between 1 (not satisfied at all) and 5 (very satisfied).

   3. Search intensity: How hard did you search for a job over the last week? Please reply
   7
     Online Appendix Table A.4 directly compares participants with non-participants and provides tests for
equality. Due to sample sizes almost all differences are statistically significant.
   8
     Online Appendix Figure A.5 shows that the attrition rate in our SMS based survey is substantially
lower than in the KM study (about 50 percent by week 12). Furthermore, while KM report that respondents
completed around 40 percent of the weekly interviews, in our data participants responded to around 78 percent
of weekly job search questions, a likely benefit of using SMS messages as opposed to online questionnaires.


                                                     9
          with a number from 1 (no search) to 10 (very hard search).

    4. Job Found: We would like to know if your job search was successful. Please reply with
          1 if you found a job and 2 if you are still searching for a job.

If a participant responds to the last question with "1", we ask 3 follow up questions: a) what
is the start date of the new job; b) what date was the offer received; and c) what date was
the job accepted. Figure A.6 in the Online Appendix displays the sequence of the questions,
while Table A.5 shows the complete text of all questions in German with English translation.


3       Validating the Survey Responses

3.1       Basic Patterns of Search Effort Responses

We now describe the basic pattern of responses to our main question on job search effort and
provide suggestive evidence that the responses are meaningful and valid.
        The question on job search effort, asked each Tuesday and Thursday for 18 weeks, is:

          How many hours did you spend searching for a job yesterday? For example, looking
          for job-postings, sending out applications or designing a cv. Please reply with the
          number of hours, e.g. "0.5", or "2". If, for whatever reason, you did not look for
          a job simply respond with "0".

To deal with outliers (which may stem from mistyping a response), we drop all answers of
job search above 15 hours (0.1 percent of observations) and winsorize the responses between
6 and 15 hours (2 percent of observations) to 6 hours. Figure 3a shows a histogram of all
valid responses for unemployed job seekers transformed to minutes of job search. About 30
percent of the responses indicate no job search on the previous day. Given the phrasing of
the question, almost all responses are at multiples of 30 minutes with bunching at full hours.
Conditional on searching, the most common response is "1 hour", but many people also report
search effort between 30 minutes and 3 hours.
        Figure 3b shows that the average search effort by day over the duration of our survey
displays no obvious time trend and only limited seasonality.9 Encouragingly, the mean time
spent searching in our sample of 83 minutes is comparable to the average search intensity in the
KM survey (70 minutes on weekdays), in the Survey of Consumer Expectations supplement
    9
    If a person responds to a question the following day, we still code the response for the day that we originally
asked about (for example Monday if the question was sent out on Tuesday but answered on Wednesday).




                                                        10
(77 minutes, Faberman et al., 2017) and is somewhat higher than in the American Time Use
Survey (48 minutes, Krueger and Mueller, 2010).10
       As a first validation check we investigate how search effort changes on public holidays,
where we expect people to search less either because of holiday activities or since employers
may not be reachable. While we paused the survey during the 2 weeks of Christmas / New
Year in each year, we did ask questions on several days where the previous day was a national
holiday, such as Easter Monday or Labor Day (May 1st). On these days, indicated in Figure
3b with dashed vertical lines, there is a clear dip in search effort. An event-study analysis
(Figure 4a) shows a dip of around 30 minutes in search effort on a holiday.11
       For a second validation check we use the fact that 1,858 respondents report finding a job
during the survey period and provide job acceptance dates. Figure 4b shows that, while search
effort is stable before job acceptance, it falls sharply to about 25 minutes after job acceptance.
These 25 minutes are somewhat higher than the reported search intensity of employed workers
in Faberman et al. (2017) of about 10 minutes, but this may be explained by the fact that
accepted jobs in our sample could involve unattractive jobs, such as part-time jobs.
       As a further check, Figure 4c shows how search effort evolves before and after the start
of a job, splitting by the gap in days between the job offer and the job start. Workers who
receive an offer and start a job shortly after (within less than 9 days) have the sharpest drop
in search with search effort. If workers received an offer more than 26 days before the job
start, search effort falls already around 2 months prior to the job start.12
       Overall, search effort responds in sensible and intuitive ways to exogenous events like
holidays and endogenous events like job acceptances and job offers.

3.2      Systematic Reporting Bias

A different challenge for a survey measure of search effort is that there could be systematic
reporting bias over the course of the survey. For example, respondents might be embarrassed
to admit not searching for a job but this 'social desirability bias' may decline over time as
respondents get used to the survey. Respondents might also develop survey fatigue and default
to answer '0' (or something else) as the survey goes on.
  10
     Krueger and Mueller (2012) using time use data report much less time spent on job search in European
countries (5-16 minutes). However these numbers do not condition on UI eligibility and likely include many
long-term unemployed that make these less comparable to our sample.
  11
     Online Appendix Table A.6 shows that search effort drops less for less important holidays, by around 17
minutes on regional holidays and by about 5 minutes during school vacations.
  12
     Online Appendix Figure A.7 shows the distribution of the offer-start gap. It also shows that most of this
gap comes from a gap between the job acceptance date and the job-start date and only to small degree from
a gap between the job-offer date and the job-acceptance date.


                                                     11
    We now consider this issue, with additional detail in Online Appendix D. Table 2 presents
regressions of search effort (while unemployed) on the number of months of unemployment.
The first columns ("between") use only the first response of each individual and the variation
in unemployment duration is thus entirely cross-sectional, with controls added in Column
2. Column 3 ("within") uses all the responses but controls for individual fixed effects, thus
presenting a within-person estimate. The point estimate for the between estimators is -0.44
minutes per month of job search , -0.51 with controls. The within estimate in column 3 is
very similar, with a point estimate of -0.24, not statistically significantly different from the
between estimate.
    These findings are in sharp contrast to the corresponding specifications in KM which we
replicated with the publicly available data in Columns 4-6.13 While the between estimates
in KM show a slight increase in column 4 (0.83 minutes per month), the within estimate in
Column 6 implies a 10.78 minute decline per month. This discrepancy in within and between
estimates shows up as a seesaw like pattern in KM Figure 3 (reproduced in Online Appendix
Figure A.8), where each cohort starts with high search effort which subsequently declines until
the start of the next cohort. This discrepancy makes it hard to draw clear conclusions whether
search effort is in fact declining or flat throughout the unemployment spell. While within-
person estimates have the advantage that the evolution of effort over time is not affected by
changes in the sample, this advantage is negated in the presence of systematic reporting bias.
    The corresponding figure in our data, Figure 5, shows that subsequent cohorts largely line
up, i.e. the next cohort on average starts at a level of job search where the previous one ended.
While there are some differences due to sampling error, they do not appear to be systematic.
    We can also conduct a direct test of reporting bias based on the following intuition. Within
a cohort of individuals who become unemployed at the same time and with the same PBD, it
is random whether the person was sampled in an early or later strata of our survey. Suppose
we observe two individuals with the same UI entry date T U I , the same PBD P at a time t, but
who were sampled at a different time (indicated by the survey contact date T contact ). In the
absence of a survey reporting bias, how long an individual has been on the survey t - T contact
should not be correlated with search effort st : Cov (st , t - T contact |t, T U I , P ) = 0. We test this in
Panel B of Table 2. We estimate a relatively small and statistically insignificant impact of the
number of months in the survey on the reported search effort and the resulting point estimate
is indeed very close to 0 and, despite small standard errors, statistically insignificant.14
  13
     This corresponds to Table 2 in KM. In the paper the regressions add some controls from administrative
data that are not publicly available which yields small differences to our results.
  14
     Since KM had a single contact date, there is no variation in t - T contact conditional on t and T U I and the
test cannot be performed directly in their data.


                                                       12
    We believe that the simplicity of the SMS method that was designed to make responding
as easy and painless as possible and minimized the (true or perceived) incentives to simply
respond with "0", largely avoids systematic reporting bias. While we cannot rule out that there
is systematic bias in levels (e.g. search effort might always be overstated by 20 percent), any
such bias does not appear to vary systematically over the course of the interview. Thus, in the
next section we use the within-person response to search effort questions over time to examine
how search effort varies throughout the unemployment spell and around UI exhaustion.
    While the mean search effort is our key measure of search effort, we also present results
on additional job search variables, namely different quantiles of the search effort measure, as
well as the impact on three additional search variables which we ask once a month. Online
Appendix Table A.7 presents the same test as in Table 2, Panel B for these additional variables.
After replicating the test for our main variable in Panel A, in Panel B we present the result for
a qualitative measure of job search, for the log monthly target wage, and for a life satisfaction
measure. Unlike for our main measure, the qualitative search intensity measure displays a
decrease over the survey, with some evidence of a decrease also for the life satisfaction variable.
Panel C also shows that, while the average search effort displays no seesaw pattern, there is
some pattern for some of the quantiles (such as whether the person searched at least 240
minutes). Thus, when we present these robustness results, we present also results adjusted,
to a first approximation, for this survey trend.


4   Job Search over the Unemployment Spell

We now turn to three key pieces of evidence. First, we document the path of search effort
in the initial months, far from exhaustion. The standard model predicts an increase, while
other models predict a decrease, say due to discouragement or habituation. Second, we provide
evidence on the path of search effort near exhaustion. The standard model predicts an increase
up to exhaustion, with a constant effort thereafter. A reference-dependent model with a
backward-looking reference point (DellaVigna et al., 2017) also suggests an increase up to
exhaustion, but a decrease thereafter. For these analyses, we use the search effort responses,
excluding individuals after the date at which they report having accepted a job offer.
    Third, we focus on a test for the role of storable offers. Namely, we test whether individuals
who report getting a job near benefit expiration are more likely to have lower search effort in
the weeks beforehand. In the same spirit we test whether individual who receive job offers
before UI exhaustion delay the job start date to the exhaustion point.




                                                13
4.1      Job search at the beginning of the unemployment spell

For the first finding, we consider the intensity of search effort from month 2 (as early as we
could survey unemployed respondents) to month 6, excluding the group with UI expiration at
month 6. Figure 5 presents the disaggregated evidence separately for each of the five different
PBD groups (6, 8, 10, 12, and 15 months), for each of the different sampling schemes. In all
five PBD groups, the unemployment duration in the initial months is fairly flat, with a slight
decrease for PBD of 8 and 15 months and a slight increase for PBD of 12 months.
       In Table 3 we aggregate across all the PBD durations, except for PBD of 6 months, in
which case it is difficult to separate the initial patterns in search effort versus the response
to the upcoming expiration. We compare the search intensity in months 3, 4, 5, and 6, with
search intensity in month 2 (the omitted category). Columns 1 and 2 display the estimates
from a cross-sectional regression, combining within-person and between-person variation, with
demographic controls added in Column 2. Both specifications indicate a flat profile of search
effort. In Column 3 we add person fixed effects, thus focusing on within-person search effort.
Finally, Column 4, our benchmark specification (reproduced in Figure 6a), also adds some
basic time controls­fixed effects for question asked on Thursday versus Tuesday and calendar
month fixed effects.15 These specifications confirm the finding from the cross-sectional spec-
ification of a precisely-estimated flat search profile: we can reject a 5 percent (4.3 minutes)
decrease in search intensity by month 6 relative to the search intensity in month 2.
       How do these patterns compare with the patterns in the hazard from unemployment?
Figure 6c displays a weighted hazard rate over PBD groups, matching the share of PBD
groups in Figure 6a. Given the timing evidence in Figure 4b-c, we compare the patterns of
job search to patterns in the hazard one month later. The flat path in search effort contrasts
with a sharp decrease in the hazard rate from 12 to 7 percent over the same unemployment
length. This suggests that the decline in hazard rates is unlikely to be due to a discouragement
effect and may be due to unobserved heterogeneity.

4.2      Job search around UI exhaustion

For the second finding, we focus on search effort in the 4 months around the UI exhaustion.
Most models, other than a pure storable-offer model, predict an increase in search effort
up to expiration due to the (waning) option value of unemployment. Following expiration,
the standard model predicts a flat profile of search intensity, or an increasing profile, to the
  15
    Notice that we cannot add a full vector of date fixed effects, given the presence of individual fixed effects
in the regression, for the usual inability to non-parametrically separate out cohort-time-age fixed effects.



                                                       14
extent that the workers are further depleting their assets. A model with reference dependence,
instead, predicts a decrease in search intensity post expiration.
      The disaggregated raw data on search intensity in Figure 5 shows evidence of an increase
in search intensity up to expiration (captured as month T-1) for the PBD group 10, 12, and 15
months, with a flat pattern for 6 and 8 months. Following benefit expiration, search intensity
declines for for PBD group 6, 10 and 12 months, and is flat for the other groups.
      Table 4 presents the evidence for search intensity, compared to month T-1, the last month
of receiving benefits, for cross-sectional specifications (Columns 1 and 2) and within-person
specifications (Columns 3 and 4). These estimates yield similar results, provided we control at
least for the basic demographic controls (Column 2). In the benchmark specification (Column
4), search effort increases by 7.3 minutes (s.e.=2.0 minutes) in the 3 months leading up to
expiration, and then decreases by 5.8 minutes (s.e.=1.9 minutes) in the ensuing 3 months.
      Figure 6b displays the point estimates from Column 4, comparing them to the parallel
estimates on the time path of the hazard rate (Figure 6d). The "spike" in hazard is matched
by a similar "spike" in search intensity, even if, in percent terms, the increase in minutes
searched is clearly smaller. Unlike our conclusions in the previous section, this suggests that
the hazard patterns at expiration can be accounted for by shifts in search effort, a point we
return to in the section on estimates of job search models.

4.3     Robustness

We present a battery of robustness checks in Tables 5 and 6 for our two key results on search
effort. All estimates include person fixed effect and time controls, as in our benchmark.
      Sample Inclusion. The first two robustness checks address alternative ways to define who
remains in the sample as the survey progresses. In Column 2 we restrict to "full participants"
who respond (and stay unemployed) for the full 18 weeks. Next, we present a narrower
definition of non-employment. It is important to exclude from the search measure individuals
who found a job, and there may be some slippage in how we record this. In Column 3
we require that individuals actively report not having found a job. That is, while in our
benchmark measure we presume that individuals are employed if they do not respond to the
question on whether they are employed, in this sample we exclude those responses. The results
from both samples (also in Online Appendix Figure A.9) are similar to the baseline ones.
      Coding of Search Measure. In the benchmark, each observation is a survey response.
In Column 4, we average all the responses of a respondent within a 2-week period and run
the regressions at this bi-weekly level, effectively under-weighting responses by frequent re-
sponders. Next, in Column 5 we return to the response-level sampling, but aim to address

                                               15
the role of non-response, by coding as zero cases in which the individuals do not respond to
a survey, provided that they give later responses, and that they confirm that they are still
non-employed. In Columns 6 and 7 we vary the top-coding of the survey response to a lower
threshold at 240 minutes (Column 6) or to a higher threshold (Column 7). In all four of these
specifications, the results are similar to the baseline ones.
   Extra Control. Another concern may be that since we cannot control for a full vector
of time fixed effects (due to the inability of separately identifying a linear time and duration
trend), the results may be partly driven by changes in labor market conditions over time.
In Column 8, we thus estimate our baseline regressions also controlling for the county level
monthly unemployment rate, yielding very similar results.
   Representativeness of Sample. Table 1 showed that participants tend to have more
education, are more likely to be German citizens and somewhat more likely to be female,
compared to non-participants. Thus, we reproduce our results reweighting our sample to
match the composition of the sample frame (Column 9) and of the overall pool of unemployed
(Column 10). We find similar results, with a stronger increase in search effort up to expiration
and a smaller (though still clear) decline in search effort after expiration. In Online Appendix
Tables A.8 and A.9 (with results reproduced in Online Appendix Figures A.10 and A.11) we
present the results split by different demographics. We find the same qualitative patterns
across the groups, though some groups display more evidence of an increase up to exhaustion,
while other more evidence of a decrease ex post.
   Different PBD Groups. A legitimate question is whether a single PBD group is respon-
sible for the estimated search effort patterns. In Online Appendix Table A.10, we estimate the
patterns for search intensity around expiration for the 5 groups. We detect a clear increase in
search effort leading up to the expiration for 3 out of the 5 groups (and a flat pattern for the
other 2). Similarly, we observe a decrease in search effort post expiration for 4 out of the 5
groups, with an increase just for the 15-month PBD group. As Figure 5 shows, the pattern of
flat search effort over the initial month holds for 4 out of the 5 groups. Thus, while we pool
the PBDs for statistical power, the results are not reliant on any one group.
   Distribution of Search Effort. So far we have considered our main envisioned measure,
the average reported search effort in minutes. It is valuable, though, to also consider shifts at
different quantiles of the distribution, such as the share of workers reporting positive search,
the share reporting search for at least 240 minutes, and so on. Online Appendix Figure A.12
and A.13 display the disaggregate plot of the share of such searches. Unlike for our main
measure, these figures provide evidence of apparent survey bias, in that the share reporting
positive search declines within a cohort more than it does between cohorts, with the opposite

                                                16
for the share reporting search above 240 minutes.16 Panel B in Online Appendix Table A.7
indeed estimates a significant within-person impact of survey duration, negative for any search
and positive for search above 120 minutes. Thus, in Online Appendix Tables A.11 and A.12
which replicate the key tables on initial search effort and effort around expiration for these
quantile variables, we display in Panel B the estimates with a linear correction for the sur-
vey bias. While the unadjusted estimates display quite different patterns across the different
quantiles, after adjustment for the survey bias in Panel B, the results are consistent with the
main ones: in the initial months of unemployment the search intensity is flat, or slightly de-
creasing (Table A.11). Around expiration, search intensity increases up to expiration (weakly
for the any-search measure) and decreases following expiration (Table A.12).
       Additional Search Measures. While the focus of the survey is on the measure of
minutes of job search, the question we ask twice a week, we also rotate 3 additional questions
related to job search, each of which is asked every 4 weeks: a qualitative 1-10 measure of
search intensity, a measure of target wage (which we transform in logs), and a measure of
life satisfaction. Online Appendix Figures A.15, A.16 and A.17 display the raw patterns for
these three variables, showing for the qualitative search intensity variable a clear within-survey
downward trend. Indeed, Panel C of Online Appendix Table A.7 confirms that this is the case
for two of the three measures, including the qualitative search measure.17 In Online Appendix
Table A.13 and A.14 we provide the within-person results for these measures in the initial
months and near expiration. An important caveat is that these measures are significantly more
noisy, given that each individual gives at most 4 responses in the sample. After controlling
for the survey response bias (Panel B), the results for the qualitative search effort measure
are consistent with the main ones: the search effort is quite flat in the initial months, and
it is increasing up to expiration and (weakly) decreasing thereafter. The log target wage is
fairly flat in the initial month, consistent with the findings in Krueger and Mueller (2016), it
decreases slightly up to expiration, as predicted, and then it slightly decreases further. Life
satisfaction appears to decrease in the initial months, though the pattern is not obvious with
the survey correction (Panel B). Overall, these results are less clear than the benchmark ones,
but this is to be expected given the infrequency of these questions in our sampling, as well as
the evidence of some survey response bias (unlike for our main measure).
  16
    Online Appendix Figure A.14 validates these measures, showing that they respond to job acceptance.
  17
    Online Appendix Figure A.18 shows that the qualitative search measure and the life satisfaction measure
respond as expected to job acceptance, while, surprisingly, we detect no response for the log target wage.




                                                    17
4.4     Do job seekers time the start date of a job with the exhaustion of benefits?

We then turn to our third key finding on storable offers: the spike in the hazard at expiration
may be mostly due to unemployed workers who received an offer earlier on in the spell, but
opted to delay the start of work until the end of the UI benefit period. As far as we know,
while this explanation has been put forward often, there is little direct evidence to it.
      As a first piece of evidence on this explanation, we use as measure of storable offers the
distance in days between the date a job offer was received and when the job started, as reported
to us by the workers, censoring this measure at 180 days. To the extent that storable offers
explain the spike, this delay in starting a job should be larger for individuals who start a job
at UI exhaustion, versus individuals who start a job before exhaustion, or after exhaustion.
Figure 7 and Online Appendix Table A.15 show the evidence in this regard. The average delay
between job offer and job start varies mostly between 25 and 30 days for individuals taking
jobs in month -4 to -1 before expiration, and 1 to 2 months after expiration. For the 251
individuals who start a job in the month of UI expiration, this delay is in this range, at 28.4
days. This evidence suggests that delay of job start due to storable offers, if any, is limited to
a small share of workers, or would have to be very limited temporally.
      As a complementary piece of evidence, in Figure 7b we examine the timing of the search
effort intensity in the months leading up to the job start for individuals who start a job at
expiration, versus individuals who start a job before, or after, UI expiration. To the extent
that storable offers are common for the group starting a job at UI expiration, we should see
their search effort taper off sooner. Instead, Figure 7b shows that the patterns of decrease of
search effort leading up to job start are very similar, independent of when the job start falls.
Thus, under either measure we do not find evidence supporting a quantitatively important
role for storable offer models in explaining the spike at expiration.

4.5     Contrasting the results with expert forecasts

How do these results line up with the expectations of job search experts? What role did
experts anticipate for storable offers, discouragement, and other models in search effort? Along
the lines proposed by DellaVigna and Pope (2018) and DellaVigna et al. (2019), we elicit
expectations for the three key findings above. We identified 48 job search experts from papers
in the area in high-impact journals in the last few years, or more junior researchers working
in the area. We then contacted these researchers asking whether they would be willing to
answer a prediction survey taking 10-15 minutes on our job search findings. We are grateful
to the 35 experts who completed the survey, for a 74 percent participation rate.


                                                18
         The survey presented the set up with some key summary statistics, and then asked for
prediction for 4 key numbers, corresponding to the 3 key findings. First, we provided the
average search effort in month 2 of unemployment, and asked for a prediction for month 6
(our first finding). Second, we provided the search effort for the month before expiration and
we asked for the search effort in month -4 (to measure the expected increase in search effort up
to expiration, if any), and in month +2 ( to capture an possible decrease of search effort post
expiration). Finally, for the storable offer finding, we presented Figure 7a without showing the
observation for individuals who find a job in month 0, and asked for a prediction for that.18
         Figures 8a-c present the average forecast, compared to the findings, with additional in-
formation in Appendix Table A.16 and the full distribution of forecasts in Online Appendix
Figure A.19. The experts on average expect a 20 percent decrease in search effort from month
2 to 6, well outside the confidence interval of the actual findings (Figure 8a). Thus, they
expected either a larger role for discouragement or for reference dependence, than we observe.
         The experts also expect a sizable increase in search effort leading up to expiration, as
predicted by most models except for a pure storable-offer model (Figure 8b). Thus, the
experts do not believe that the "spike" is purely due to storable offers. The expert also
expect a similar-sized decrease in search effort post expiration, as predicted under reference
dependence, but not under the standard model. These predictions are directionally in line
with the data, even though the experts overestimate the extent of the spike in search effort.
         Finally, the experts on average expect an offer-start gap over 50% larger for individuals
who start a job at UI expiration, compared to in other periods (Figure 8c). Thus, the experts
expect a larger incidence of storable offers than we observe in the data.


5        Reconciling the Survey Results with Job Search Models

To interpret the findings, we estimate a non-stationary job search model (van den Berg, 1990)
using as moments both the search effort and the hazard patterns. The model builds on
DellaVigna et al. (2017) allowing for reference dependence and present bias, but spells out
separately the cost of effort and the productivity of effort. The model has a search effort
margin and an optimal consumption choice, but no reservation wage choice. It allows for
unobserved heterogeneity in the effort cost and in the search productivity functions.
    18
    The figures and numbers presented to the experts were not exactly identical to the ones in the paper due
to some further data cleaning that occurred after the survey. However, the differences are minor.




                                                    19
5.1      The job search model

Model Setup. We make several simplifying assumptions. First, jobs last indefinitely once
found. Second, wages are fixed, eliminating reservation-wage choices. In each period t an
unemployed worker sets the optimal effort et (e.g. minutes of job search per day). The effort
is linked to a probability of obtaining a job offer in period t by the function f (et ). That is,
with probability f (et ) the individual obtains a job paying a re-employment wage w. If the
individual accepts the job offer, the job starts in period t + 1. Search effort is costly, with a
cost of effort c(et ). We assume c(0) = f (0) = 0, c (e) > 0, f  (e) > 0, c (e) > 0.
       In each period, individuals receive income yt , either UI benefits bt or wage wt , and consume
ct . Consumers can accumulate (or run down) assets At with a borrowing constraint At  -L.
                                                                               At+1
Assets earn a return R so consumers face a budget constraint                   1+R
                                                                                      = At + yt - ct . The UI
benefits bt equal bt = b for t  P and bt = b for t > P . In each period t individuals choose
not only the search effort but also the optimal consumption ct , yielding utility u(ct ).
       The utility from consumption is potentially reference-dependent:

                                         v (ct ) +  [v (ct ) - v (rt )]   if   c t  rt
                         u (ct |rt ) =                                                                    (1)
                                         v (ct ) +  [v (ct ) - v (rt )] if     ct < rt

where rt is the reference point. The utility consists of consumption utility v (ct ) and gain-loss
utility v (ct ) - v (rt ). When consumption is above the reference point (ct  rt ), the individual
derives gain utility v (ct ) - v (rt ) > 0, which receives weight , set to 1. When consumption
is below the reference point (ct < rt ), the individual derives loss utility v (ct ) - v (rt ) < 0,
with weight . The parameter   1 captures loss aversion: the marginal utility is higher for
losses than for gains. The standard search model is nested in this model for  = 0.
       As in DellaVigna et al. (2017), the reference point is the average income over the N  1
previous periods:
                                                           t-1
                                                      1
                                               rt =               yk .
                                                      N   k=t-N

The parameter N captures the length of adaption: the longer the N, the more an unemployed
worker feels the loss utility from being unemployed relative to the earlier paychecks (with
w > b) or, after the end of the UI benefit period, relative to the UI benefit checks.19
       Value Functions. The unemployed choose search effort et and consumption ct in each
  19
    There are alternative assumptions for the reference point, in terms of past consumption or forward looking
as in Kszegi and Rabin (2006). DellaVigna et al. (2017) discuss these alternatives. A key advantage of our
assumption of an income-based reference point is that it is computationally simpler, given that its path is
exogenous, while capturing the key memory-salience motivation for backward looking reference points.


                                                          20
period and (assuming for now an exponential discount factor  ) face the value function:

    VtU (At ) =     max u (ct |rt ) - c (et ) +  f (et )VtE                               U
                                                          +1|t+1 (At+1 ) + (1 - f (et ))Vt+1 (At+1 )   (2)
                   et ;At+1
                                                       At+1
                   subject to: ct = At + yt -               .
                                                       1+R

   For the unemployed, the value function depends only on assets At , since the reference
point is fully determined by t and thus is not an explicit state variable: VtU (At ).
   For the employed, the value function is VtE
                                             |j (At ) for an individual employed in period t and
who found a job in period j , where the combination of t and j determines the reference point:

                                 VtE                              E
                                   |j (At ) = max u (ct |rt ) + Vt+1|j (At+1 ) .                       (3)
                                              ct > 0


   Given Equation (2) the first order condition for the optimal level of search effort et in the
case of an interior solution can be written as:

                          c (e                       E                  U
                              t (At+1 )) = f (et ) Vt+1|t+1 (At+1 ) - Vt+1 (At+1 ) .                   (4)

The optimal level equates the marginal cost of effort with the marginal value of effort, which
in turn is equal to the marginal productivity of effort, times the difference between the value
function of being employed, versus unemployed. Notice that the reference dependence affects
the optimal effort though its impact on VtE            U
                                          +1|t+1 and Vt+1 .
   Given that the function f (e) is monotonic, we can rewrite problem (2) as


               max u (ct |rt ) - c (st ) +  st VtE                           U
                                                 +1|t+1 (At+1 ) + (1 - st )Vt+1 (At+1 )                (5)
               st ;At+1

where c
      ~(st ) is the composite of the actual cost of effort and the inverse of the production
          ~(st ) = c(f -1 (st )). This reformulation implies that the problem can be solved
function: c
as if the optimization is with respect to the probability of exiting unemployment, st , as in
DellaVigna et al. (2017). This also makes it clear that with just data on the hazard rate
from unemployment st , one could not possibly separate out the function c(e) and f (e), as
one instead estimates a composite function c(f -1 (st )). Finally, this clarifies that, in order
                                                       ~ (st ) > 0, in addition to the previous
to find an interior solution to (5), we need to assume c
                             ~ (st ) > 0).
assumptions (which guarantee c
   We extend the model to allow for present-bias, with an additional discount factor   1
between the current period and the future. Following DellaVigna et al. (2017) and Ganong
and Noel (2019), we assume naiveté: the workers (wrongly) assume that in the future they

                                                        21
will make decisions based on regular discounting  . This assumption simplifies the problem,
since we can use the value functions of the exponential agent (given that the naive worker
believes she will be exponential from next period). In addition, the evidence on present bias
is largely consistent with naivete' (DellaVigna, 2009; Augenblick and Rabin, 2019). The naive
present-biased individual solves the following value functions:

      VtU,n (At ) =      max          u (ct |rt ) - c (st ) +  st VtE                            U
                                                                    +1|t+1 (At+1 ) + (1 - st ) Vt+1 (At+1 ) (6)
                      st [0,1];At+1
                                                        At+1
                      subject to: ct = At + yt -             ,
                                                        1+R

where the functions VtU        E
                      +1 and Vt+1|t+1 are given by equations (2) and (3) above for the expo-
nential discounters. We thus first solve for all possible values of VtU        E
                                                                      +1 and Vt+1|t+1 and then we
solve for consumption and search paths given VtU,n
                                               +1 .



5.2     Estimation

Parametric Assumptions. To bring the model to the data, we introduce a set of additional
assumptions. First, we assume log utility, v (c) = ln (c). Second, we assume a search cost
function of power form: c (e) = ke1+ / (1 +  ), with  > 0 so the function is increasing and
convex. Third, similarly we assume that the productivity of effort takes a power form f (et ) =
min 1, Ee1+ /(1 +  ) , with  > -1 so that the function is increasing. This implies that the
                                                                                                           -
composite cost function c (st ) equals c(st ) =            k
                                                          1+
                                                               (s)(1+ ) with  =     -
                                                                                   1+
                                                                                        and k =   k 1+ 1+
                                                                                                   ( )
                                                                                                  E E
                                                                                                               .
To guarantee an interior solution, we need c (st ) > 0 and thus  > , that is, the search cost
function is more concave than the productivity of effort function.
      Fourth, we model heterogeneity across workers as heterogeneity in both the cost of search
k and the productivity parameter E . For example, when allowing for two types, we assume
type 1 has parameters (k1 , E1 ) while type 2 has parameters (k2 , E2 ).
      Fifth, we make the following assumption about the wages and unemployment benefits.
We take the pre-unemployment wage w to equal the average wage for each of the different
PBD groups.20 We assume that the re-employment wage equals 0.9w, building on evidence
in Schmieder et al. (2016). We assume that UI benefits equal 0.635w, and that following
expiration of the UI system, workers receive welfare benefits equal to 400 euros. Sixth, we
assume that individuals start with zero assets, that they cannot borrow against their future
income, and that they earn no interest on savings (given the low-interest rate environment).
 20
   For our baseline estimates with PBD=12 and 15 we assume a pre-unemployment wage of 1610 Euro per
month. For the PBD=8 and 10 robustness check we assume a wage of 1265 Euro.



                                                         22
       The vector of parameters  for the standard model are: (i) the three levels of search cost
khigh , kmed , and klow , with khigh  kmed  klow , three levels of productivity of effort Ehigh , Emed ,
and Elow , and two probability weights plow and pmed; (ii) the search cost curvature  ; (iii) the
productivity curvature  ; (iv) the time preference parameters  and . For the reference-
dependent model, we estimate in addition: (v) the loss aversion parameter ; and (vi) the
number of (1-month) periods N over which the backward-looking reference point is formed.21
For the reference-dependent model we estimate a model with 3 types of heterogeneity, and a
model with only 2 types of heterogeneity, in which case we remove parameters khigh , Ehigh ,
and pmed . The weight  on gain-loss utility is set to 1 rather than being estimated; thus, the
loss-aversion parameter  can be interpreted also as the overall weight on loss utility.
       Estimation. Denote by m ( ) the vector of moments predicted by the theory as a function
of the parameters  , and by m
                            ^ the vector of observed moments. The moments m ( ) combine
the information on average search intensity in minutes from our survey, as well as the admin-
istrative information on the hazard rates. For the search intensity, we use the key findings on
the within-person search effort path in months 2-6 (Figure 6a) as well as the within-person
path around UI expiration (Figure 6b). In addition, in order to pin down the level of the
productivity of effort across groups (Ej ), we also add the average cross-sectional search effort
in month 2 and at expiration (T).22 For the hazards, we use the monthly hazard rates from
month 2 to month 19 for the PBD group 12 and 15, computed using a standard regression
discontinuity design exploiting the age discontinuity in PBD around age 50 (Figure 1b).
    The estimator chooses the    ^ to minimize the distance (m ( ) - m
                                                                     ^ ) W (m ( ) - m
                                                                                    ^ ) . As
weighting matrix W , we weight the hazard moments with the diagonal of the estimated
variance of the hazard moments; we weight the search effort moments with inverse of the
variance-covariance matrix. We upweight the weight of the search effort minutes by a factor
of 10, to recognize the focus of the estimation on the novel evidence on minutes, as well as the
potential mis-specification of the hazard model with respect to the forms of heterogeneity.23
       To calculate the theoretical moments, we use backward induction. First we numerically
compute the steady-state search and value of unemployment. Then we solve for the optimal
search and consumption path in each period as a function of the asset level. Finally, we use
the initial asset level as a starting value to determine the actual consumption path and search
intensity in each period.
  21
     In the tables we report the speed of adjustment in days, that is, N*30.
  22
     These moments do not affect the fit of the different models, as both standard and referent-dependent
models fit them perfectly. They are, however, important to pin down the parameters for the different types,
as they document the extent of unobserved heterogeneity in search effort over time.
  23
     This is similar in spirit to Armstrong and Kolesár (2019).



                                                    23
   Under standard conditions, the minimum-distance estimator using weighting matrix W
                                                        ^ W G
achieves asymptotic normality, with estimated variance (G   ^ )-1 (G
                                                                   ^ W ^W G   ^ W G
                                                                          ^ )(G   ^ )-1 /N ,
      ^  N -1
where G              N
                            mi (^) and ^  V ar[m(^)] .
                     i=1



5.3      Estimates

Benchmark Estimates. In Table 7, we present estimates for a 3-type standard model with
no reference dependence ( = 0) in Columns 1 and 4, for a 2-type reference-dependent model
in Columns 2 and 5, and for a 3-type reference-dependent model in Columns 3 and 6. For
each of these models, we assume exponential discounting ( = 1) in Columns 1-3 and allow
for present bias, fixing the long-term monthly discount factor to  = 0.995 (equivalent to an
annual 6% discount rate), in Columns 4-6.
       The estimates for the standard model present similar patterns. We estimate a high degree
of impatience, especially for the exponential discounting case, with a monthly discount factor
^ = 0.639, a fairly convex effort productivity function and an even more convex cost of effort

function; the three types differ substantially in the cost of effort and productivity levels.
       The estimates for the reference-dependent models similarly point to a convex effort pro-
ductivity function and an even more convex cost of effort function, and also high impatience,
with a monthly discount factor ^ = 0.897 in Column 3 and a present-bias parameter   ^ = 0.473
in Column 6 (similar to the estimates in Paserman, 2008 and one of the types in Ganong and
Noel, 2019). For both the 2-type and the 3-type reference dependent model, the estimates
allowing for present-bias have a significantly better fit, in addition to more reasonable esti-
mates for the discount parameters. Thus, we take the estimates in columns 5 and 6 to be
our benchmarks. We estimate loss-aversion parameters  = 3.18 and  = 2.66, in the range
of estimates in the literature.24 The estimated parameters N = 298 and N = 338 (in days)
indicate slow adaptation; this parameter is estimated to be about twice as long as in the
Hungarian context (DellaVigna et al., 2017).
       Figure 9 compares the fit of the 3-type standard model and the 3-type reference-dependent
model, for the present-bias case (Columns 4 and 6). Interestingly, both models fit the path of
the hazard very well, in particular capturing all the spike in hazard at UI expiration (Figures
9c-d). Thus, the two models would be hardly distinguishable based on the hazard alone.
Turning to the search effort moments, both models fit quite well the path of the search effort
  24
    Online Appendix Figure A.20 shows a clear improvement in fit as measured by SSE for the specification
in Column 6 as  increases from 1.5 to 2, and a flatter slope for higher . The figure also shows the SSE for the
specification with exponential discounting in Column 3, which estimates a large    ^ = 12.6. The figure shows
that the fit is fairly comparable for  = 4.



                                                      24
in the initial months of unemployment (Figure 9a). This may be surprising, since one may have
expected the within-person search intensity to increase significantly in the standard model,
and conversely to decrease in the reference-dependent model, reflecting the adaptation to the
losses. In the standard model, though, the increase of search effort is convex and slow initially,
especially given the high discounting. For the reference-dependent model, the flat initial path
reflects the countervailing forces of a decrease in effort due to the initial (slow) adaptation,
but also an increase due to the envisioned upcoming loss at UI expiration.
   The key difference between the two models is in with regards to the search effort at
expiration (Figure 9b). The standard model fits well the increase in search effort up to
expiration, but cannot capture the decrease post-expiration. In fact, notice that to the extent
that the agents smooth consumption and thus still have some assets at expiration, the within-
person search effort would keep increasing post expiration, as the individuals deplete the
remaining assets. This contributes to the estimated high impatience in the standard model.
   In contrast, the reference-dependent model fits well not just the increase in search up to
expiration--due not just to the usual option value but also to the anticipated loss utility
due to loss in benefits--, but also the observed decrease in effort part expiration. In the
months following the UI exhaustion, the habituation moderates the loss utility due to the cut
in benefits, accounting thus for the lower search intensity. Importantly, the model fits the
observed decrease in search effort for a reasonable (if sizable) degree of loss aversion.
   Online Appendix Figures A.21 and A.22 display the fit for some of the other models in
Table 7. The 3-type models assuming exponential discounting (Figure A.21) display similar
qualitative features, though the fit of the hazard moment is not quite as good as under the
present-bias assumption. The estimates with present-bias but assuming just 2 types for the
reference-dependent model (Figure A.22) do not fit the hazard spike or the decline in search
effort post UI expiration quite as well as in the benchmark, but overall already provide a
better qualitative fit than the 3-type standard model, despite having fewer parameters.
   Robustness. In Table 8 we present a number of alternative specifications, taking as
benchmarks the 3-type standard model with present bias (Column 4 of Table 7) and the 3-
type reference-dependent model with present bias (Column 6 of Table 7). We first vary key
model assumptions. In Column 1, we estimate both  and  : we cannot reject a  = 0.995
(as assumed earlier) and do not obtain a better fit of the data compared to the benchmarks.
In Column 2, we estimate the gain utility parameter  instead of fixing it to 1, as typical
in the literature. We estimate a larger ^ = 4.24, with a correspondingly smaller , not
surprisingly since the extent of loss aversion is essentially   ( - 1). Since the fit for this
model is only slightly better than for our benchmark, we maintain the assumption  = 1.

                                               25
In Column 3, conversely we present estimates from a linear reference-dependent model, with
 > 0 but no loss aversion ( = 1). Even without loss aversion, reference dependence still
has an impact on job search because a high reference point increases differentially the value
of employment relative to the value of unemployment. The fit of this model, while clearly
superior to the standard model, is not as good as with loss aversion (SSE=140.7 versus 129.2),
and in particular it does not fit the decline in search effort after UI expiration very well
(Online Appendix Figure A.23). In Column 4, we remove the assumption of 0 initial wealth
(consistently with the high estimated impatience) and assume assets equal to one month of
pre-unemployment income. The qualitative features of the estimates are unchanged, with a
slightly worse fit for both the standard model and the reference-dependent model.
    In the next three specifications, we vary the moments used. In Column 5, we use the same
moments, but we do not upweight the search effort moments, using instead (the diagonal
of) the optimal weighting matrix, thus giving much more weight to the hazard moments
(estimated on much larger administrative data). The qualitative patterns are similar, with
a better fit for the reference-dependent model (SSE=69.7 versus 106.8), which however now
fits only partially the decline in search effort post expiration. In Column 6, we revert to
the benchmark weighting, but we exclude from the estimation the search effort moments for
the months past UI expiration. Without these moments, we cannot reject the null of no loss
aversion ( = 1), indicating the importance of the expiration moments for the identification of
reference dependence. Finally, in Column 7 we use the benchmark search effort moments but
instead of using the hazard moments for the 12 vs. 15 month PBD, we use the hazards for the
8 versus 10 month PBD. As Online Appendix Figure A.24 also shows, the reference-dependent
model has a clearly better fit than the standard model (SSE=197.0 vs. 340.6).


6   Discussion and Conclusion

In this paper, we present novel evidence on the search effort of unemployed workers from
an SMS-based survey of unemployed workers in Germany. We present three key findings on
within-person search effort over the spell. First, the intensity of job search is flat in the initial
months of unemployment, from month 2 to month 6. Second, in the months surrounding UI
expiration search effort first increases up to expiration and then decreases thereafter. Third,
we do not find evidence that workers starting a new job at UI expiration had an offer earlier,
or stopped searching earlier, as hypothesized under a storable-offer model.
    We estimate a model that allows for unobserved heterogeneity in both the cost of search
and in the productivity of search effort, using as moments evidence from the survey and on the


                                                 26
hazard into employment from matched administrative data. We allow for reference dependence
with respect to recent income, to capture a form of backward-looking reference dependence.
While both a standard model and a reference-dependent model fit well the path of the hazard
and the flat pattern of search effort in the initial months, only the reference-dependent model
can explain the increasing and then decreasing pattern of search effort around UI expiration.
   The model that we estimate focuses on a comparison of a standard model with unobserved
heterogeneity with a reference-dependent model. Yet, a variety of other models have been
proposed in the literature to understand observed patterns in job search. A first set of models
aims to explain the spike at expiration with storable offers; as we discussed above, we do not
find evidence supporting this model in the German context, and our structural estimates can
explain the full extent of the spike, without resorting to storable offers. We should notice
that this may differ in other contexts. In the Hungary context (DellaVigna et al., 2017), for
example, neither the standard model nor the reference-dependent model fit well the spike in
hazard at UI expiration. It remains an open question whether storable offers may be more
common in a different institutional context such as in Hungary.
   A second explanation for the spike at expiration involves recalled workers going back to
their jobs. In our context, though, recalls are not common, and we show that the hazard
patterns are similar if we exclude recalls.
   A third explanation for the search effort patterns is that there may be only a fixed set of
jobs to search for and that, after an unemployed worker has gone through them, the worker
does not have much scope for additional job search. This could in principle explain why after
UI expiration, when presumably workers are search especially intensely, search intensity may
decline. Yet, this explanation would predict a temporary decrease in search effort right after
UI expiration, not a continuous decrease. Furthermore, if such lumpy nature of search effort
were of first-order importance, it likely would manifest itself also in a decrease in search effort
over the initial months. We stress that such lumpy search effort patterns may be more of
a first-order issue for methods that measure only one type of search effort, such as possibly
online postings, than for a measure that aims to capture all margins of search effort, like ours.
   A fourth explanation is worker discouragement, perhaps because of a decline in the call
back rate over the spell. This could explain the decrease in search effort after expiration.
However, to the extent that there is a discouragement effect, one would expect it to be
stronger in the initial months (as in Kroft et al., 2013), when instead search intensity is flat.
   Of course, it is possible that a combination of such explanations is at play, in a way that
would explain the overall findings. In any case, we hope that the additional evidence on within-
person search intensity will prove useful in providing additional facts to tease alternative

                                                27
models apart. As we stressed in the paper, the fact that we can consider within-person
patterns enables us to largely side-steps concerns about unobserved heterogeneity that plays
a key role in understanding the patterns in hazard rates from unemployment.



References

Allen, Eric J, Patricia M Dechow, Devin G Pope, and George Wu, "Reference-dependent
  preferences: Evidence from marathon runners," Management Science, 63 (6), (2017), 1657­
  1672.

Altmann, Steffen, Armin Falk, Simon Jäger, and Florian Zimmermann, "Learning about Job
  Search: A Field Experiment with Job Seekers in Germany," Journal of Public Economics,
  (Forthcoming).

Armstrong, Timothy and Michal Kolesár, "Sensitivity analysis using approximate moment
  condition models," (2019).

Arni, Patrick and Amelie Schiprowski, "Job search requirements, effort provision and labor
  market outcomes," Journal of Public Economics, 169 (2019), 65 - 88.

Augenblick, Ned and Matthew Rabin, "An Experiment on Time Preference and Misprediction
 in Unpleasant Tasks," The Review of Economic Studies, 86 (3), 05 (2019), 941-975.

Ballivian, Amparo, J Azevedo, Will Durbin, J Rios, J Godoy, and C Borisova, "Using mobile
  phones for high-frequency data collection," Mobile Research Methods, (2015), 21.

Barberis, Nicholas, "Psychology-based Models of Asset Prices and Trading Volume," in Dou-
  glas Bernheim, Stefano DellaVigna, and David Laibson, eds., Handbook of Behavioral Eco-
  nomics, North Holland, (2018).

Barseghyan, Levon, Francesca Molinari, Ted O'Donoghue, and Joshua C Teitelbaum, "The
  nature of risk preferences: Evidence from insurance choices," American Economic Review,
  103 (6), (2013), 2499­2529.

Belot, Michele, Philipp Kircher, and Paul Muller, "Providing advice to jobseekers at low cost:
  An experimental study on online advice," The Review of Economic Studies, 86 (4), (2019),
  1411­1447.

Berkouwer, Susanna B and Joshua T Dean, "Inattention and credit constraints in energy
  efficiency adoption: Evidence from Kenya," (2019).

Boone, Jan and Jan C van Ours, "Why is there a spike in the job finding rate at benefit
  exhaustion?," De Economist, 160 (4), (2012), 413­438.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer, "Memory, Attention, and Choice,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, (forthcoming).


                                             28
Caliendo, Marco, Konstantinos Tatsiramos, and Arne Uhlendorff, "Benefit duration, unem-
  ployment duration and job match quality: a regression-discontinuity approach," Journal of
  Applied Econometrics, 28 (4), (2013), 604­627.

Card, David, Raj Chetty, and Andrea Weber, "Cash-on-hand and competing models of in-
  tertemporal behavior: New evidence from the labor market," The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 122 (4), (2007), 1511­1560.

DellaVigna, Stefano, "Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field," Journal of Eco-
  nomic Literature, 47 (2), (2009), 315­372.

  and Devin Pope, "Predicting experimental results: who knows what?," Journal of Political
  Economy, 126 (6), (2018), 2410­2456.

  , Attila Lindner, Balázs Reizer, and Johannes F Schmieder, "Reference-dependent job
  search: Evidence from Hungary," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132 (4), (2017),
  1969­2018.

  , Devin Pope, and Eva Vivalt, "Predict science to improve science," Science, 366 (6464),
  (2019), 428­429.

Dlugosz, Stephan, Ralf A Wilke, and Gesine Stephan, "Fixing the leak: unemployment in-
  cidence before and after a major reform of unemployment benefits in Germany," German
  Economic Review, 15 (3), (2014), 329­352.

Domenech, Gerard and Silvia Vannutelli, "Bringing Them In or Pushing Them Out? The
 Impact of Benefit Cuts for Long-Term Unemployed in Times of Crisis," mimeo, (2019).

Faberman, R. Jason and Marianna Kudlyak, "The Intensity of Job Search and Search Dura-
  tion," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 11 (3), July (2019), 327-57.

  , Andreas I Mueller, Ayegül ahin, and Giorgio Topa, "Job Search Behavior among the Em-
  ployed and Non-Employed," Working Paper 23731, National Bureau of Economic Research
  August (2017).

Fitzenberger, Bernd and Ralf A Wilke, "Unemployment durations in West Germany before
  and after the reform of the unemployment compensation system during the 1980s," German
  Economic Review, 11 (3), (2010), 336­366.

Fujita, Shigeru and Giuseppe Moscarini, "Recall and unemployment," American Economic
  Review, 107 (12), (2017), 3875­3916.

Ganong, Peter and Pascal Noel, "Consumer spending during unemployment: Positive and
 normative implications," American Economic Review, 109 (7), (2019), 2383­2424.

Hoogeveen, Johannes, Kevin Croke, Andrew Dabalen, Gabriel Demombynes, and Marcelo
 Giugale, "Collecting high frequency panel data in Africa using mobile phone interviews,"
 Canadian Journal of Development Studies/Revue canadienne d'études du développement,
 35 (1), (2014), 186­207.


                                            29
Johansen, Bendt and Niels Wedderkopp, "Comparison between data obtained through real-
  time data capture by SMS and a retrospective telephone interview," Chiropractic & os-
  teopathy, 18 (1), (2010), 10.

Johnston, Andrew C and Alexandre Mas, "Potential unemployment insurance duration and
  labor supply: The individual and market-level response to a benefit cut," Journal of Political
  Economy, 126 (6), (2018), 2480­2522.

Katz, Lawrence F., "Layoffs, Recall and the Duration of Unemployment," Working Paper
 1825, National Bureau of Economic Research 1986 (1986).

Katz, Lawrence F and Bruce D Meyer, "Unemployment insurance, recall expectations, and
 unemployment outcomes," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105 (4), (1990), 973­1002.

Kolsrud, Jonas, Camille Landais, Peter Nilsson, and Johannes Spinnewijn, "The optimal
 timing of unemployment benefits: Theory and evidence from sweden," American Economic
 Review, 108 (4-5), (2018), 985­1033.

Kszegi, Botond and Matthew Rabin, "A model of reference-dependent preferences," The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121 (4), (2006), 1133­1165.

Kroft, Kory, Fabian Lange, and Matthew J Notowidigdo, "Duration dependence and labor
  market conditions: Evidence from a field experiment," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  128 (3), (2013), 1123­1167.

Krueger, Alan B and Andreas I Mueller, "The lot of the unemployed: a time use perspective,"
  Journal of the European Economic Association, 10 (4), (2012), 765­794.

  and , "A contribution to the empirics of reservation wages," American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy, 8 (1), (2016), 142­79.

   and Andreas Mueller, "Job search and unemployment insurance: New evidence from time
  use data," Journal of Public Economics, 94 (3-4), (2010), 298­307.

  and , "Job search, emotional well-being, and job finding in a period of mass unemploy-
  ment: Evidence from high frequency longitudinal data," Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity, (2011), 1­81.

Kuntsche, Emmanuel and Benjamin Robert, "Short Message Service (SMS) Technology in
 Alcohol Research - A Feasibility Study," Alcohol and Alcoholism, 44 (4), 05 (2009), 423-
 428.

Lalive, Rafael, Camille Landais, and Josef Zweimüller, "Market externalities of large unem-
  ployment insurance extension programs," The American Economic Review, (2015), 3564­
  3596.

Le Barbanchon, Thomas, Roland Rathelot, and Alexandra Roulet, "Unemployment insurance
  and reservation wages: Evidence from administrative data," Journal of Public Economics,
  171 (2019), 1 - 17.


                                              30
Leung, Pauline and Christopher O'Leary, "Unemployment Insurance and Means-Tested Pro-
  gram Interactions: Evidence from Administrative Data," American Economic Journal: Eco-
  nomic Policy, (2019).

Lichter, Andreas and Amelie Schiprowski, "Benefit Duration, Job Search Behavior and Re-
  Employment," mimeo, IZA (2020).

Marinescu, Ioana Elena and Daphné Skandalis, "Unemployment insurance and job search
 behavior," Available at SSRN 3303367, (2019).

Mueller, Andreas I, Johannes Spinnewijn, and Giorgio Topa, "Job Seekers' Perceptions and
 Employment Prospects: Heterogeneity, Duration Dependence and Bias," Working Paper
 25294, National Bureau of Economic Research November (2018).

Nekoei, Arash and Andrea Weber, "Recall expectations and duration dependence," American
  Economic Review, 105 (5), (2015), 142­46.

  and , "Does extending unemployment benefits improve job quality?," American Economic
  Review, 107 (2), (2017), 527­61.

O'Donoghue, Ted and Charles Sprenger, "Reference-dependent preferences," in "Handbook of
  Behavioral Economics: Applications and Foundations 1," Vol. 1, Elsevier, (2018), pp. 1­77.

Paserman, M Daniele, "Job search and hyperbolic discounting: Structural estimation and
  policy evaluation," The Economic Journal, 118 (531), (2008), 1418­1452.

Rees-Jones, Alex, "Quantifying loss-averse tax manipulation," The Review of Economic Stud-
  ies, 85 (2), (2018), 1251­1278.

Rothstein, Jesse, "Unemployment Insurance and Job Search in the Great Recession," Brook-
  ings Papers on Economic Activity, 2011 (2), (2011), 143­213.

Schmieder, Johannes F and Simon Trenkle, "Disincentive effects of unemployment benefits
  and the role of caseworkers," Journal of Public Economics, 182 (2020), 104096.

   and Till von Wachter, "The effects of unemployment insurance benefits: New evidence and
  interpretation," Annual Review of Economics, 8 (2016), 547­581.

  , , and Stefan Bender, "The effects of extended unemployment insurance over the busi-
  ness cycle: Evidence from regression discontinuity estimates over 20 years," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 127 (2), (2012), 701­752.

  , , and , "The effect of unemployment benefits and nonemployment durations on wages,"
  American Economic Review, 106 (3), (2016), 739­77.

Sydnor, Justin, "(Over) insuring modest risks," American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
  nomics, 2 (4), (2010), 177­99.

Thakral, Neil and Linh T. Tô, "Daily labor supply and adaptive reference points," American
 Economic Review, (forthcoming).

                                            31
van den Berg, Gerard J, "Nonstationarity in job search theory," The Review of Economic
  Studies, 57 (2), (1990), 255­277.




                                         32
                                                         Table 1: Summary Table
                                                          (1)         (2)        (3)           (4)            (5)                (6)
                                                                                                          Participants     Participants
                                                       All UI       Sample                 Participants    Month 1          Month 4
                                                      Recipients    Frame     Contacted     Month 1       Unemployed     Unempl. Month 1
     Demographics
     Female = 1                                           0.45       0.46        0.45          0.50           0.50              0.50
     Age                                                 42.03       44.42      43.28         43.06          43.22             43.44
     Non-German Nat.= 1                                   0.18        0.22       0.27          0.16           0.17              0.13
     Education Missing                                    0.30        0.31       0.36          0.23           0.24              0.21
     Low Education                                       0.56        0.54       0.49          0.50           0.50              0.51
     High Education                                       0.13        0.15       0.15          0.26           0.25              0.27
     cellphone == 1                                       0.79        0.99       1.00          1.00           1.00              1.00

     UI Characteristics
     P at UI start = 6 months                             0.04       0.16        0.24          0.23           0.22              0.22
     P at UI start = 8 months                             0.03       0.13        0.21          0.20           0.19              0.19
     P at UI start = 10 months                            0.03       0.11        0.17          0.18           0.18              0.17
     P at UI start = 12 months                            0.24       0.36        0.21          0.22           0.22              0.23
33




     P at UI start = 15 months                            0.05       0.24        0.17          0.17           0.18              0.19
     P at UI start = 18 months                            0.03       0.00        0.00          0.00           0.00              0.00
     P at UI start = 24 months                            0.07       0.00        0.00          0.00           0.00              0.00
     P at UI start = other                                0.52       0.00        0.00          0.00           0.00              0.00
     Nonemp. Duration in months (at last contact)         6.23       5.91        6.62          6.41           6.49              6.56
     Survey Outcomes
     Min. Searched Yesterday                                                                  76.00          81.43             65.09
     Reported Life Satisfaction (Scale 1 to 5)                                                3.22           3.15              3.21
     Censored Reservation Wage                                                               2758.84        2727.92           2747.34
     Search Intensity (Scale 1 to 10)                                                          4.88          5.25               4.14
     Unemployed = 1                                                                            0.88           1.00              0.61
     N                                                  2982951     377015      86673          7797           6877              4780
     Krueger-Mueller Data                               362292      63813       63813          6025
       Notes: This table summarizes characteristics of the stock of UI recipients at different stages of the sampling process. Column
       (1) shows all UI recipients for all waves the survey was running. Column (2) shows all individuals that fulfill the basic sampling
       requirements. Column (3) represent the actually contacted individuals, which are a stratified random sample based on PxD cells.
       Column (4) contains all individuals that participated initially in the survey, column (5) shows participants that were also unemployed
       and column (6) shows individuals that were initially unemployed and still participated in the last month of the survey. Survey
       outcomes (except job search) contain first (columns 4 and 5) and last (column 6) observation of each participant.
       *Numbers retrieved from tables and text in Krueger and Mueller (2011).
                                                         Table 2: Tests for Survey Response Bias

                                                     (1)              (2)                       (3)            (4)              (5)               (6)
                                                                  German SMS Data                                      Krueger-Mueller Diary Data

      Panel A: Test for Survey Response Bias in SMS and KM-Data
                                        First Survey Response All Responses                                      First Survey Response              All Responses
                                                  Between     Between w/ controls            Within         Between      Between w/ controls            Within
      Months Unemployed                            -0.440             -0.515                 -0.239          0.826                0.502               -10.778
                                                   [0.296]            [0.311]                [0.297]         [0.458]             [0.429]                [0.960]
      Adj.R2                                        0.00                0.03                   0.49           0.07                 0.11                   0.67
      Mean Job Search                               79.11              79.11                  84.74          102.11              101.74                  64.71
      N Individuals                                 6733               6733                   6733            4202                4124                   4813
      N                                             6733               6733                  119409           4202                4124                   25658
      p-Val. Col. (2) vs. (3) /(5) vs. (6)                                                    0.471                                                      0.000
34




      Individual Controls                                                X                                                          X
      Individual FE                                                                             X                                                          X
      Panel B: Direct Estimate for Survey Response                    Bias
      Survey Duration in Months        0.814                           1.053                  0.943
                                      [0.661]                         [0.712]                [0.688]
      Adj. R2                          0.002                           0.007                  0.040
      Mean Dep. Var                   84.896                          84.896                 84.896
      N Individuals                    6877                            6877                   6877
      N                               121405                          121405                 121405
      P-Group x Unemp. Dur. FE                       X                   X                      X
      Time (running week) FE                                             X                      X
      Individual Controls                                                                       X
      Panel A performs the test for survey response bias as outlined in Krueger-Mueller (2011), applied to the German SMS-data (columns (1) to (3)) as well as to
     the original K&M data (columns (4)-(6)). In column (1)-(2) and (4)-(5) of Panel A, we only use the first response to the job-search question, conditional on that
     this response happens within the first week after survey start. Unemployment duration is the difference between UI-entry and the day of the interview (scaled
     to months). Standard errors clustered at the level of individuals. Panel B performs a refined survey test, that makes use of the repeated wave structure in the
     German SMS data. Significance levels: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
            Table 3: Search Effort Since Start of UI         Spell
                                      (1)     (2)               (3)       (4)
 [2, 3] months (omitted category) 0.00        0.00             0.00       0.00
                                       [.]     [.]               [.]       [.]
 on UI since [3, 4] months           2.35     0.99            -1.14      -1.23
                                    [1.95] [1.91]             [1.69]    [1.72]
 on UI since [4, 5] months           0.39    -1.29            -0.15      0.87
                                    [2.59] [2.51]             [2.16]    [2.20]
 on UI since [5, 6] months           -2.01   -3.33            -0.45      1.11
                                    [2.34] [2.80]             [2.29]    [2.41]
 on UI since [6, 7] months            1.24   -1.20            -0.08      1.67
                                    [3.03] [3.18]             [2.69]    [2.83]
         2
 Adj. R                             0.000 0.046               0.470     0.471
 Mean Dep. Var                      86.578 86.578            86.578     86.578
 N Observations                     29536 29536               29536     29536
 N Individuals                       2022    2022              2022      2022
 Individual Controls                                  X
 Individual FE                                                  X         X
 Time FE                                                                  X
 This table shows estimates of job-search in minutes on time on UI. Included
are all job-search responses at time of nonemployment in the examined range of
UI duration of individuals with P  8. SE (in brackets) are clustered on the
individual level. Controls include dummies for gender, German nationality, wave,
initial eligibility and UI duration, educational groups and age in years. Time-FE
control for calendar months and weekday of survey. P-Values report the H0 of
the performed test. Hypotheses are formulated such that H1 is consistent with
the ref-dependent model. *, ** and *** denote significance on 10%, 5% and 1%
significance level, respectively.




                                       35
                          Table 4: Search Effort Around UI Exhaustion

                                                        (1)                  (2)        (3)         (4)
 [-4, -3] months since UI exhaustion                  -3.28              -7.56      -6.62       -7.27
                                                      [2.13]               [2.44]     [1.97]      [1.99]
 [-3, -2] months since UI exhaustion                   0.11                -3.63     -3.65       -4.27
                                                      [1.92]               [2.09]     [1.81]      [1.83]
 [-2, -1] months since UI exhaustion                   1.82                 -1.91    -3.43       -3.76
                                                      [1.97]               [1.90]     [1.56]      [1.56]
 [-1, 0] months since UI exhaustion (omitted cat.)     0.00                  0.00      0.00        0.00
                                                         [.]                  [.]        [.]         [.]
 [0, 1] months since UI exhaustion                    -0.95                 -0.85     -2.07       -1.96
                                                      [1.27]               [1.25]     [1.09]      [1.10]
 [1, 2] months since UI exhaustion                   -3.45                  -2.32    -3.43        -2.75
                                                      [1.67]               [1.68]     [1.48]      [1.48]
 [2, 3] months since UI exhaustion                  -6.17                 -4.41     -5.04        -4.16
                                                      [1.97]               [1.93]     [1.65]      [1.65]
 [3, 4] months since UI exhaustion                 -10.17                -7.75      -7.25       -5.81
                                                      [2.34]               [2.22]     [1.85]      [1.87]
 Adj. R2                                              0.001                0.043      0.498       0.499
 Mean Dep. Var                                       84.271               84.271     84.271      84.271
 N Observations                                       89876                89876      89876       89876
 N Individuals                                         5530                 5530       5530        5530
 Individual Controls                                                        X
 Individual FE                                                                          X          X
 Time FE                                                                                           X
 This table shows estimates of job-search in minutes on time since UI exhaustion. SE (in brackets) are
clustered on the individual level. P-Values report the H0 of the performed test. Hypotheses are formulated
such that H1 is consistent with the ref-dependent model. *, ** and *** denote significance on 10%, 5% and
1% significance level, respectively.




                                                   36
                                                       Table 5: Search Effort Since Start of UI Spell - Robustness

                                               Baseline         Full          Narrow      Bi-weekly     Non resp.      Cap at      Cap at      Controlling for        Re-weighted to Match
                                                           Participants Nonemp.              Level        as zero.    240 min      480 min        Local UR         Contacted      UI-Population
                                                  (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)             (8)               (9)              (10)
      [2, 3] months (omitted category)            0.00           0.00           0.00          0.00          0.00         0.00         0.00            0.00              0.00             0.00
                                                   [.]            [.]            [.]           [.]           [.]          [.]          [.]             [.]               [.]              [.]
      on UI since [3, 4] months                  -1.23          -1.26          -0.71         -0.28         -2.65        -2.02        -0.58           -1.13             -0.36            -1.00
                                                [1.72]         [1.99]         [1.77]        [1.97]        [1.65]       [1.42]       [1.87]          [1.72]            [1.73]           [1.74]
      on UI since [4, 5] months                   0.87           1.41           1.26          1.63         -1.62        -1.29         2.29            1.16              1.32             1.80
                                                [2.20]         [2.50]         [2.31]        [2.60]        [2.08]       [1.80]       [2.42]          [2.22]            [2.23]           [2.35]
      on UI since [5, 6] months                   1.11           0.45           1.51          2.14         -1.08        -0.82         2.23            1.55              2.14             2.28
                                                [2.41]         [2.60]         [2.74]        [3.17]        [2.26]       [1.97]       [2.59]          [2.47]            [2.28]           [2.39]
37




      on UI since [6, 7] months                   1.67           3.08           0.77          0.90         -0.26        -1.08         2.99            2.19              3.16             3.47
                                                [2.83]         [3.07]         [3.44]        [4.01]        [2.68]       [2.26]       [3.09]          [2.90]            [2.71]           [2.79]
      Adj. R2                                   0.471          0.489          0.479         0.674         0.429        0.452        0.473           0.471             0.470            0.471
      Mean Dep. Var                             86.578         84.599         86.709        85.685        77.606       79.893       88.866          86.578            86.578           86.578
      N Observations                            29536          20618          26244          7843         32951        29536        29536           29536             29536            29536
      N Individuals                              2022           1047           2022          1970          2024         2022         2022            2022              2022             2022
      Individual FE                                X              X              X             X             X            X           X                X                X                 X
      Time FE                                      X              X              X             X             X            X           X                X                X                 X
      Monthly Local UR                                                                                                                                 X
      This table shows estimates of job-search in minutes on time since the start of the UI spell for alternative specifications, where column (1) is the baseline specification. Column (2) includes
     only "full participants", that are still non-employed and who still participate in the survey after 4 months since survey start. Column (3) applies a stricter non-employment definition by
     including only observations for which individuals report at the same or a later date to still be nonemployed. Column (4) aggregates to the bi-weekly level and repeats the baseline estimate on
     that level. Column (5) replaces non-responses with zeros, if for the individual at least one later actual response is observed. Column (6) and (7) change the threshold above which responses
     are winsorized. Column (8) controls for the county x month unemployment rate at time of survey. Column (9) and (10) re-weight observations based on a variety of observed characteristics
     in order to match the average characteristics observed among all contacted individuals (column (9)) and the universe of UI recipients during the time of the survey (column (10)). SE (in
     brackets) are clustered on the individual level. *, ** and *** denote significance on 10%, 5% and 1% significance level, respectively.
                                                             Table 6: Search Effort Around UI Exhaustion - Robustness
                                                                    Baseline          Full         Narrow       Bi-weekly     Non resp.      Cap at       Cap at     Controlling for         Re-weighted to Match
                                                                                 Participants Nonemp.              Level        as zero.     240 min     480 min         Local UR         Contacted      UI-Population
                                                                         (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)          (6)         (7)              (8)               (9)             (10)
      [-4, -3] months since UI exhaustion                            -7.27          -7.90          -6.78         -7.46          -5.81        -5.26       -8.49            -7.66             -8.56            -8.36
                                                                       [1.99]         [2.14]         [2.18]        [2.23]         [2.10]       [1.64]      [2.18]           [2.02]            [2.01]           [1.99]
      [-3, -2] months since UI exhaustion                             -4.27         -5.91           -4.27         -4.04          -3.88        -3.03       -5.11            -4.55            -5.75            -5.20
                                                                       [1.83]         [1.97]         [2.01]        [2.04]         [1.94]       [1.49]      [1.99]           [1.84]            [1.88]           [1.83]
      [-2, -1] months since UI exhaustion                             -3.76          -4.23           -3.27        -3.71          -3.93        -3.15       -4.03            -3.89            -5.13            -5.00
                                                                       [1.56]         [1.69]         [1.73]        [1.78]         [1.70]       [1.28]      [1.70]           [1.56]            [1.64]           [1.60]
      [-1, 0] months since UI exhaustion (omitted cat.)                 0.00           0.00            0.00         0.00           0.00         0.00        0.00             0.00               0.00            0.00
                                                                          [.]            [.]            [.]           [.]            [.]          [.]         [.]              [.]               [.]             [.]
      [0, 1] months since UI exhaustion                                -1.96          -1.79           -1.79        -1.77         -2.81       -2.39         -1.80            -1.86             -2.00            -1.90
                                                                       [1.10]         [1.23]         [1.24]        [1.24]         [1.20]       [0.91]      [1.19]           [1.10]            [1.14]           [1.12]
      [1, 2] months since UI exhaustion                                -2.75         -3.88            -1.95       -3.28          -3.44        -2.95        -2.58            -2.49              -2.38           -2.55
38




                                                                       [1.48]         [1.58]         [1.67]        [1.63]         [1.59]       [1.24]      [1.61]           [1.50]            [1.57]           [1.53]
      [2, 3] months since UI exhaustion                               -4.16         -4.59            -3.50        -4.25         -5.23        -4.09        -3.95            -3.76             -3.81            -3.79
                                                                       [1.65]         [1.75]         [1.86]        [1.84]         [1.76]       [1.37]      [1.81]           [1.68]            [1.75]           [1.66]
      [3, 4] months since UI exhaustion                              -5.81          -6.11           -5.65        -6.33          -7.09        -5.76       -5.48            -5.29              -4.93            -4.58
                                                                       [1.87]         [1.96]         [2.36]        [2.08]         [2.25]       [1.59]      [2.01]           [1.90]            [1.99]           [1.90]
      Adj. R2                                                          0.499          0.513          0.505         0.669          0.455        0.480       0.501            0.499             0.489            0.497
      Mean Dep. Var                                                   84.271         81.893         84.313        83.945         75.035       77.613      86.706           87.732            84.271           84.271
      N Observations                                                   89876          65472          77847         27200          87472        89876       89876            89876             89876            89876
      N Individuals                                                     5530           3126           5342          5400           5345         5530        5530             5530              5530             5530
      Individual FE                                                     X              X               X             X             X            X            X               X                 X                 X
      Time FE                                                           X              X               X             X             X            X            X               X                 X                 X
      Monthly Local UR                                                                                                                                                       X
      This table shows estimates of job-search in minutes on time since UI exhaustion for alternative specifications, where column (1) is the baseline specification. Column (2) includes only "full participants", that are
     still non-employed and who still participate in the survey after 4 months since survey start. Column (3) applies a stricter non-employment definition by including only observations for which individuals report at
     the same or a later date to still be nonemployed. Column (4) aggregates to the bi-weekly level and repeats the baseline estimate on that level. Column (5) replaces non-responses with zeros, if for the individual
     at least one later actual response is observed. Column (6) and (7) change the threshold above which responses are winsorized. Column (8) controls for the county x month unemployment rate at time of survey.
     Column (9) and (10) re-weight observations based on a variety of observed characteristics in order to match the average characteristics observed among all contacted individuals (column (9)) and the universe of
     UI recipients during the time of the survey (column (10)). SE (in brackets) are clustered on the individual level. *, ** and *** denote significance on 10%, 5% and 1% significance level, respectively.
                          Table 7: Structural Estimates of Job Search Models
                                                (1)           (2)           (3)        (4)           (5)            (6)
                                                          -discounting                            -discounting
                                             Standard     Ref. Dep.      Ref. Dep.   Standard     Ref. Dep.      Ref. Dep.
                                              3 type       2 type         3 type      3 type       2 type         3 type
 Parameters of Utility Function
 Loss aversion                                    .          5.96          12.6          .            3.18         2.66
                                                            [0.68]        [1.97]                     [1.32]       [0.63]
 Adjustment speed of ref. point N                 .         403.7         451.3          .           297.9        338.4
                                                            [27.8]        [32.7]                     [22.7]       [32.6]
 Discount factor (30 days)                 0.639            0.931         0.915        0.995         0.995        0.995
                                          [0.0658]        [0.00876]      [0.0184]        [0]           [0]          [0]
 Discount factor                              1                1             1         0.918         0.475        0.473
                                             [0]              [0]           [0]      [0.00874]      [0.127]      [0.0943]
 Parameters of Search Cost and Productivity
 Curvature of search cost                   18.7             3.16          5.58        1.88          4.59           1.68
                                           [0.42]           [0.031]       [0.058]     [0.068]       [1.39]         [0.26]
 Curvature of search effort productivity    8.21             1.65          3.06        1.51          1.77           0.39
                                           [0.20]           [0.010]       [0.021]     [0.061]       [0.62]        [0.061]
 Composite curvature  =      -
                            1+
                                            1.13             0.57          0.62        0.15          1.02           0.93

 Search Cost for Type 1 (ln(k1))                -56.3        -17.0         -26.7       -3.96        -23.9          -7.71
                                               [233.6]       [0.12]        [9.13]                   [6.12]         [3.88]
 Type 1 (ln(E1))                                -25.5        -14.0         -18.4       -24.7        -14.8          -5.02
                                               [109.5]      [0.060]        [5.64]      [0.28]       [2.53]         [2.18]
 Search Cost for Type 2 (ln(k2))                -86.7        -17.4         -26.7       -6.57        -25.3          -12.3
                                                [49.7]       [0.28]        [0.48]      [0.17]       [6.10]         [1.64]
 Type 1 (ln(E2))                                -41.8        -12.9         -19.8       -8.81        -13.2          -9.80
                                                [23.3]       [0.15]        [0.31]      [0.13]       [2.56]         [0.31]
 Search Cost for Type 3 (ln(k3))                -94.9           .          -58.7       -12.9           .           -30.3
                                                [16.3]                     [93.4]      [0.36]                      [15.0]
 Type 1 (ln(E3))                                -44.0          .           -36.9       -12.8           .           -15.2
                                                [7.66]                     [57.5]      [0.32]                      [7.60]
 Share of Highest Cost Type p1                   0.17        0.49           0.50        0.24         0.44           0.58
                                                [0.11]      [0.013]       [0.027]     [0.012]       [0.026]       [0.025]
 Share of Highest Cost Type p2                   0.37          .            0.49        0.31           .            0.41
                                               [0.021]                    [0.029]     [0.014]                     [0.026]
 Model Fit
 Number of Moments Used                          49           49             49         49            49             49
 Number of Estimated Parameters                  11           10             13         11            10             13
 SSE for Hazard                                127.4        156.6          118.8      91.2          117.6          92.1
 SSE for Inital Effort                          14.2         17.2           17.4       14.2          28.4           13.4
 SSE for Effort around Exhaustion              139.8         33.9           30.8      144.2         40.5           23.7
 Goodness of Fit (SSE)                         281.6        208.4          167.0      249.6         186.9          129.2

Notes: The table shows parameter estimates for the standard and the reference-dependent search models. Estimation
is based on minimum distance estimation. The targeted moments are 1) the within-person estimates of the evolution
of search effort at the beginning of the spell, 2)the evolution of effort at UI exhaustion, and 3) the empirical hazards
for the P=8 and P=10 month groups, that are estimated using a regression discontinuity design at the cutoff, to keep
the composition between the two groups identical. Standard errors for estimated parameters in parentheses.




                                                          39
                              Table 8: Robustness Table for Structural Estimation
                                         (1)         (2)             (3)         (4)           (5)        (6)            (7)
                                      Estimate    Estimate       Estimate    Pos. initial     Effort      No          Estimate
                                       and                            ;        Assets       upweighted   Decline    using P=8/10
                                                                   fix                         ×1         FE            Group
 Standard Model - 3 Types
 Discount factor (30 days)              0.911       0.995          0.995        0.995          0.995       0.995       0.995
                                       [0.123]        [0]            [0]          [0]           [0]         [0]          [0]
 Discount factor                        0.646       0.919          0.918        0.484          0.920       0.917       0.717
                                      [0.0188]    [0.00865]      [0.00874]    [0.0258]       [0.0203]    [0.0109]     [0.0307]
 Curvature of search cost                10.1        1.88           1.88         8.42          1.88        3.45         3.40
                                        [0.12]     [0.065]        [0.068]      [0.077]        [0.068]     [0.026]      [0.24]
 Curvature of search effort              5.65        1.51           1.51        4.62           1.52        2.88         1.80
 productivity                          [0.059]     [0.059]        [0.061]      [0.070]        [0.057]     [0.027]      [0.16]
 Composite curvature  =      -
                            1+
                                         0.68        0.15           0.15        0.68           0.14        0.15         0.57

 Number of Moments Used                   49          49            49            49            49          45           49
 Number of Estimated Parameters           12          11            11            11            11          11           11
 SSE for Hazard                         105.2       91.2          91.2          127.6         90.9        90.9         194.5
 SSE for Inital Effort                   12.6        14.1          14.2          13.0          1.42        12.6         13.7
 SSE for Effort around Exhaustion       131.3       144.3         144.2         125.7         14.5        168.4        132.4
 Goodness of Fit (SSE)                  249.1       249.6         249.6         266.4         106.8       118.8        340.6
 Reference Dependent Model - 3 Types
 Loss aversion                           2.81        1.28             1          4.92          5.70       0.95          3.88
                                        [1.29]      [1.12]           [0]        [0.80]        [0.60]     [0.056]       [1.18]
 Eta                                      1          4.24           3.35          1             1           1            1
                                                    [0.13]         [1.76]
 Adjustment speed of ref. point N       330.4       357.2           66.0        306.3          412.1       76.8         568.8
                                        [54.6]      [44.3]         [2.81]       [28.1]         [12.3]     [6.23]        [62.1]
 Discount factor (30 days)              0.967       0.995          0.995        0.995          0.995      0.995         0.995
                                       [0.111]        [0]            [0]          [0]            [0]        [0]           [0]
 Discount factor                        0.475       0.473          0.511        0.350          0.896      0.821         0.763
                                      [0.0477]     [0.123]        [0.204]     [0.0403]       [0.00786]   [0.0689]     [0.0230]
 Curvature of search cost                3.26        2.46           8.17         3.06           1.92       3.02          3.01
                                        [1.92]      [0.34]         [7.99]      [0.022]        [0.0099]    [1.95]       [0.045]
 Curvature of search effort              1.12        0.75           4.02         0.76           1.38       2.11          1.74
 productivity                           [0.89]     [0.030]         [4.32]     [0.0099]        [0.0088]    [1.48]       [0.019]
 Composite curvature  =      -
                            1+
                                         1.01        0.98           0.83         1.30           0.23       0.29          0.47

 Number of Moments Used                   49          49            49            49            49          45           49
 Number of Estimated Parameters           14          14            13            13            13          13           13
 SSE for Hazard                         93.0        87.6          65.8          86.7           62.6       52.4         137.2
 SSE for Inital Effort                   12.8        12.5          9.36          20.9          2.75        6.84         23.1
 SSE for Effort around Exhaustion       23.2        23.2          65.4          25.4           4.39       160.8         36.7
 Goodness of Fit (SSE)                  129.0       123.4         140.7         133.0          69.7        76.4        197.0
Notes: The table shows parameter estimates for the standard and the reference-dependent search models. Estimation is based
on minimum distance estimation. The targeted moments are 1) the within-person estimates of the evolution of search effort at
the beginning of the spell, 2)the evolution of effort at UI exhaustion, and 3) the empirical hazards for the P=8 and P=10 month
groups, that are estimated using a regression discontinuity design at the cutoff, to keep the composition between the two groups
identical. Standard errors for estimated parameters in parentheses. [.] indicates that the parameter estimate is on the boundary
and thus the standard error is not well identified.




                                                            40
                  Figure 1: Re-employment Hazard Using Administrative Data

        .14
                                        P=6
        .12
                                                 P=8
         .1
                                                            P=10   P=12
        .08
                                                                               P=15
        .06

        .04

        .02

          0
              0               4                8                 12              16
                                                Duration in Months

                                        (a) All Eligibility Categories

        .14

        .12

         .1

        .08

        .06

        .04

        .02

          0
              0               4                8                 12              16
                                                Duration in Months

                                  (b) Regression Discontinuity at Age 50

Notes: This figure shows reemployment hazards by PBD groups based on administrative data between
January 2013 and June 2016. Panel (a) shows hazard rates for all 5 PBD-groups, whereas figure (b) provides
RD-estimates of the 12 vs. 15 month eligibility group around the discontinuity at age 50. The sample consists
of individuals aged between 28 and 60 at time of UI entry and have exactly 6, 8, 10, 12 or 15 months of PBD
at UI entry. For PBD=12 and PBD=15, we additionally restrict to age between 45 and 55 at time of UI entry
and on qualifying for long UI eligibility based on working history. We also restrict to immediate UI take-up
after job-loss (<2 days). Numbers of observations for panel are for P=6: 113568, for P=8: 80809, for P=10:
59967, for P=12: 258954 and for P=15: 216307.




                                                       41
                                                Figure 2: Survey Design
                                                                                    Draw sample of
               Snapshot of         June                                             people to
               UI recipients
                                                                                    contact; Request
               (as of May
                                                                                    address / phone
               15th) becomes
                                                                                    information
               available to us                  Data


                 Receive                        Data
                 addresses                                                          Send out letter
             First SMS contact
                                                                                    Weekly rotating
                                                       SMS          SMS
            Standard question:                                                      question:
            Hours of job search                        SMS
                                                                    SMS
                                                                                    Target wage, Search
                                                       SMS
            yesterday                                                               intensity, Life
                                                                                    satisfaction



                                    Full Q: ,,How many hours did you spend searching for a job
                How many
                                    yesterday? For example, looking for job-postings, sending
                hours did
                you look            out applications or designing a cv. Please reply with the
                for a job           number of hours, e.g. "0.5", or "2". If, for whatever reason,
                yesterday?          you did not look for a job simply respond with "0""

                                    German: ,,Wie viele Stunden haben Sie gestern mit
                                    Arbeitssuche verbracht?"

                                        (a) Timing of Sampling and Survey Design


                 Unemp.
                 Duration
                  13 mon
                  12 mon
                  11 mon
                   10 mon
                    9 mon
                    8 mon
                    7 mon
                    6 mon
                    5 mon
                    4 mon
                    3 mon
                    2 mon



                                 Nov     Dec    Jan     Feb                 Nov      Date
                                 2017    2017   2018    2018                2019

                                    (b) Overlapping Panel Design for P=12 Group

Notes: This figure illustrates (a) the overlapping cohort structure by wave, and (b) timing of data retrieval,
send out of letter and first SMS contact.

                                                               42
                                   Figure 3: Distribution and Time Series of Job Search Measure

                                             .35

                                              .3

                                             .25
                                 Fraction




                                              .2

                                             .15

                                              .1

                                             .05

                                               0
                                                     0   30    60   90 120 150 180 210 240 270 300 330 360+
                                                                       Minutes of Job Search
                                                           (a) Histogram of Job Search Responses

                                             140                                                           8
                Minutes searched yesterday




                                             120



                                                                                                               Unemployment Rate
                                                                                                           6
                                             100

                                              80
                                                                                                           4
                                              60

                                              40
                                                                                                           2
                                              20

                                               0                                                           0
                                                   01jan2018     01jul2018 01jan2019 01jul2019
                                                               Calendar Date of Intended Contact

                                                                Mean Search               Unemp. Rate
                                                    (b) Time Series of Job Search and Unemployment Rates

Notes: Panel (a) shows a histogram for job-search for all responses for individuals who still report being
nonemployed. We drop responses above 15 hours and censor responses to 6 hours. Panel (b) shows time series
of mean daily search (of nonemployed job searchers) for days with at least 20 valid responses. The horizontal
dashed line indicates the mean job search over the whole period, the vertical dashed lines indicate days of
federal public holidays. The red dashed line shows the seasonally adjusted monthly unemployment rate.




                                                                            43
                                                          Figure 4: Validation of Search Effort Measure
                                               140

                                               120

                Minutes Job Search Yesterday   100

                                                80

                                                60

                                                40

                                                20

                                                 0
                                                           -20                             0                                      20
                                                                               Days since National Holiday


                                                                 (a) Search Effort Around National Holidays

                                               140

                                               120
                Minutes Job Search Yesterday




                                               100

                                                80

                                                60

                                                40

                                                20

                                                 0
                                                     -4                 -2                 0                      2                    4
                                                                              Months since Job Acceptance


                                                                  (b) Search Effort Around Job Acceptance

                                               140

                                               120
                Minutes Job Search Yesterday




                                               100                                                   Lag Offer-Start <= 9 days

                                                80                                                   Lag Offer-Start 10 to 26 days

                                                60                                                   Lag Offer-Start >= 26 days

                                                40

                                                20

                                                 0
                                                     -4                 -2                 0                      2                    4
                                                                                 Months since Job Start


                                                     (c) Search Effort Around Job Start, by time since Acceptance

Notes: This figure shows mean job search effort for nonemployed individuals around different events. Event
dates are normalized to zero. In figure (c) the distance between two survey dates (Tuesday - > Thursday
and Thursday - > Tuesday) is standardized to 3.5 days for the ease of comparison.


                                                                                      44
                      Figure 5: Search Effort (Minutes of Job-Search Yesterday) over the Unemployment Spell by Survey Cohort
         120                                                                                         120                                                                                                              120

         110                                                                                         110                                                                                                              110
                                                                                                                                                                              339                                                                                                     1138
         100                                                                                         100                                                            632                                               100                                                             206    905
                                                                                                                                                      1038   790                                                                                                               397
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1486
                                                              1413                                                            1237                                                                                                                                      1915
          90                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        465
                              1150
                                     4649
                                                                                                          90                                 1631                                                                      90                  1364           933                                1615
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1269
               2020   1397                  3202     1816                                                         1772               954                                                                                       1921                                                   2288
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1144          453
                                     998                                           925                                                                       2562             1443
                                                                                                                                                                              1432
                                                     2475                 1156                                                                                      1822              1131           708                                                  842                                              1069
          80                                                  2044
                                                                                           489            80                                 771      383                             1022   830
                                                                                                                                                                                                             339       80                                                                                         496
                                            490                           978                                                                                                                601                                                                 600    507

          70                                                                                              70                                                                                                           70

          60                                                                                              60                                                                                                           60

          50                                                                                              50                                                                                                           50
               2             4         6             8                           10                              2                   4          6        8          10                              12                        2                   4          6        8          10                    12
                             Unemployment Duration in Months                                                                             Unemployment Duration in Months                                                                              Unemployment Duration in Months

                        (a) P=6 Months Group                                                                                     (b) P=8 Months Group                                                                                         (c) P=10 Months Group

                                                   120                                                                                                             120
45




                                                   110                                                                                                             110
                                                                                                                 929
                                                                                   536                                  450                                                                                    411                   346
                                                   100                                   547                                                                       100                                                                                        689 365
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    220 782
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    922                            1000 772
                                                                   1583 1334 1104 630          1684 242
                                                                                               470 1321                                                                                                    469 1180
                                                                                                          1116                                                             1766                                               696                       882
                                                    90      2238             792                                                                                    90              1262 1038 654                                    2149 1901
                                                                                                                                     1099                                                        554                                               1679
                                                                                                                 2942                                                                        860 423                                        1190
                                                                                                                        2401 1318
                                                                                                                             1894
                                                    80                                                                                      855
                                                                                                                                            869                     80                                                        2427
                                                                                                                                     1580       773

                                                    70                                                                                                              70
                                                                                                                                                      409
                                                    60                                                                                                              60

                                                    50                                                                                                              50
                                                         2            4        6     8      10       12     14                                16                          2            4       6     8      10       12     14                            16
                                                                             Unemployment Duration in Months                                                                                 Unemployment Duration in Months

                                                                          (d) P=12 Months Group                                                                                            (e) P=15 Months Group

     Notes: This figure shows cohort plots for P=6 to P=15 months. 95% CI (SE clustered on individual level) are displayed as outer lines (values above
     125 and below 50 are censored for the ease of exposition). Numbers at a dot refer to the numbers of observations on which the dot is based. A cohort
     is defined as the duration in months on UI at time of first contact. It contains the months 2,3,5,8,11,13. Values that are -due to slight differences
     in definition of cohorts in earlier waves- outside those range are increased by one months such that they are fit in the listed month range. One dot
     represents observations from 4 weeks. Since responses are restricted to the regular survey duration (up to 18 weeks), the last dot of each cohort contains
     only observations from two weeks.
                                                                          Figure 6: Search Effort Throughout
                                                    The relationship between Search and Unemp.
                                                                                                             the Unemployment Spell
                                                                                                           The relationship between Search Effort and Unemp.
                                                                                                                            90

                                              90
                                                                                                                            85
                                              85
                  Search Effort




                                                                                                         Search Effort
                                                                                                                            80
                                              80

                                                                                                                            75
                                              75

                                              70                                                                            70


                                              65                                                                            65
                                                    2              3            4           5       6                                 -4        -3          -2     -1     0      1       2   3
                                                                   Month of Unemployment                                                                  Months since UI Exhaustion

                 (a) Initial Evolution of Search Effort (N ind. = 2022, N obs. (b) Search Effort around UI Exhaustion (N ind. = 5530, N
                 = 29536)                                                      obs. = 89876)
46




                                               .14                                                                                   .14
                        Reemployment Hazard




                                                                                                               Reemployment Hazard
                                               .12                                                                                   .12


                                                   .1                                                                                 .1


                                               .08                                                                                   .08


                                               .06                                                                                   .06

                                                                                                                                     .04
                                               .04
                                                        3              4          5         6       7                                      -3        -2      -1      0      1     2      3   4
                                                                       Months of Unemployment                                                               Months since UI Exhaustion

                                                            (c) Initial Evolution of Hazard Rate                                            (d) Hazard Rate around UI Exhaustion

     Notes: The figure shows mean job search over the initial spell of unemployment (up to 6 months) and around UI-exhaustion (between -4 and +3
     months around UI exhaustion) controlling for individual, weekdate and calender-month fixed effects and compares it to reemployment hazard in those
     months. For the initial evolution of Search Effort only individuals with P  8 are included. Standard Errors are clustered on the Person level. Hazard
     rates are pooled over different P-groups where each group is weighted with the number of individuals that are in the respective survey group.
                                                                         Figure 7: Evidence about Storable Offer Model
      Days between Job-Offer and -Start (cap: 180)
                                                     50


                                                     40
                                                                                                                                                      48
                                                                         210                                                                 98
                                                     30       101                                                  251

                                                                                       169            207                       162

                                                     20


                                                     10


                                                      0
                                                          -4            -3            -2              -1            0           1           2         3
                                                                                           Job Start, Relative to UI Exhaustion

                                                              (a) Mean Duration between Job-Offer and Job-Found by Date of UI Exhaustion


                                                     140

                                                     120                                                             Job Start before UI-Exhaustion
      Minutes Job Search Yesterday




                                                     100                                                             Job Start at UI-Exhaustion

                                                      80                                                             Job Start after UI Exhaustion

                                                      60

                                                      40

                                                      20

                                                          0
                                                              -4                 -2                        0                        2                 4
                                                                                                 Months since Job Start

                                                                     (b) Job Search Effort by Job Found and Date of UI Exhaustion

Notes: Panel (a) shows the duration in days between job-offer and job start by the month of the job start
relative to UI exhaustion. Panel (b) shows reported job search intensity around job start by whether individuals
start their job around UI exhaustion (+/- one month around UI exhaustion) or at other points of their
unemployment spell.




                                                                                                       47
                                                                            Figure 8: Expert Forecasts vs. Survey Results

                                                             90

                                                             85
              Search Effort


                                                             80

                                                             75

                                                             70
                                                                                                                                               Mean prediction

                                                             65


                                                                  2                      3                        4                        5                     6
                                                                                                       Month of Unemployment


                                                                                         (a) Search Effort Early In Spell

                                                             90


                                                             85
              Search Effort




                                                             80


                                                             75

                                                                                                                                Mean prediction
                                                             70
                                                                       Mean prediction

                                                             65

                                                                  -4           -3            -2           -1            0             1            2             3
                                                                                                     Months since UI Exhaustion


                                                                                     (b) Search Effort Around UI Exhaustion
              Days between Job-Offer and -Start (cap: 180)




                                                             50


                                                             40
                                                                                                                           Mean prediction

                                                             30                                                            Actual result


                                                             20


                                                             10


                                                              0
                                                                  -4            -3           -2              -1            0           1           2             3
                                                                                                  Job Start, Relative to UI Exhaustion


                                                                            (c) Evidence of Storable Offers Around UI Exhaustion

Notes: This figure contrasts the expert forecasts with the results of the survey for the three main findings.

                                                                                                              48
                             Figure 9: Predicted Moments of the Standard and Reference-Dependent Models - Present Bias ( )
                                               90                                                                                                            90



                    Search Effort in Minutes




                                                                                                                                  Search Effort in Minutes
                                               85                                                                                                            85




                                               80                                                                                                            80

                                                                                           Empirical search effort                                                                                       Empirical search effort
                                                                                           Simulated effort std. model                                                                                   Simulated effort std. model
                                                                                           Simulated effort ref. dep. model                                                                              Simulated effort ref. dep. model
                                               75                                                                                                            75
                                                     2               3                4                 5                     6                                    -4         -3       -2      -1        0        1            2            3
                                                                             Month since UI start                                                                                      Month relative to Exhaustion


                                                         (a) Search effort at beginning of UI spell                                                                     (b) Search effort around UI exhaustion
49




                                               .14                                                                                                           .14
                                                                                               Empirical, P=12                                                                                               Empirical, P=12
                                                                                               Empirical, P=15                                                                                               Empirical, P=15
                                               .12                                                                                                           .12
                                                                                               Simulated std. model, P=12                                                                                    Sim. ref. dep. model, P=12
                    Reemployment Hazard




                                                                                                                                  Reemployment Hazard
                                                                                               Simulated std. model, P=15                                                                                    Sim. ref. dep. model, P=15
                                                .1                                                                                                            .1

                                               .08                                                                                                           .08

                                               .06                                                                                                           .06

                                               .04                                                                                                           .04

                                               .02                                                                                                           .02

                                                0                                                                                                             0
                                                          2      4       6     8     10     12    14          16         18                                             2          4   6     8     10     12    14          16         18
                                                                             Month since UI start                                                                                          Month since UI start


                                                              (c) Hazard rate for standard model                                                                            (d) Hazard rate for ref.-dep. model

     Notes: The figure shows the empirical moments that we use in the structural estimation and the predicted moments from the estimated standard and
     reference-dependent models. The standard model corresponds to Table 7, Column (4), while the reference-dependent model corresponds to Table 7,
     Column (6).
