                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  PRICE DISCOVERY AND LIQUIDITY RECOVERY:
             FOREX MARKET REACTIONS TO MACRO ANNOUNCEMENTS

                                        Masahiro Yamada
                                         Takatoshi Ito

                                       Working Paper 27036
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27036


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




The authors acknowledge financial support from JSPS Grant Number 17H00995. The authors are
grateful to comments on an earlier version by Martin Evans, Yushi Yoshida, Takamitsu Kurita,
Yoshihiro Ohashi and participants of the 4th annual international conference on "High Frequency
Exchange Rate Dynamics: Econophysics and Econometric/Theoretical Analysis," December
2019 in Tokyo. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27036.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Masahiro Yamada and Takatoshi Ito. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Price Discovery and Liquidity Recovery: Forex Market Reactions to Macro Announcements
Masahiro Yamada and Takatoshi Ito
NBER Working Paper No. 27036
April 2020
JEL No. E44,F31,G14,G15

                                           ABSTRACT

We examine whether the forex market quality, measured by the speed of price discovery and
liquidity recovery after macro statistics announcements, has improved using the EBS high-
frequency data for 20 years. Considering the recent rise of computer-based trading, a popular
conjecture is that the market quality has improved. Our empirical analysis, however, suggests that
an improving trend is only observed in price discovery. Moreover, two measures are negatively
correlated because an increasing number of traders improves liquidity but slows down price
discovery. Theoretically, the latter finding implies that "fast" traders have a poor interpretation of
how the news will impact prices.


Masahiro Yamada
Department of Economics
Osaka University
1-7, Machikaneyama
Toyonaka, Osaka, 560-0043
Japan
m.yamada@econ.osaka-u.ac.jp

Takatoshi Ito
Columbia University
School of International and Public Affairs
Room 927 IAB (MC 3333)
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
ti2164@columbia.edu




An appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27036
1       Introduction
    The foreign exchange market has transformed from a human-dominated market to a machine-

dominated market over the last two decades. Computers loaded with algorithms receive and process

information and send limit orders and market orders to the order-matching machine, operated by

EBS, Reuters, or dark pools. The order-matching machines process orders mostly on a first-come,

first-served basis. Bank computers are colocated with the order-matching machine to minimize the

loss in transmission time. The entire process of orders from market takers being matched with

orders of market makers is completed within a fraction of a second.

    In the world of high-frequency traders ­ machines armed with algorithms ­ new information

should be integrated into prices much quicker than before. Although it is a near-consensus in the

literature that price discovery is faster, whether high-frequency traders provide or consume

liquidity is still controversial.1

    New information can be a macroeconomic news announcement at scheduled time, an unexpected

result of known events like an election or a referendum, or some economic and political development

at an unexpected time.

    After a macro news announcement, the foreign exchange rate (price) has to move to a new

equilibrium that reflects this new information. Let  denote a change in an efficient price after the

announcement, or the true market reaction to the news. Informed traders have the correct


    1
     Much academic research claims that algorithmic high-frequency traders help price discovery and liquidity
provision during regular trading hours (e.g., Brogaard, Hendershott, and Riordan (2014), Chordia, Green, and
Kottimukkalur (2018)). On the other hand, in situations of extremely volatile markets such as a Flash crash,
high-frequency traders can consume rather than provide liquidity (Kirilenko et al. (2017)). As a study directly
related to ours, Chordia, Green, and Kottimukkalur (2018) investigate equity markets and report that price
discovery after macro announcements has become faster during these years. Scholtus, Van Dijk, and Frijns (2014)
investigated the U.S. equity market and emphasize that the speed of trading is important for its profitability
from the news trading. In line with the finding on market quality by Scholtus, Van Dijk, and Frijns (2014),
Jiang, Lo, and Valente (2012) report that high-frequency trading lowers the depth on the limit order book during
the post-announcement period, but increases price efficiency through the trade.
                                                        1
expectation , which predicts . Upon the arrival of news , the surprise component of new

information  -  is integrated into the market price through trades among market participants,

achieving  =  - . Some of the market participants are informed and others are uninformed. Not

knowing , uninformed traders try to learn the correct contents and interpretation of news through

trading and price and volume movements.

 After new information arrives, the price level moves to a new equilibrium level. This is called

price discovery. When traders do not share the same information and interpretation, they extract

information from prices during the trading process toward price discovery. It is expected that the

volatility becomes higher upon the arrival of news, and remains high for a period of time. This is

a phenomenon called volatility clustering.

 Interesting and important questions are, first, whether widespread high-frequency traders have

made the price discovery process faster; and second, whether they provide more liquidity so that

volatility is less than that during previous times without machines. With tick-by-tick data, the

price discovery process can be examined with very high frequency. The impact of the widespread

use of machines can only be analyzed with tick-by-tick data.

 In cases when there is a macroeconomic statistics announcement at a scheduled time, liquidity

dries up prior to the announcement time, as traders prefer to stay on the sidelines given a strong

amount of uncertainty. After the number of macro statistics is announced and news contents are

fully digested, the liquidity recovers to the pre-announcement time.

 We use 20 years of high-frequency data to examine the changes in the market quality defined by

the speed of price discovery and liquidity recovery. The data have been collected in the ICAP EBS

order-matching system, which makes it possible for us to examine long-term changes. We focus on

price and liquidity reactions to macro announcements. We expect the market quality has changed

over time as machines have gradually replaced humans.




                                                 2
  We define the speed of price discovery as a variance ratio, i.e., the variance of return in [,  + ]

over the variance of return in [,  +  ], where  is the time of news arrival;  and  are free

parameters satisfying    .2 Liquidity recovery is measured by the shrinkage of effective bid-ask

spreads in a similar manner; the liquidity dries up at the moment of announcements and then

gradually recovers in some minutes.

  Figure 1 describes the developments of the speed of price discovery and liquidity recovery for

EUR/USD in these 20 years.



                                        [Figure 1 is inserted here]



  Contrary to our expectations, the changes in the speed of price discovery are only slight over the

years, with large fluctuations. We do not observe a trend of increasing speed in liquidity recovery.

In fact, the liquidity recovery was fast enough even in 1999, and the room for improvements was

small. Moreover, these two measures fluctuate to the opposite directions and do not necessarily

improve simultaneously. The correlation coefficient is -0.355. These findings call for more

investigation into the underlying factors that drive the market quality.

  Based on the observations from Figure 1, the next question is what drives the fluctuation of price

discovery and liquidity. We set two key variables that are theoretically relevant and empirically

available: explanatory power of the news for predicting after-the-news returns, and the number of

traders who submit limit orders. The first variable, which we call "R-squared measure," is obtained

by an explanatory power, or R-squared, of the surprise of macro statistics announcements against

after-the-news returns.3 Because the surprise component is calculated from the expectation of news



  2
    Chordia, Green, and Kottimukkalur (2018) employ a similar measure and report that price discovery after
announcements becomes faster in recent years in the U.S. equity market. They employ two second for  and
0.1 second for . Considering the market structure and trade frequency, we employ the longer time interval.
  3
    For defining the surprise of news, we use pre-expectations of macro statistics provided by Bloomberg.
                                                     3
provided by Bloomberg's survey, its explanatory power can be close to that of market participants.

The R-squared is proportionally related to the precision of information held by traders. Based on

this idea, we use this R-squared measure as a proxy for the precision of information held by traders.

  The second variable is "quote counts," or the number of traders who hold limit orders, which is

available in our high-frequency dataset. The number of traders is an important component to

determine the price discovery and liquidity, but it depends on whether they are informed or

uninformed traders.

  Our regression analysis shows that the price discovery is faster when the R-squared measure is

higher, but slower when the quote counts are higher. Conversely, the liquidity recovery is slower

when the R-squared is higher, but it becomes faster when the quote counts are higher. Figure 2

graphically illustrates these main empirical findings.



                                          [Figure 2 is inserted here]



  Theoretically, our empirical findings are consistent with a situation in which market participants

behave like uninformed traders, as implied by classic noisy rational expectation models (e.g.,

Grossman and Stiglitz (1980)). When traders behave like uninformed traders, they provide liquidity

but cannot add any information to the market price. 4 Therefore, an increasing number of

uninformed traders deteriorates the price discovery. In reality, however, trading after macro

announcements may be more like informed trading, because they hold their own interpretation of



  4
     Uninformed traders can contribute to price discovery when noise traders' temporary move the market price
away from its efficient price. But this situation fits to regular trading hours rather than to the timing of news
releases. In the literature, Anand, Tanggaard, and Weaver (2009) investigated data on the Stockholm Stock
Exchange and reported that liquidity provision leads to an improvement in price discovery. Scholtus, Van Dijk,
and Frijns (2014) show that the speed of HFTs is an important determinant of the profitability of their news-
driven trading strategy, and the activity of HFTs positively affect market quality defined as depth, bid-ask
spread, and price resiliency.
                                                        4
the news as private information. This is an idea of Kim and Verrecchia (1997) to investigate the

trading after news announcements.

  In the theoretical model of Kim and Verrecchia (1997), each trader is endowed with a private

expectation  involving "interpretation error of news"  :  =  +  . Each trader's objective is

to make a prediction for  =  - . In this situation, a trader's own surprise regarding news,  -

 =  +  , is related with , and it is associated with the interpretation error. When the error is

large, the trader only has noisy information and trades like an uninformed trader. In this way, a

problem with public information is transformed into a problem with the standard microstructure

model of private information.

  Thus, a problem is whether we can reproduce the reality with a model where there are only

informed traders. To handle this situation, we rely on the Kyle (1989) model, which provides a

general microstructure framework. This model is regarded as a general one, because (i) the model

is inhabited with N risk-averse informed, M risk-averse uninformed, and random noise traders; (ii)

each informed trader has their own private information, and other informed and uninformed traders

extract signals from equilibrium prices, i.e., the information structure is not nested; (iii) both

informed and uninformed traders have market power; and (iv) it is a model for an order-driven

market, the same as the structure of the EBS interbank market. Because of the property (ii), an

informed trader has an aspect of both an informed and uninformed trader, and we can consider a

situation in which there are only informed traders.

  Our empirical measures of market quality, i.e., the variance ratio and liquidity, can be formulated

in this theoretical model to pin down their connections with exogenous parameters. We show

comparative statics analysis for these market quality measures with respect to the number of

traders and the precision of their private information. A key additional assumption for replicating

the empirical results is that the sum of precision of trader's private information is fixed. In this

situation, price discovery is not faster even if there are many traders, since such traders only


                                                  5
improve liquidity, like an uninformed trader. As a result, better liquidity and fast price discovery

are not necessarily achieved at the same time.

    After controlling for these determinants, a time trend of market quality can be empirically

obtained. We find that the exogenous quality improvements in the Forex market are mixed: price

discovery becomes faster, but liquidity recovery becomes slower. These findings are not only

applicable to the specific currency pair, but are observable across a wide range of currency pairs.


    The outline of this paper is as follows. Section 2 provides a theoretical model that suggests the

empirical measures of price discovery and liquidity, as well as proxies for exogenous parameters.

Section 3 explains the data and defines the empirical measures and their overview, and then we

conduct regression analyses to find determinants of market quality and any exogenous time-trend

of improvements. Section 4 further conducts related empirical analyses in order to check their

robustness. We also demonstrate numerical simulations on the model by feeding parameters that

match the reality. Section 5 concludes.



2      A Stylized Model
    In this section, we present a model that provides a guide to constructing the possible measures

of price discovery and liquidity recovery, their determinants, and an interpretation of empirical

analysis. Based on the classical Kyle (1989) model, we consider an environment where the sum of

precision of trader's private information is fixed. In this set up, despite that each informed trader

has exclusive private information, their marginal contribution to the price informativeness can be

small, so that they behave like uninformed traders.

    Our model features one trading stage, one risky and risk-free asset, and  informed and random

noise traders. At  = 0, informed trader n is endowed with an initial belief about the news statistics

 =  +  ,  = 1,2,  ,  as well as a public announcement . Following Kim and Verrecchia

                                                   6
(1994),  ,  = 1,2,  ,  is regarded as an interpretation error for each trader. After-the-news

price  is realized in a form of  =  - . Thus, we assume that the after-the-news price is a

function of the "true" unobserved surprise of the announcement. Based on this structure, trader k

can generate their own signal    -  =  +  for predicting .

  Both informed and noise traders trade the risky asset at  = 1, and the asset value is realized at
                                                                    -1              -1
 = 2. We assume the normal distribution of random variables:   N(0,    ) and   N(0,    )

which are mutually independent. Note that the unconditional expectation of  is assumed to be

zero, so that the price of risk asset at  = 0 is zero as well. This structure allows us to interpret

the price of risky asset at  = 1 as one-period return of the asset and  as the after-the-news

return.5 The risk-free asset earns zero interest.

  Informed traders have a negative exponential utility function, and they maximize a terminal

wealth by choosing an order submission strategy. An informed trader's profit maximization

problem transforms into a mean-variance optimizing problem:
                                                
                          max E[( - ( )) | , ] - Var [( - ( )) | , ],
                                                2
  where  is a risk aversion parameter. At  = 1, informed traders submit their demand/supply

functions to an auctioneer and simultaneously observe an aggregate demand/supply curve ( ).
                                                   2
Noise traders randomly submit market orders   N(0,   ), which is inelastic to the price and

independent of  and  . The price at  = 1 clears the demand/supply of informed and noise

traders; i.e., the market-clearing condition   () +  = 0 holds.

  This model involves signal extraction and imperfect competition. From the assumptions on

information structure, each informed trader receives a different news signal; that is, the information

is not nested, which enables informed traders to extract additional information from the aggregate


  5
    In our empirical analysis, we measure the surprise as a deviation of released statistics from the Bloomberg
survey results. Although such survey results are also publicly available for market participants, for simplicity,
the theoretical structure does not account them explicitly. Alternatively, we can assume that the unconditional
expectation of  already reflects the survey results and is set as zero.
                                                        7
demand/supply curve ­ namely, E(| , )  E(| ) and Var(| , )  Var(| ). In contrast to the

competitive model of Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), informed traders utilize their monopoly power,

which is inherited from their informational advantage. Therefore, compared to a competitive case,

traders are less aggressive in informed trading; the incorporation of information into prices can be

delayed, and the liquidity can decrease.

  In the original model of Kyle (1989), there are uninformed traders who do not receive private

signals, but optimally characterize their demand/supply functions. In our model, they are muted

for making the characterization of equilibrium easier. In fact, it is reasonable to assume there are

only informed traders after an announcement, because each trader observes public news and trades

based on their interpretation of news. Even without uninformed traders, however, informed traders

learn from prices and act like uninformed traders depending on the precision of their information.

  Readers familiar with the literature might notice that Kyle (1989) is a model for private

information, not for public information. Microstructure models regarding public information release

are studied by, for example, Kim and Verrecchia (2006), Kim and Verrecchia (1994), Wang (1994),

Holden and Subrahmanyam (2002), and Llorente and Michaely (2002). Although these papers

investigate a market structure after the release of public information, their model structures allow

private information to facilitate informed trading. The information structure of our model can be

regarded as a variation of      Kim and Verrecchia (1994): a source of private information is

individual's information production that relates the public news and terminal asset values. 6

Another source of private information can be idiosyncratic liquidity shocks during pre-

announcement, which is studied by Llorente and Michaely (2002) and Tetlock (2010). But this

reasoning is more suitable to modeling longer-time horizon situations, not the intraday tick-by-tick

transactions.


  6
    Another important difference with Kim and Verrecchia (1994) is that they employ a quote-driven market
(Kyle (1985) type model) while we employ an order-driven one (Kyle (1989) type model). The difference is
discussed by Bernhardt and Taub (2006), but it is not in the scope of this paper.
                                                    8
  Overall, our theoretical framework is not quite original. We use the Kyle (1989) model to derive

reasonable predictions of intraday order-driven market transactions in a tractable and general

manner. However, this model is rich enough to provide theoretical predictions that can be compared

with our empirical analyses.


2.1 Characterization of equilibrium7
  We focus on a symmetric linear equilibrium that determines the strategy of informed traders.

We start from a conjecture of the strategy that is written by constants , ,  ;

                                 (,  ) =  +  - ,  = 1,2,  ,                                              (1)
  The market-clearing condition gives the equilibrium price as

                                                                            1
                             =   +    +  +  ,                                                            (2)
                               (           )                                
                                    

   is price impact, a price change per unit of unexpected order flow, and it is interpreted as a

measure of illiquidity. To derive the expression of , ,  , we solve the profit maximization problem

as well as a signal extraction problem for informed traders. Profit maximization gives the following

demand function

                                       E(| , ) -                       
                             ( , ) =                ,                       ,                            (3)
                                        + Var(| , )                     - 1
  and a second order condition 2 + Var(| , ) > 0. The signal extraction problem gives a form

of conditional expectation and conditional variance8

                                                 (1 - )    
                                    E(| , ) =            +  ,
                                                           
                              -1
                                  Var(| , ) = ( +  + ( - 1) )-1 ,



  7
    The derivation of the equilibrium follows Theorem 4.1, 5.1 and 5.2 of Kyle (1989). The proofs of these
theorems are provided by Kyle (1989), and we do not repeat the details.
  8
    Each trader receives their own signal and prices, and they can extract that is correlated with the future
return but independent of the own signal. Applying normal-normal update, we can obtain the results. See
Theorem 4.1 in Kyle (1989) for more detailed derivation.
                                                      9
                                                  ( - 1) 2
                                                         2
                                                               .                                    (4)
                                              ( - 1) 2 +   

      is a measure of informational efficiency of the price. E() = 0 leads  = 0. Thus,  and 

are a function of  . Plugging these expressions into the demand function and matching the

strategic constants  and  with the conjecture (1), we obtain

                                       (1 - )              - 
                                   =          ,       =          .                                  (5)
                                         +                (  + )
     The second order condition implies that the denominator of  is positive even if  were to be

negative.  is less than 1 and  is positive by their definitions. Thus  > 0. Substituting out

,  , , these two equations are combined to yield a cubic equation for the endogenous variable

 ,

                                     2       2   ( - 2)2 2
                                                         
                              3 +         +    -           = 0.                                     (6)
                                     - 1    - 1   ( - 1)2
     By definition, all the coefficients on  are positive, and the constant term is negative. Thus, the

left-hand side of equation (6) is monotonically increasing in  if  > 0, and a unique solution

exists for   3. By determining  , we obtain the solutions of other endogenous variables. From

equation (5),  is a function of  and exogenous parameters. Rewriting (5) with the definition

of  yields

                                                1     
                                            =      1 -                                              (7)
                                                 (     )
     The signal extraction problem (4) implies that 1 -  / means the goodness of fit of the

regression for  on  and . Substituting out  and  from equation (5), we find that  is a

function of  and exogenous parameters.

     Monopolistic competition.    Based on this baseline model, if we further assume  =  / for

some constant  , then, for large  , an informed speculator's signal becomes so noisy that it

contains only a small amount of information. Even with this situation, each informed trader still

executes their tiny monopolistic power, and in this sense, this is a monopolistic competition model.
                                                    10
We regard this specification fits more to reality: since each trader has similar views on the

announcement results, an increasing number of informed traders does not necessarily lead to more

information in the market. We set this monopolistic competition model as a benchmark. Assuming

 =  / , equation (6) is now rewritten:
                                      2             2 2
                             3    2           ( - 2) 
                           +       +         - 2        = 0.                                                (8)
                              - 1    ( - 1)    ( - 1)2
  Still, we can find a unique solution for  .


2.2 Implication of the model
  Measures of market quality. Two endogenous variables are of our interest regarding market

quality: liquidity and price discovery. Liquidity is defined as the inverse of price impact  per unit

of unexpected order flow; it is easy to find its empirical equivalent. We use effective bid-ask spread

as an empirical proxy of illiquidity. Although this model does not explicitly define bid-ask spread,

( = 1) - ( = -1) = 2 can be regarded as the equivalent of an effective bid-ask spread.9 Note

that  is a measure of illiquidity rather than liquidity. We use the inverse of it for the definition

of the measure of liquidity.

  Price discovery is measured as

                                                   Var( - )
                                                                                                            (9)
                                                     Var()
  Here we employ  -  instead of , in order to omit the effect of noise trading; we can interpret

 -  a mid-price rather than a transaction price. 10 Note that, substituting out  with (2) ,

taking a variance and using equation (7), we obtain the expression of  as a function of 2 




  9
    This follows the standard treatment which can be found in, for example, Bondarenko (2001).
  10
     This definition of price discovery appears that it is defined on price levels. But  and  are interpreted as
the deviation from their unconditional expectation so that we can regard the measure as being based on returns:
Var(--E[])
 Var(-E[])
            .
                                                       11
                                2
1 -  / :  = (1 +  / )(2 ) . Thus, the price discovery measure reflects each trader's power

to predict the future return.

  Determinants of market quality. Two exogenous parameters are of interest regarding the

determinants of market quality: total precision of informed traders' information  , and the

number of informed traders  .

  Empirically, we use the R-squared measure, a goodness of fit of the surprise of news for predicting

the after-the-news return, as a proxy for  . We explore comparative statics for  =  instead

of directly investigating 2 , because 2 is endogenously obtained in the model. The relation

between these two elements are obtained as follows. Knowing the average expectation of the

informed traders,     +   / , we can calculate the predictive power as 2
                                                                       -,  1 -

         -1 = 1 -  /( +  ). Thus, keeping other exogenous variables constant, an exogenous
 /Var (|)

increase in 2
            -, translates into an increase of  =  . Our conjecture is that the predictive

power of the news surprise to after-the-news return is parallel with 2
                                                                     -, , allowing us to proxy

the sum of informed trader's precision  .

  Traders are assumed to trade according to their interpretation of the news just after the

announcements; the number of informed traders  is regarded as the number of market

participants. We use quote counts as a proxy for  .

  Regarding these variables, implications of the model are summarized in the following propositions.

Proposition 1. Comparative statics for the number of informed traders
  In the monopolistic competition model,
                           2
                    ( - 1)   
     ()  :  < 0   <          .
                     2( - 2)
                               2
                       ( - 1)    
    ()  :      < 0   <           .
                        2( - 2)


  Proof. Corollary 1 and 2.

                                                  12
 The first statement is straightforward; liquidity improves as  becomes larger. This is ascribed

to fist, the direct effect of thicker demand/supply curve, and second, a reduction of asymmetric

information. The first effect can be obtained because  , the aggregate order aggressiveness,

increases according to  . The second effect is obtained from the second statement.

 The seconds statement means that an increase in  delay the price discover. This is because

 , the total information obtained from own signal and the signal extraction from price, decreases
                                                      2
of      (Lemma 3). Since  = (1 +  / )(2 ) = (1 +  / )(1 -  / )2 ,                     changes in

proportion to  . The information obtained from own signal  becomes small because of the

assumption of fixed total information,  =  / . Signal extraction improves as  increases

(Lemma 2), but it does not overcome this first effect. Therefore,  can be increasing in  when

we do not assume monopolistic competition model. We test this implication in section 4.2.

 In short, in the monopolistic competition model, informed traders are more like uninformed

traders because their private information becomes trivial. As a result, an increase in the number

of informed traders results in the similar outcome to an increase of uninformed traders.

Proposition 2. Comparative statics for the precision of signal 
 In the monopolistic competition model,
                  2                                                              
    ()  :    ,  ,   ,                                                             < 0.
                                                                                 
                                                                   
       ,     ,                                                      > 0.
                                                                   
                         
    ()  :                 > 0.
                         


 Proof. Lemma 7 and 8.




                                                 13
    The second statement is straighthood; more precise signal makes traders more aggressive in their

information-based trading, which leads to more informative prices, followed by better price

discoveries.

    For obtaining the intuition for the first statement, it is useful to consider two extreme cases;11

when 2 is close to one and when 2 is much smaller. When 2 is close to one (and  is very

large), traders are more certain about the true fundamental and they feel less risky to trade. As a

result, they tend to provide liquidity (i.e.,  becomes small). When 2 is much smaller, traders

are more sensitive to the other trader's private information and they feel riskier to trade. As a

result, they tend to provide less liquidity (i.e.,  becomes large). Thus, an increase of  (and

2 ) has two opposite effects on liquidity depending on the levels of exogenous parameters and 

itself. It is an empirical question whether the liquidity is increasing in  or not, which will be

examined numerically in section 4.2.



In summary, price discovery will be facilitated by the informativeness of the private signal

(Proposition 2-(ii)). The effect of the number of traders, the implications of Proposition 1-(i) and

1-(ii), can depend on parameters level but they are valid in a fairly wide range of parameters.

Effect on liquidity, or Proposition 2-(i), may be sensitive to the value of exogenous parameters. In

section 4.2, we will match exogenous parameters to data, and demonstrate the comparative statics

numerically.


3         Empirical Analysis
Our empirical analysis is implemented as follows. First, we estimate the impact of news surprise

on after-the-announcement Forex returns. A key finding on this estimation is that the predictive

power of news to future Forex returns is time-varying. As we mentioned in section 2.2, the



    11
         We gratefully acknowledge that this intuition is suggested by Martin Evans.
                                                          14
predictive power can be interpreted as a proxy of precision of trader's private information, which

is an important determinant of price discovery. For second-step regressions, we regress the price

discovery measure and liquidity recovery measures on such theoretically motivated determinants,

time trend, and control variables. We can interpret the results based on the theoretical model, and

the coefficients on the time trend can be interpreted as market quality improvements that cannot

be explained by the factors considered in the regression model.


3.1 High-Frequency data
  In this section, we describe the dataset and its handling. Our main dataset includes firm (ready

to transact) quotes and actual deal prices and volumes within the trading platform of ICAP EBS.12

The data cover the quotes and transactions from January 1998 to December 2017, but the extent

of details depend on the technical development of the platform. From January 1998 to December

2005, EBS provides "EBS Ticker Historical Data," which records prices of deals and best quotes;

and from January 2006 to December 2017, it provides EBS Level-5 data, which additionally record

deal volumes as well as information regarding limit order book. The entire dataset allows us to

examine long-term changes in Forex market quality, and recent detailed data are utilized to

examine the market quality determinants.

  ICAP EBS has broadened the universe of currency pairs over years, but we focus on EUR/USD

for this analysis. Unless otherwise noted, all the empirical results are in EUR/USD. As a robustness

check, we will use seven other currency pairs to execute panel regressions; AUD/USD, GBP/USD,

NZD/USD, USD/CAD, USD/CHF, USD/CNH, and USD/JPY.



  12
     Market participants in the interbank market are mostly financial institutions. In the literature of Forex
market microstructure (e.g., Evans and Lyons (1999)), order flows sometimes refer to "customer" order flows
which is submitted to such financial institutions from non-financial companies. In our dataset, such orders are
not available. All the transactions are among traders who has a contract to participate in the EBS interbank
market.


                                                       15
  Data on deals.     Order submission and matching in the actual trading environment is in real-

time, but the recording omits certain deals that show multiple transactions within a certain time

slice. The observation at time-stamp  contains the deals that occur between  - 1 and . The

minimum time slice, the difference between  - 1 and , varies from a second (in earlier years in

the sample) to 100 milliseconds (recent years in the sample) depending on the period. 13 The

transaction prices are the most extreme ones (highest paid and lowest given) during the time slice.

The minimum tick size also varies depending on the period.14

  Data on quotes. The quote information contains the limit order prices and volumes up to ten

steps (tenth best) of the limit order book. The observation is a snapshot of the limit order book,

which is recorded every time when any change occurs in the book. The bid-ask spread is calculated

based on the best bid and ask prices. The dataset also contains quote counts, the number of traders

who are submitting limit orders at each step of the book. Note that, the data acquisition occurs

for each side of the book separately; for some time, only one-side of the book is updated. In this

analysis, for making correct filtration for each observation, we use the sample when the both sides

of the book update simultaneously.

  There are some caveats regarding the dataset. First, EBS allows negative spreads: the best ask

price can be lower than the best bid price. This situation happens when the two entities in the

book do not have credit lines between them. An arbitrage opportunity for this negative spread is

discussed in Ito et al. (2012). Second, when an observation has both a deal and a quote in the same

time slice, the dataset does not specify the order of each transaction. We need to estimate the

order of transactions. Lastly, the minimum time slice in the EBS market is 100 milliseconds, which


  13
     The grid of time-slices has changed during the following periods: "one second" before January 22, 2008, "a
quarter-second" from January 22, 2008 to August 31, 2009, and "a 100 milliseconds" from August 31, 2009 to
present.
  14
     The minimum tick size was traditionally four decimal places for EUR/USD (or 0.1 cent), which is called
one pip. It was decimalized (i.e., five decimals, 0.01 cent) on March 7, 2011 and then rolled back to half pips
after September 24, 2012.
                                                       16
is coarser than that of the U.S. equity market. With this wide time grid, it is difficult to construct

high-frequency trading activity. Chordia, Green, and Kottimukkalur (2018) examine the price

discovery of 100-millisecond returns against two-second returns. For studying the influence of high-

frequency traders in the Forex market, we need a more detailed dataset. We leave it for future

research.

  Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics of the data around macro announcements.



                                             [Table 1 is inserted here]



  In recent years, the frequency of quote revision has increased, but it is partly due to technical

developments in data acquisition that occurred in 2008. After 2008, the frequency is mostly flat.

Quote counts and depth dropped in 2011, but again, this is ascribed to the changes in minimum

tick size (from 0.1 cent to 0.01 cent, effective from March 2011). Subsequent recovery is also

explained by the rollback of minimum tick size (from 0.01 cent to 0.5 cent, effective from

September 2012). Such discontinuous changes in data potentially affect our analysis. For its

treatment, we divided the quote counts and depth by the max offer limit order price minus the

min of the bid limit order price.

  Another notable change is that the deal volume decreases in recent years. This is not only in

the ICAP EBS market, but also in a BIS Central Bank Survey that shows that the OTC forex

exchange turnover of EUR/USD also dropped globally. BIS survey points heightened activity in

Japanese yen against the background of monetary policy developments (BIS Triennial Central

Bank Survey 2016).15 The level of liquidity, measured by bid-ask spread and price impact, barely

shows time trends, but a relative imbalance of order flows rose after 2014.




  15
       https://www.bis.org/publ/rpfx16.htm
                                                        17
3.2 News announcements
    Government agencies in the U.S., Japan, and the EU announce macroeconomic statistics (e.g.

GDP, unemployment, inflation rate and others) at a pre-announced day and time. Some are

monthly; some are quarterly. While some announcements are published when the US equity

markets are closed, Forex markets are open 24-hour a day, and we can obtain a rich sample of the

market reaction to the news.

    For gauging the market reaction, we define a "surprise" part of the announcement. For that, a

pre-announcement expectation to each news is needed. Several days before the announcement,

Bloomberg compiles "forecasts" by market participants and discloses the median. In accordance

with these forecasts, we define the news surprise as
                                            ,actual - ,forecast
                                                                       ,                                   (10)
                                        Std-1 (,actual - ,forecast )
    where  is a certain announced statistic made in public at time .16 The denominator is a

standard deviation of the surprise estimated by using observations up to  - 1. This is implemented

by a rolling estimate with 12-period windows.

    Impact of surprise on returns.        First, we regress 10-minute after-the-news returns on the

surprises of news:17
                                                      
                                  (,  + 600) =              (, ) + (, ).                                   (11)
                                                     
                                                     =1

·        (, ) pins down each announcement timing indexed by date  and its intraday time .  is

         in intraday seconds from 00:00 New York time.



    16
     In this paper, timing of each announcement is indexed by t. Roughly, t corresponds to announcement day,
but sometimes there are multiple news announcements in the same day. Furthermore, there is more than one
news at the same t. We regard multiple news at the same time as one sample chunk and do not duplicate the
sample by the number of simultaneous news.
  17
     A similar regression analysis can be found in literature: Andersen et al. (2003), Hashimoto and Ito (2010),
Fatum, Hutchison, and Wu (2012), Cheung, Fatum, and Yamamoto (2019), Andersen et al. (2007).
                                                         18
·        (,  + 600): exchange rate return (log-difference) in basis points, from time  to  + 600

         on day . The rate is defined by mid-quotes.

·         (, ): surprise of i-th macroeconomic news statistics on day  at time , defined as (10). If

         there are no news on i-th statistics, it takes zero.

·        : the number of different indicators. We consider total  = 48 indicators, most of them are

         consistently available since 1998.18

·        The coefficients are estimated by OLS with Newey-West standard errors (lag of 10).

    In this estimation, we extract 10-minute after-the-news returns to define the dependent

variable.19 Another way to estimate the impact is to use all the transaction data and control for

intraday seasonality, as Andersen et al. (2007) implemented. In our study, we limit the sample

around the announcements because the sample size of high-frequency data tends to be too large.

    After the regression, using the absolute value of the regression residuals, Andersen et al. (2007)

estimate a time-series model for the disturbance volatility for each asset (i.e., two-step weighted

least squares procedure). Similarly, we utilize the residual component for defining price discovery,

which will be described in section 3.4. The statistical model in Andersen et al. (2007) explains the

volatility with its own lags, news surprise, and calender time patterns. In contrast, we focus on the

dynamics of volatility, and investigate economic determinants for the dynamics and its

development over time.

    The regression results are summarized in Table 2, which is associated with the median of absolute

after-the-news returns and the number of quote revisions.




    18
     Note that Chicago PMI and U. of Michigan Sentiment data are systematically released early to subscribers.
In this research, however, omitting these indicators has little effect on the results, and particular treatments are
not made for overall estimates.
  19
     We check the average path of prices after the announcement (Figure 7) and determined that 10 minutes is
appropriate. At this point, Evans and Lyons (2008) argues that it takes more than days for the Forex price to
integrate the news contents. In our paper, we limit the duration for focusing on microstructure of the market.
                                                         19
                                          [Table 2 is inserted here]



  The qualitative results are consistent with existing literature; the most influential statistics

include labor statistics (changes in non-farm payroll and unemployment rate), GDP statistics

(advance estimate), and some leading and sentiment indicators such as ISM Manufacturing and

consumer confidence, etc. After the announcement of such influential statistics, the magnitude of

jumps in the forex rates and quote revisions tend to become large.

  As Fatum, Hutchison, and Wu (2012) report, the impact of the news on forex rates depends on

the macro-financial environment. So does the explanatory power of the news on forex rates. To

show this, we executed a rolling regression of (11) and presented the results in the last column in

Table 1. After the global financial crisis, predictability was sluggish until 2013.


3.3 Market quality measures
  Price discovery and liquidity recovery.        As introduced in equation (9), we measure the price

discovery as a variance ratio:

                                               Var ((,  + ))
                                      ,      =                  .                                        (12)
                                               Var ( (,  +  ) )
   and  maintain    .20 This definition is essentially the same as the one used in Chordia,

Green, and Kottimukkalur (2018), where they use a ratio of absolute return for measuring the

speed of market reaction. We take a square root of the variance ratio to match the definition based

on absolute returns.




  20
     Alternatively, we can use the weighted price contribution (WPC), and the R-squared of unbiasedness
regressions. The statistical property of each measure is examined by van Bommel (2011). We use variance ratio
because its theoretical equivalent is easily available. In fact, the autocorrelation of return seems small (as
described in Figure 7 and the potential bias of using WPC may not be large.
                                                      20
  This variance ratio gauges the convergence of volatility clustering. In the literature, Andersen et

al. (2007) investigate the residual of the regression (11) rather than using the sequence of raw

returns. Following this, we utilize the prediction by (11) for defining price discovery for eliminating

potential confusion of interpretations, which will be specified in next section.

  We measure liquidity recovery as an inverse of bid-ask spreads (BAS):

                                                  (,  + ) -1
                                    , = E                     .                                            (13)
                                                [{(,  +  )} ]

  We take the inverse because a bid-ask spread is a measure of illiquidity rather than liquidity.

Among many different liquidity measures, we employ bid-ask spread because (i) it needs only

quotes information and constructing long-term statistics is easy; the other measures such as depth

and price impacts need limit order book or transaction volume information, which is not available

before 2006. And (ii) other popular descriptive liquidity measures such as depth are not stable

after announcements. Bid-ask spread, however, may represent only a part of liquidity. In the

regression analysis in later sections, we employ volume-weighted average of limit prices to reflect

the information of limit order book.

  Both measures approach one as    ; each path shows the speed of price discovery and

liquidity recovery. Note that price discovery corresponds to the settlement of volatility clustering,

but it does not mean return predictability.

   Figure 3 plots the year-by-year path of each.21 We can observe that liquidity recovery is much

faster than price discovery.



                                          [Figure 3 is inserted here]



  21
     Parameterization: for price discovery, we set T=600; for liquidity recovery, we set T=300. For a comparison
with Chordia, Green, and Kottimukkalur (2018), we show the time-series change of price discovery using raw
returns rather than residual. For liquidity, we use effective bid-ask spread rather than volume-weighted bid-
ask spread, this is due to data availability. Limit order book information is only available after 2006.
                                                       21
  Figure 3 shows that both measures do not necessarily improve over time. For price discovery,

the slowest year is 2011 and the fastest year is 2003 and 2017. For liquidity recovery, most years

are slower than the year 2011. To emphasize this point, we provide Figure 1, which shows the

year-over-year changes in both measures. In fact, there is little evidence that both measures

improve over time.


3.4 Regression analysis
  Benchmark specification.    Based on the observation above, our next question is (i) what the

determinant of such market quality is, and (ii) whether the market quality has improved, after

taking such elements into account. As we discussed theoretically, we consider two key drivers as

determinants: the number of traders and the precision of the trader's private information. The

coefficients on time trend are considered to be market quality developments.

  For the proxy of the number of traders, we use quote counts: the number of traders submitting

limit orders. As Proposition 1 suggests, they provide liquidity, but whether it contributes to price

discovery depends on the quality of private information. The empirical specification is a simple

linear regression model, with its LHS including the price discovery measure or the liquidity recovery

measure. Estimated coefficients can be compared with Proposition 1-(i) and 1-(ii). The liquidity

should be positively related to the number of traders. If traders behave like an uninformed trader,

price discovery is negatively related to the number of traders.

  The precision of the trader's private information is proxied by the R-squared measure. If traders

have rich information that helps in predicting the impact on Forex rates, price discovery would be

fast. As we have mentioned in section 3.2, the explanatory power of the news surprise for the Forex

return depends on the monetary and macroeconomic situation, and it is time-varying. In fact, a

rolling regression of equation (11) produces time-varying R-squared (the result is available in


                                                  22
Table 1), which can be regarded as a proxy for the precision of the trader's private information.22

The precision of information is positively correlated with the speed of price discovery after the

announcement (Proposition 2-(ii)), but it's effect on liquidity depends on other variables

(Proposition 2-(i)).

 Corrections on the market quality measures.            A possible criticism to use the price discovery

measure (12) is that the Bloomberg survey is considered as public information and the speed of

convergence can be explained by a simple market efficiency argument. Also, for implementing

regression analysis, the measure must be realized at each macro announcement. In order to

circumvent these problems, we introduce a modified definition of price discovery measure as follows.

                                              |(,  + ) -   (,  +  )|
                                   ,, =                              ,
                                              |(,  +  ) -  (,  +  )|

  where  is the prediction by the equation (11); we estimated (11) by rolling regression with

1,000 overlapping windows. The measure is calculated for each announcement time; it is a realized

measure for previous definition (12) . Here we set  = 600 , because of the observation that

convergence of price ceases in 10 minutes on average (see Figure 7 for the average price path after

the announcement).

  For liquidity recovery measure, we employ volume-weighted bid-ask spread (VWBAS) instead

of bid-ask spread. VWBAS is defined as a spread of bid and ask prices where each bid (ask) price

is an average of limit bid (ask) prices weighted by their limit order volumes. With VWBAS, we

can exploit the information of limit order book. Now, the liquidity recovery measure is defined as

                                                (,  + ) -1
                                    ,, =       {(,  +  )}

  We set  = 300. The bid-ask spread is affected by the tick size changes implemented in 2011

and 2012, but the effects can be offset by taking the ratio of spreads at different times.


  22
     R-squared measure is calculated for news-by-news basis to avoid non-observatory cases. Please refer to the
caption of Table 4 for the detailed construction.
                                                       23
  Time trend. In the regression equation, we assume a linear time trend which is scaled from zero

to one. The coefficient on the trend can be interpreted as improvements of market quality that

cannot be ascribed to the other independent variables.

  Control variables.         For independent variables, other than the two proxies and time trend

introduced above, we also add control variables: information on the limit order books (the depth

and frequency of quote revisions are both normalized by tick size23), the magnitude of news surprises,

and the year dummies for 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2012,24 order imbalance and cumulative volumes.

The time-gap of the tick-by-tick data is not equal. For constructing these variables, we interpolated

the data by replacing the missing variables with their last observances. Sampling timing is as

follows. The quote counts and depth are a snapshot variable at (,  + ), the quote revision is the

sum of [(,  - 15min, (,  + 15min)], and the order imbalance and cumulative volumes are the sum

of [(, ), (,  + )]. The correlation coefficients of independent variables are presented in Table 3.25



                                             [Table 3 is inserted here]



  Regression results and interpretations. The regression results are presented in Table 4 and

Table 5. For a robustness check, we tried different k, the duration defining the snapshot of price

discovery and liquidity recovery measure. As Scholtus, Van Dijk, and Frijns (2014) stress, the

speed matters for trading based on news, and the demography of market participants may change

in different time slice k. In the last column in each table, we also presented a result without controls.




  23
       See section 3.1 for this treatment.
  24
       These years had volatile macroeconomic conditions in the wake of the Global Financial Crisis.
  25
     We changed the timing of the sampling of quote counts and depth, and obtain qualitatively the same results.
These variables vary symmetrically between before and after the announcement; they gradually decrease toward
the announcements, and gradually recover after the announcements.
                                                        24
                               [Table 4 and Table 5 are inserted here]



  In Table 4, the regression for price discovery, the coefficients on R-squared measures are

significantly positive, but those of quote counts are negative. Conversely, in Table 5, the regression

for liquidity recovery, the coefficients on R-squared measures tend to be negative, but those of

quote counts are positive significant. These results hold true regardless of the inclusion of controls,

but the significance may depend on time slice k; typically, the coefficients tend to be less significant

for large k. This tendency is natural because price movement approaches to more like random walk

as k becomes large. Even if we adjust this by discounting the denominator of the measures by k,

we can obtain qualitatively the same results.

  As we discussed in section 2.2, the R-squared measure represents asymmetric information in the

market. When it is large, informed traders have a greater informational advantage regarding the

true reaction of price to the news. Hence, the incorporation of information into prices is more rapid

(or  / > 0), but uninformed traders are reluctant to trade, and the liquidity decreases (or

/ < 0). If each informed trader has a distinguished interpretation of news, the increase in

traders would facilitate price discovery; but this is not the case. Conversely to this conjecture, the

increase in the number of traders delays price discovery (or  / < 0), implying that informed

traders have poor information and act more like uninformed traders.

   The trend coefficient is positive and statistically significant for price discovery but is negative

significant for liquidity recovery. The trend variable is normalized by the total time period, and it

lets us know the percentage changes in price discovery/liquidity recovery that is not ascribed to

the variables considered in this regression. From 2006 to 2017, the improvement in the speed of

price discovery is up by about 24% points at maximum, but liquidity recovery is down by about

28% points at maximum. Note that each independent variable has its own trend component, as

shown in Table 3. The regression coefficient on trend is strongly affected by the other independent

                                                   25
variables. For an alternative analysis, not reported here, we implemented the regression with de-

trended independent variable. We can obtain the similar results for each independent variable and

overall qualitative results do not change, but the magnitude of trend coefficients becomes less than

ten.

    For control variables, the pattern of coefficients is not very consistent between Table 4 and Table

5. The number of quote revisions negatively affects both measures. This is somewhat surprising

because it implies that an active trading environment does not necessarily improve market quality.

The order-imbalance per total deal volumes, usually regarded as another measure of informed

trading,26 positively affects price discovery, which is consistent with theoretical intuition. But its

influence on liquidity is weak.

    Overall, faster price discovery does not necessarily imply faster liquidity recovery, and vice versa.

Since the R-squared measure and quote counts affect each measure in the opposite direction, a

negative correlation between price discovery and liquidity is a possibility. In fact, time series plots

in Table 1 consistently support this observation.

    Our result may be contrasted to the existing literature in that high-frequency algorithmic traders

are considered to enhance both price discovery and liquidity provision (Brogaard, Hendershott,

and Riordan (2014), Chordia, Green, and Kottimukkalur (2018)). Because our dataset does not

contain clear identification of high-frequency traders, our results, unfortunately, do not necessarily

directly describe the behavior of high-frequency traders. But the implication of our empirical result

suggests that the informational advantage of fast-moving traders should not be taken for granted.



4         Robustness Analysis




    26
         Kaul, Lei, and Stoffman (2008) and Easley, O'Hara, and Lopez de Prado (2012).
                                                         26
  In this section, we conduct supplemental analyses that support the robustness of the results in

section 3. First, we show extended regression analyses on price discovery. Second, we examine

numerical experiments of the theoretical model. Lastly, we check whether there is market

inefficiency after news announcements.


4.1 Extended analyses on price discovery
  Some arguments should be discussed to justify the robustness of the results in section 3.4. First,

it is questioned whether the technological development of the EBS matching system can improve

price discovery or not. The time trend in Table 4 is positive, implying that such an association is

likely. But this can be a natural consequence of the increase in transaction activity. In the

regression, we add the number of quote revisions to control activity effects. A more direct way to

establish a control is to use tick-time instead of calendar time for constructing the dataset.27

  Second, we check whether news types affect the regression results. Some news announcements,

such as labor statistics, are far more influential to the forex rates, as market participants pay more

attention. It is possible that market reactions may also differ.

  Third, we check whether these empirical results are applicable to other currencies than

EUR/USD. To investigate this, we expand the universe of currency pairs to include seven other

USD currency pairs and attempt a panel regression analysis.28

  Price discovery in tick-time.     The setup for a regression model is identical to that in section 3.4
                                                                                  |(,+)-  (,+ )|
except that the price discovery measure is defined based on tick-time:                    (,+ )|
                                                                                                 ,      where
                                                                                  |(,+ )-

the numerator is now indexed by tick-time n from the announcement time (, ). Thus, we measure

the speed of price discovery not by the calendar time but by the number of quote revisions. With




  27
     A similar idea can be found in Barclay and Hendershott (2003). They extend the weighted-price contribution,
a standard measure for price discovery, by normalizing it via the number of transactions.
  28
     We stick to USD pairs because US macro news affects the market the most.
                                                       27
this formulation, we can measure the ability of price discovery on a per-transaction basis. The

regression results are shown in Table 6.



                                       [Table 6 is inserted here]



  The results are similar to that of Table 4, the calendar-time regression. R-squared measures have

a positive impact on the price discovery process, and quote counts have a negative impact. The

coefficients on time trends are slightly smaller in their magnitude but still positive and significant,

indicating that the capacity of improving price discovery has moderately increased.

  News types.    Do the speed of price discovery and liquidity recovery differ for different news

types? We implement regressions with news-type dummy which is interacted with three main

determinants. To this aim, two major news announcements are selected: labor statistics

announcement and GDP (advance estimate) which are the most influential to the changes in forex

rates (see Table 2).



                                       [Table 7 is inserted here]



  The regression results are presented in Table 7. For three determinants, R-squared measures,

quote count, and time trend, implications for quote count and time trend are unchanged from the

previous regression results. In fact, they tend to be more exaggerated in these news announcements:

larger quote counts make price discovery much slower and make liquidity recovery much quicker;

and in recent years, price discovery becomes much faster but liquidity recovery much slower.

   Coefficients on R-squared measures, however, show opposite signs to the non-dummy

coefficients. GDP dummies are not significant, but Labor statistics dummies are significant. This




                                                   28
suggests that higher predictive power leads to slower price discovery and better liquidity as if

traders are uninformed.



  Price discovery: A panel regression analysis.         We apply the same analysis to other seven

currency pairs: AUD/USD, GBP/USD, NZD/USD, USD/CAD, USD/CHF, USD/CNH, and

USD/JPY.



                                       [Figure 4 is inserted here]



  Figure 4 corresponds to the analysis in Figure 1 and Table 4. The bottom panel is the result of

a fixed effect panel regression for the speed of price discovery. For readability, we only present a

plot of the t-statistics of independent variables in different k-sec samples.

  Similar to the results in Table 4, R-squared measures have large positive coefficients, and quote

counts have large negative ones. The time trend variable is positive. Thus, we can confirm that

major findings are still valid. Contrary to the results in EUR/USD, the number of quote revisions

is positive in this panel regression. This indicates that the cross-sectional differences for price

discovery in major currency pairs are faster than those for minor currency pairs.

  The top two panels plot the time-series development of price discovery and liquidity recovery for

each currency pair. We can observe that the development of market qualities in EUR/USD is in

line with other currency pairs: price discovery has been improving but experienced a sluggish

movement between 2009 and 2012. Liquidity recovery tends to be slow in recent years for all pairs

except for an outlier: USD/CNH. As indicated by the regression results, the major currency pairs

tend to show faster price discovery, but EUR/USD does not necessarily show the best market

quality. As observed in EUR/USD, the negative correlation between price discovery and liquidity

recovery is also observed in these panels.


                                                   29
4.2 Numerical experiments
  Our empirical findings are summarized as follows. After macro announcements,

  ·    the increase in the number of traders does not improve price discovery but increases

       liquidity.

  ·    the higher explanatory power of the news for after-the-announcement returns helps price

       discovery but reduces liquidity.

  But the theoretical analysis shows that some of the results depend on the level of parameter

values and the assumption of monopolistic competition. To check whether the theory correctly

predicts the empirical results, we conduct numerical experiments on these findings.



  Numerical experiments on price discovery.          First, we explore how the assumption of

monopolistic competition changes the relationships between the number of traders and price

discovery.    For a numerical experiment, we set up a smooth transition from the monopolistic

competition case to the imperfect competition case. The precision of interpretation noise  is now

replaced as
                                                                         1
                     (, ) = ()       + (1 - ())  ,        () =                    .
                                 fix                             1 + exp(-( -  ))
  Here, fix = 4 and  = 5 are assumed to be fixed. k is a parameter that shifts the information

structure from a monopolistic competition case (i.e.,  () =  / when  = -) toward an

imperfect competition case (i.e.,  =  /fix when  = ). Other model parameters are specified

as follows.

  ·    = 1 for normalization.

  ·    = 25-2 , which accounts for the standard deviation of the total return of 25bp.

  ·    =  × 0.5, which is set to achieve 2 = 1 -  /( +  ) = 1/3.

                                                30
  ·   2
        = 0.001 × 2
                    + 0.00005 ×  , which is set for keeping the informed trading ratio
       +  
       +   +
                    around 10%.

  These parameters are set to simulate the reality that is observed in Table 1 and Table 2. Under

this model calibration, Figure 5 plots the variance ratio, or price discovery measure,  () 

Var(() - ())/Var() as a function of  .



                                      [Figure 5 is inserted here]



  In the imperfect competition region, or when k is large, the variance ratio initially decreases, but

then increases when  becomes large. In the monopolistic competition region, or when k is small,

the variance ratio is decreasing in  , corresponding to our empirical finding. Thus, we can confirm

that the assumption of monopolistic competition is necessary to replicate the reality.



  Numerical experiments on liquidity.       Next, we check the theoretical results on liquidity.

Proposition 1 states that the liquidity is increasing in  (or price impact  is decreasing in  )
                                        2
if  is sufficiently small compared with   . On the other hand, as in proposition 2, the changes

in price impact with respect to  can depend on parameter values. Figure 6 shows the simulation

result with the same parameter setting as above except for  ; it plots the inverse of , or a

measure of liquidity, as a function of  with different parameter values of  . Now that,  =

 × 0.5 × , and  = 0.5, 1.0,  , 5.0.



                                      [Figure 6 is inserted here]



Liquidity increases in  as the theory suggests, but it is not monotonic with respect to the changes

in the precision of noise  . When  is small, the increase of  results in the improvement of

                                                  31
liquidity; when  is large, the effect reverses. Empirically, we observe the latter effect, namely, it

applies to the upper-right region, but their significances were not very sounding. In fact, the

numerical analysis shows that the effect of  on liquidity might be sensitive to the parameter

values.

4.3 Predictability of after-the-news return
  Post-earnings announcement drift is a well-known anomaly in stock markets (Bernard and

Thomas (1989)). Also, a significant autocorrelation of return potentially biases the estimation of

variance ratio (van Bommel (2011)). In this section, we examine whether such a drift, or a positive

autocorrelation of returns, is observed after the macro announcement in the forex market. This is

used to determine the time interval to calculate after-the-news return.

  Testing methodology is straightforward: calculating cumulative returns and autocorrelation of

returns. Following the standard methodology for showing the post-announcement drift, we can

calculate the cumulative return conditional on news surprise. Each announcement sample is

stratified into seven bins by their surprise, and then the cumulative return from -20 minutes to +3

hours from the announcement is calculated. An alternative method is to calculate the simple

autocorrelation of return after announcements as Corr ((,  + ) - (, ), (,  + 3hours) -

(,  + )),  = 100sec, 200sec, . The autocorrelation is calculated by each year sample. Figure 7

describes the two results.



                                     [Figure 7 is inserted here]



  The results indicate that there is little evidence of post-announcement drift: the price path

conditional on news surprise does not have a clear drift. Rather, there is a reversal after the

announcements when the magnitude of news surprise is small. In fact, the autocorrelation shows a


                                                  32
mild negative correlation. For the overall sample, the autocorrelation is around -5%. This result,

however, claims the absence of a drift on average, and does not state the absence of drift conditional

on the arrival rate of informed traders (Vega (2006)). Thus, we can confirm the absence of apparent

inefficiency after the news announcement; a more precise investigation is left for future research.


5      Conclusion
    In the paper, we investigate the forex market reaction to macro announcements, both in pricing

and liquidity, and examine whether the market quality has improved over time. Novelties of our

research are three-fold: first, data are long-term (from 1999 to 2017) as well as high-frequency

(tick-by-tick transaction data); second, the market impact of news is studied with particular focus

on the issues of market quality; and third, the empirical methodology and interpretation are fully

grounded in a classical market microstructure theory.

    Overall, empirical evidence shows that market quality in the forex market has not necessarily

improved in recent years: the speed of price discovery has an improving trend, but liquidity

recovery does not. Liquidity recovery was fast enough in 1999, leaving only small room for

improvement. Moreover, these two measures are negatively correlated. When some traders have

private information (or precise interpretation of the news statistics), their trades increase price

discovery but other traders are reluctant to provide liquidity to avoid risks of trading against the

informed. When most of the traders do not have private information, their trades do not contribute

to price discovery but provide liquidity. In particular, our regression analysis shows that an increase

in the number of traders does not improve price discovery just after the announcement; fast-moving

traders are likely to be uninformed. This result suggests that high-frequency trader's informational

advantage in interpreting macro statistics announcement should not be taken for granted.




                                                   33
Appendix: Proof of propositions

Lemma 1.
                                                                       
                                         > -1. If   4,                  < 0.
                                                                       
                                                                               2 2
                                                                 2         (-2) 
 Proof. Multiplying the cubic equation (8),  3 + -1
                                                 
                                                     2 + (-1)
                                                           
                                                               -            (-1)2
                                                                            2         = 0, by  3 , we obtain

                                            2               2 2
                                   3   2            ( - 2)   
                           () +      () +         -        2
                                                                = 0.                                              (14)
                                 - 1      ( - 1)     ( - 1)
 As  increases, the coefficients on the first three terms weakly decrease, while the last term increases.
                                                                        
 Therefore  should be increasing in  . Since  > 0, we obtain            
                                                                           > -1.
                                                                                                 2  2
                                                                                 2          (-2)
  Next, applying the implicit function theorem to  (, )   3 + -1
                                                              
                                                                  2 + (-1)
                                                                        
                                                                            -                      
                                                                                             2 (-1)2
                                                                                                        = 0, we have

                         -1                       2         2          2 2
                /                    2   (2 - 1)         (-3 + 9 - 4) 
            =-    =-        -          -               -                     ,                                    (15)
                /    (  ) ( ( - 1)2         2 ( - 1)2        3 ( - 1)3     )
                    2         2 
where   
           = 3 2 + -1
                           
                       + (-1)  > 0 is straightforwardly obtained because  > 0. Using  (, ) = 0, the last

term of  / is substituted out. The resulting expression is a polynomial of  without constant terms, and
                                                                                                     
each coefficient of  is greater than zero if   4. Thus, we have  / > 0 if   4, and                   
                                                                                                           < 0 can be

obtained. 

  Regarding Lemma 1, the equation for  in (5) indicates why the increase of  results in a decrease of  .

There are two channels through which  affects the behavior of traders; its effect on liquidity (which is

represented by  in  ) and price informativeness (which is represented by  and ). The liquidity channel is

straightforward. Because the aggregate demand/supply function is linear in  , the increase of  makes the

price inelastic with respect to the unit order flow: improvement of liquidity. In the imperfect competition model,

when the market is more liquid (or the price is less elastic to the order flow), the traders become more eager to

trade, i.e.,  increases (this is implied by equation (5)).

  The price informativeness channel is more complicated because it can increase as well as decrease  . If price

becomes more informationally efficient and revealing, each trader becomes reluctant to trade on their signals,

and  decreases. Because informational efficiency is increasing in  (i.e., / > 0), the larger  reduces

 . On the other hand, if total available information increases in  , the precision of signal for traders  increases


                                                          34
accordingly. Then, trading on price information becomes less risky, traders become more aggressive, and 

increases.

If we assume a monopolistic competition model, the second effect of informational channel is shut down, because

total available information is fixed:  =  . Therefore, information channel only reduces  , which can

overcome the liquidity channel and an increase in  result in decreasing  .

Lemma 2.
                                                       
                                                        > 0.
                                                       
                                                                       (-1) 2
  Proof. Differentiating the informational efficiency parameter  =            2    with respect to  , we have
                                                                      (-1) 2 +  

                                     -2
                           2                                                         2
                                                                                       
              = ( - 1) 2 +                     2 + 2( - 1)     - ( - 1) 2 2( - 1)  -       .               (16)
              (             )             {                              (            2 )}
                                                                                    1 2          
  The first parenthesis is clearly positive. The second parenthesis reduces to (2 -  ) + 2( - 1)   . After

rearranging terms, we have

                                               /     2 - 1
                                           >0    >-        .
                                               /    2( - 1)

  Lemma 1 claims that this is satisfied in   4. 


Lemma 3.
                                                                2
                                                         ( - 1)   
                                               < 0 if  <           .
                                                          2( - 2)
  Proof. By definition (4),    +  / + ( - 1)  / . Differentiating with respect to  , we have

                                                          
                                       = - 2 +  ( - 1)  +  2 .
                                                          

  Rearranging terms, we have

                                                   1 - 
                                            <0   <      .
                                                 ( - 1)

  Substituting out / with the equation (16) , this is rewritten:
                                                  2
                                 1 -   /            
                          <0   <         < -1 +             .
                               ( - 1)  /        2( - 1)2  2

  We have the expression for  / with the equation (15). Rearranging it yields


                                                         35
                                                         2         2          2 2
                                              2   (2 - 1)       (-3 + 9 - 4) 
                                 -              -             -
                         /           ( - 1)2        ( - 1)2         2 ( - 1)3
                           =-                                             2 2
                                                                                        .
                         /                               22
                                                                   3( - 2) 
                                           -         2 -         +
                                             ( - 1)      ( - 1)      ( - 1)2
                                                                     2


  Here, the denominator is obtained by substituting 3 3 out by  (, ) = 0. Using this expression, after some

calculations, we have
                                                        2
                                             /            
                                               < -1 +
                                             /        2( - 1)2  2
                                   2                2 2            4 2
                         3      3        2   2                      
                          + (1 - )        + ( - 1)          -             < 0.
                  ( - 1)        2 ( - 1)           ( - 1)2    2 2 ( - 1)2

  Again, we substitute out the last term by using  (, ) = 0, and make sure each coefficient is negative. In
                                                                                                         
the resulting expression, the coefficients on  2 and  are clearly negative. The coefficients on  3 is   (-1)
                                                                                                               -
  2                                         2 
                                       (-1)
2(-2)
     ,   which can be negative if  <    2(-2)
                                               .   


Corollary 1.
                                                                 2
                                     2                    ( - 1)   
                                       < 0 and  > 0 if  <           .
                                                           2( - 2)

                                                                                                    2        
  Proof.    2  1 -  / is a definition. The sign of 2 / coincides with  / because                    
                                                                                                        =   2  .
                                                                                                            

                     2
  (1 +  / )(2 ) and  / > 0 immediately follow. 


Corollary 2.
                                                               2
                                                        ( - 1)   
                                              < 0 if  <           .
                                                         2( - 2)

                                                              1       
  Proof.    As equation (7) indicates, the price impact is  =   (1 -  ). Lemma 1 suggests that 1/ is
                                                                       


decreasing in  , and Corollary 1 suggests 1 -  / is also decreasing in  . Thus  is decreasing in  . 


Lemma 4.
                                                      
                                                       > 0.
                                                      
                                                                                           2  2
                                                                             2        (-2)
Proof. Applying the implicit function theorem to  (, )   3 + -1
                                                             
                                                                 2 + (-1)
                                                                       
                                                                           -                 
                                                                                       2 (-1)2
                                                                                                  = 0, we have




                                                       36
                                -1               2               2
                       /              1                   2( - 2)  
                   =-    =-                 2 +         -             .                                       (17)
                       /    (  )   (( - 1)      ( - 1)      ( - 1)2 )
                                                            2


We can show  / > 0 like Lemma 1. The last term is substitute out by  (, ) = 0, and we have

                        2 3    1    2           1      2
                     =-     +(    -       2 +        -        2  < 0,
                               - 1  - 1)      (( - 1) ( - 1)) 

 because each term in parentheses is negative and  > 0. Combining these, we obtain  / > 0. 


Lemma 5.
                                                         
                                                          > 0.
                                                         

                                    (-1) 2
  Proof. By definition (4),               2  / .   Differentiating with respect to by  and rearranging terms, we
                                  (-1) 2 +  


have
                                                    -2
                                      2                                  2
                                                                                       2
                         = ( - 1) 2 +                        2( - 1)        - ( - 1) 2  .
                         (             )                 {                             }

  The denominator is clearly positive, and it is enough to show the numerator is positive as well. Rearranging

terms, we can show that the numerator is positive if and only if

                                                       1
                                                       > .
                                                        2

In the LHS, substituting out  / by (17), we have
                                                      2                2 2
                                                               2( - 2)  
                                                 2 +         -
                                         ( - 1)      ( - 1)      2 ( - 1)2
                                =-                                       2 2
                                                                                       .                      (18)
                                                       22
                                                                 3( - 2)  
                                         -         2 -         +
                                           ( - 1)      ( - 1)      2 ( - 1)2
Note that the denominator is positive. Rearranging terms, we have
                                                        2 2            2
                       1                -         ( - 2)                  
                       >                       2 + 2        > 0   3
                                                                    +         > 0.
                        2              ( - 1)      ( - 1)2            ( - 1)

Last equivalence holds from  (, ) = 0. 

                                                                 
Note that, evaluating   
                         ,   we have    
                                           = (1 - ) (2           
                                                                    - 1). We can also argue the limiting case of  
                                                              


 and   . From equation 14), with   , we have,
                                                          2 2
                                       ()3 +  ()2 + 2
                                                        -   = 0.


                                                              37
Here  should be finite to satisfy the equality. Taking the limit for  , we obtain ()2 = 2
                                                                                           . Plugging this

into the definition of , we find that      lim      = 1/2.29
                                         ,


Lemma 6.
                                                      
                                                       > 0.
                                                      
                                           (-1)                                                       1
Proof.     Differentiating    + 
                                 +          
                                                  ( ) with respect to  , we have                
                                                                                                    =   + (-1)
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                               ( ) +

(-1) 
     
      .      Applying Lemma 5, with  > 0 by definition, we have the desired result. 


Corollary 3.
                                                      2
                                                        > 0.
                                                      

                                                                  2         
Proof.      Differentiating of 2 = (1 -  (
                                             by  , we have             =   2  .    Applying Lemma 6, we have the
                                          ))                                 


desired result.

Lemma 7.
                                                                                                 
                 ,                                                                                < 0.
                                                                                                 
                                                                                   
             ,     ,                                                                > 0.
                                                                                   
                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                            
Proof.     Since  = 2 / , taking a derivative of log  with respect to  , we have                  
                                                                                                         =        2
                                                                                                                      -     
                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                         

                                                                 2                                       
Since both  and  are positive, we examine the sign of             2
                                                                      -    
                                                                                to explore the sign of   
                                                                                                          .
                                                                        


  Because of the definition of  and  is bounded, as  goes to infinity,  / approach to 0 and 2  1.
                                                                  2                   1        2
After some calculation, ignoring exogenous constants, we have      2
                                                                           =   2  2 ~ 2   ( +   ), which goes to
                                                                                     

                                                                                                           
zero as  goes to infinity because       
                                            0 ( is increasing but bounded). Since           
                                                                                                 > 1/2,    
                                                                                                                      becomes

negative if  is sufficiently large. The cutoff value depends on other exogenous parameters.
                                                                  
  Next, we show the second statement. Fist, we show that          
                                                                      < 1. From equation (18), a direct calculation

                      -2                       -2
leads     
              < 1   - (-1)  < 0 . Plugging   = (-1)  into the cubic equation (8) , we find that

 (,   ) > 0. Since  (, ) is an increasing function of  ,  that satisfies  (, ) = 0 is less than   . Thus,


  29
       The result 0 <  < 1
                         2
                           is also stated in Kyle (1989).
                                                            38
                    -2                                                                             2              
we can show that  - (-1)  < 0 . Second, we show that we can find  that satisfies                    2
                                                                                                        >         
                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                               

            2 
Expanding    2
               ,   we have

                             2                             - 1
                               =  1 + (1 - )  2   - 1                                                          (19)
                              2  (           (       ) 1 + ( - 1))
                                       2                                                                    
  Thus, collecting terms on  for        2
                                             >       
                                                      ,   we can find the condition for  . Note that , ,    
                                                                                                               are
                                                                                                        

                         1          
not a function of  and   2
                             <      
                                       < 1 and 0 <  < 1
                                                      2
                                                        ensure the existence of such  . For a limiting case, the
                                 

                              
condition for  reduces to  > 1-    when   . 

                                        
  Note that we can also show that       
                                             approaches to zero when  goes to zero (from equation (8), (18)).


Lemma 8.
                                                           
                                                            > 0.
                                                           

                                         2                        2
Proof. Note that  = (1 +   ) (2 ) = (1 +   ) (1 -  ) . Substituting out  , we obtain
                                                  


                                                                  2
                                                      1 + ( - 1)
                                        = 1 +                       .
                                         (    ) (1 + ( - 1) +  / )

                                                                ln
Since  > 0, for obtaining    
                                 > 0, it is enough to show      
                                                                      > 0;

    ln       2( - 1)        2( - 1)            1            2
       =             -                  - 2      -                 .
          (1 + ( - 1) 1 + ( - 1) +  / )    ( +  / 1 + ( - 1) +  / )     


  From Lemma 5 we have / > 0, and the first parenthesis is positive because  > 0. Also, we can show

the second parenthesis is negative. This results in ln / > 0. 




                                                             39
References
Anand, Amber, Carsten Tanggaard, and Daniel G. Weaver, 2009, Paying for Market Quality,
 Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 44, 1427­1457.
Andersen, Torben G., Tim Bollerslev, Francis X. Diebold, and Clara Vega, 2003, Micro effects of
 macro announcements: Real-time price discovery in foreign exchange, The American Economic
 Review 93, 38­62.
Andersen, Torben G., Tim Bollerslev, Francis X. Diebold, and Clara Vega, 2007, Real-time price
 discovery in global stock, bond and foreign exchange markets, Journal of International
 Economics 73, 251­277.
Barclay, Michael J., and Terrence Hendershott, 2003, Price Discovery and Trading After Hours,
 Review of Financial Studies 16, 1041­1073.
Bernard, Victor, and Jacob Thomas, 1989, Post-Earnings-Announcement Drift: Delayed Price
 Response or Risk Premium?, Journal of Accounting Research 27, 1­36.
Bernhardt, Dan, and Bart Taub, 2006, Kyle v.s. Kyle ('85 v. '89), Annals of Finance 2, 23--38.
Bondarenko, Oleg, 2001, Competing market makers, liquidity provision, and bid-ask spreads,
 Journal of Financial Markets 4, 269­308.
Brogaard, Jonathan, Terrence Hendershott, and Ryan Riordan, 2014, High-Frequency Trading
 and Price Discovery, Review of Financial Studies 27, 2267­2306.
Cheung, Yin-wong, Rasmus Fatum, and Yohei Yamamoto, 2019, The exchange rate effects of
 macro news after the global financial crisis, Journal of International Money and Finance 95,
 424--443.
Chordia, Tarun, T Clifton Green, and Badrinath Kottimukkalur, 2018, Rent seeking by low-
 latency traders: Evidence from trading on macroeconomic announcements, Review of Financial
 Studies 31, 4650­4687.
Easley, David, Maureen O'Hara, and Marcos M. Lopez de Prado, 2012, Flow toxicity and
 liquidity in a high-frequency world, Review of Financial Studies 25, 1457­1493.
Evans, Martin D. D., and Richard K. Lyons, 1999, Order flow and exchange rate dynamics,
 Journal of Political Economy 110, 170­180.


                                                40
Evans, Martin D.D., and Richard K. Lyons, 2008, How is macro news transmitted to exchange
 rates?, Journal of Financial Economics 88, 26­50.
Fatum, Rasmus, Michael Hutchison, and Thomas Wu, 2012, Asymmetries and State
 Dependence: The Impact of Macro Surprises on Intraday Exchange Rates, Journal of the
 Japanese and International Economies 26, 542--560.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1980, On the impossibility of informationally
 efficient markets, The American Economic Review 70, 393­408.
Hashimoto, Yuko, and Takatoshi Ito, 2010, Effects of Japanese macroeconomic statistic
 announcements on the dollar/yen exchange rate: High-resolution picture, Journal of the
 Japanese and International Economies 24, 334­354.
Holden, Craig W., and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2002, News Events, Information Acquisition,
 and Serial Correlation, The Journal of Business 75, 1­32.
Ito, Takatoshi, Kenta Yamada, Misako Takayasu, and Hideki Takayasu, 2012, Free Lunch!
 Arbitrage Opportunities in the Foreign Exchange Markets, NBER working paper (18541).
Jiang, George, Ingrid Lo, and Giorgio Valente, 2012, High-Frequency Trading in the U.S.
 Treasury Market Around Macroeconomic News Announcements, Working Paper, Washington
 State University.
Kaul, Gautam, Qin Lei, and Noah Stoffman, 2008, Aiming at Pin: Order Flow, Information, and
 Liquidity, Working paper.
Kim, Oliver, and Robert E. Verrecchia, 1994, Market liquidity and volume around earnings
 announcements, Journal of Accounting and Economics 17, 41­67.
Kim, Oliver, and Robert E. Verrecchia, 1997, Pre-announcement and event-period private
 information, Journal of Accounting and Economics 24, 395­419.
Kim, Oliver, and Robert E Verrecchia, 2006, Trading Volume and Price Reactions to Public
 Announcements, Journal of Accounting Research 29, 302.
Kirilenko, Andrei, Albert S Kyle, Mehrdad Samadi, and Tugkan Tuzun, 2017, The Flash Crash:
 High Frequency Trading in an Electronic Market, The Journal of Finance 72, 967­998.
Kyle, Albert S, 1989, Informed speculation with imperfect competition, The Review of Economic
 Studies 56, 317­355.

                                                41
Llorente, Guillermo, and R Michaely, 2002, Dynamic volumereturn relation of individual stocks,
 Review of Financial Studies 15, 1005­1047.
Scholtus, Martin, Dick Van Dijk, and Bart Frijns, 2014, Speed, algorithmic trading, and market
 quality around macroeconomic news announcements, Journal of Banking and Finance 38, 89­
 105.
Tetlock, Paul C., 2010, Does public financial news resolve asymmetric information?, Review of
 Financial Studies 23, 3520­3557.
van Bommel, Jos, 2011, Measuring price discovery: The variance ratio, the R2, and the weighted
 price contribution, Finance Research Letters 8, 112­119.
Vega, Clara, 2006, Stock price reaction to public and private information, Journal of Financial
 Economics 82, 103­133.
Wang, Jiang, 1994, A Model of Competitive Stock Trading Volume, Journal of Political
 Economy 102, 127.




                                                42
                              Price Discovery and Liquidity Recovery over Years
   1.00

   0.90

   0.80

   0.70

   0.60

   0.50

   0.40

   0.30

   0.20

   0.10

   0.00
          1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017

                                 Price Discovery Rate         Bid-Ask Recovery Rate


          Figure 1: Yearly changes in the speed of price discovery and Liquidity recovery
The definition of price discovery and liquidity recovery are provided at equation (12) and (13) . We calculate
 =40, =600 , =5, =300 for each yearly sub-sample. Both measures do not show evident improvement over years;
the market quality does not necessarily become better in recent years.




                                                        43
                                                                                        High news
                                                                                        precision




                                                     Many
                                                     quote
                                                     counts




                                   Figure 2: Diagram of empirical findings
In each panel, the solid line describes a sample path of mid-quotes, which is associated with the bid prices (the line
below) and ask prices (the line above). When the price discovery is fast, the price path converges to the stable level
quickly. When the liquidity recovery is fast, bid-ask spreads become narrow quickly. Our interest is what effects two
key variables, the explanatory power of news for after-the-news return, and the number of traders have on these.




                                                          44
                     Table 1: Selected descriptive statistics after macro announcements
Descriptive statistics   # of
                                    quote     depth  depth   depth   bid-ask              # of
between (u,t) to         quote                                                 |return|           volume |OIB|/VOL ret/OIB   2
                                    counts   (n<=5) (n>=5)    all    spread               trade
(u,t+30sec)              revision
         1999                9        -        -      -       -       0.95       1.32       -       -        -         -       -
                             6        -        -      -       -       8.12       3.66       -       -        -         -       -
         2000               11        -        -      -       -       1.13       1.58       -       -        -         -       -
                             6        -        -      -       -       3.89       3.78       -       -        -         -       -
         2001               14        -        -      -       -       1.14       2.36       -       -        -         -     0.31
                             6        -        -      -       -       0.95       6.52       -       -        -         -     0.09
         2002               14        -        -      -       -       1.10       2.51       -       -        -         -     0.34
                             6        -        -      -       -       0.93       4.37       -       -        -         -     0.03
         2003               17        -        -      -       -       0.91       2.60       -       -        -         -     0.27
                             6        -        -      -       -       1.01       6.65       -       -        -         -     0.03
         2004               19        -        -      -       -       0.82       2.48       -       -        -         -     0.37
                             7        -        -      -       -       1.22      12.25       -       -        -         -     0.08
         2005               17        -        -      -       -       0.83       2.07       -       -        -         -     0.48
                             7        -        -      -       -       0.64       7.25       -       -        -         -     0.02
         2006               28       84       146    96      252      0.80       2.94      26      202     0.15      0.05    0.31
                             7       27       63     53      95       0.39       7.23       9      153     0.22      2.21    0.05
         2007               28       108      175    145     335      0.74       1.81      23      124     0.18      0.02    0.34
                             6       38       81     84      137      0.43       4.78       9      141     0.21      0.31    0.01
         2008               78       74       91     75      173      0.74       2.77      36      104     0.20      0.05    0.34
                            28       36       50     63      97       0.79       5.35      27      159     0.18      0.56    0.06
         2009               96       103      88     66      156      1.35       2.25      36      87      0.17      0.07    0.16
                            47       44       47     41      78       0.72       4.03      31      103     0.19      0.96    0.03
         2010              130       165      125    99      233      0.79       1.96      47      102     0.15      0.04    0.13
                            61       43       51     49      82       0.56       3.63      42      116     0.18      0.90    0.01
         2011               96       36       21     23      45       0.95       2.19      44      83      0.18      0.05    0.16
                            58       47       38     42      76       0.44       4.11      44      115     0.19      0.56    0.02
         2012               78       39       23     27      51       0.77       1.33      31      53      0.16      0.02    0.13
                            57       39       38     38      64       0.31       2.63      40      90      0.20      0.61    0.02
         2013              104       86       49     57      108      0.76       2.11      43      78      0.18      0.06    0.20
                            68       24       23     25      41       0.33       6.51      54      137     0.23      0.59    0.07
         2014               82       85       54     57      116      0.77       1.63      32      69      0.25      0.04    0.35
                            59       19       39     67      93       0.37       6.53      46      155     0.24      0.51    0.02
         2015              100       74       39     48      89       1.33       3.36      36      72      0.28      0.07    0.35
                            61       18       30     40      62       1.04      13.44      50      171     0.25      1.67    0.03
         2016               71       81       43     51      97       1.33       2.00      20      37      0.36      0.03    0.41
                            54       28       31     32      51       0.73       7.25      35      115     0.28      1.10    0.04
         2017               69       103      56     61      115      0.89       1.78      16      29      0.35      0.04    0.41
                            53       34       25     42      57       0.84       5.18      29      93      0.29      0.85    0.04




Note: Shaded rows are yearly median, non-shaded rows are standard deviation. Quote counts, depth, bid-ask spread
are a snapshot at (,  + 30sec). Other indicators are the sum between (, ) to (,  + 30sec). "depth (n<=5) "is the
sum of limit order up to 5 steps. Each statistic is the median in each year. "OIB" stands for order imbalance, or the
sum of deals initiated by buyers minus deals initiated by sellers. Returns are defined as log return in basis points.
Before 2006, detailed limit order book data (quote counts and depth) and deal data are not available. Note that the
minimum tick size is revised in 2011 from 1 pip to 1/10 pip, and in 2012 from 1/10 pip to 1/2 pip, showing discrete
jumps in quote counts and depth. R-squared is calculated from the 500period window rolling regression of (11).




                                                                45
              Table 2: Impact of News Surprise, t-values, and Average return magnitudes
                                                                      Median of      Median quote      Frequency   Availability   Significance
y = (log(S(t,u+600sec) -                                              abs(y) 10-     revision in 10-                              reported in
log(S(t,u))x10,000                         coefficient    t-stat     min after the    min after the    (monthly    (from 1999     Andersen et
                                                                                                         UON)         UON)
                                                                        news              news                                    al. (2003)
Chg. Nonfarm Payrolls                      -20.187       -6.460          22.9             1995                                     
GDP_A                                      -11.073       -4.446          13.4             1252         Quarterly                   
ISM Manufacturing                           -6.839       -4.446          10.0              784                                     
Retail Sales                                -6.054       -4.431           9.4              751                                     
Trade Balance                               -6.454       -4.298           9.8              589                                     
Empire Manufacturing                        -3.873       -4.121           6.4              954                     from 2004
Consumer Confidence                         -4.642       -3.443           8.9              556                                    
New Home Sales                              -2.781       -3.311           7.0              595
Durable Goods Orders                        -3.054       -3.096           7.5              587                                    
ADP                                         -4.984       -2.962           6.2             1461                     from 2007
Chicago Purchasing Manager                  -2.599       -2.899           8.1              577
Avg. Hourly Earnings                        -7.963       -2.839          22.9             1995
Current Account                             -3.683       -2.798           6.5              549         Quarterly
Factory Orders                              -2.423       -2.724           8.4              590                                    
Phil. Fed Outlook                           -3.228       -2.233           7.0              594
CPI                                         -2.347       -2.148           9.6             1415
Housing Starts                              -1.706       -1.917           6.9              579
Industrial Production                       -2.021       -1.837           6.6              544                                    
PPI. Ex. Food Energy                        -1.660       -1.501          8.0               691
U of Mich Sentiment_F                       -1.245       -1.413           8.8              648                     from 2001
GDP_S                                       -2.367       -1.403           8.8              830         Quarterly
U of Mich Sentiment_P                       -1.421       -1.357           8.7              852                     from 2001
Personal Consumption_T                      -3.193       -1.318           7.3              847         Quarterly   from 2004
Leading Index                               -0.949       -1.254           7.1              629
NAHB Housing Market Index                   -1.313       -1.203           4.7              656                     from 2004
Personal Consumption_S                      -4.416       -1.022           8.1             1164         Quarterly   from 2004
Existing Home Sales                         -1.116       -0.916          8.1               576
PCE Core                                    -0.863       -0.821           6.4              868                     from   2005
GDP Def_A                                   -1.753       -0.793          13.4             1332         Quarterly   from   2001
Import Price                                -1.181       -0.739           7.6              897                     from   2005
GDP Def_T                                   -1.056       -0.704           7.3              570         Quarterly   from   2001
Chg. Manufact. Payrolls                     -1.715       -0.625          22.9             1995
GDP Def_S                                   -0.723       -0.530           8.8              830         Quarterly   from 2001
Personal Consumption_A                      -1.278       -0.391          13.4             1631         Quarterly   from 2004
Budget Statement                            -0.141       -0.318           3.6              143
Whole Sale Inventories                      -0.207       -0.234           7.0              571
Personal Spending                           -0.174       -0.217           6.4              538
GDP_T                                       -0.079       -0.041           7.0              561         Quarterly
Unit Labor Cost_F                           -0.053       -0.030           7.6              708         Quarterly   from 2002
Employment Cost Index                       -0.054       -0.017           9.4              615         Quarterly
Construction Spending                        0.186        0.150           9.4              633
Building Permits                             0.466        0.471           6.9              846                     from 2004
Consumer Credit                              0.287        0.773           2.5              127
Unit Labor Cost_P                            2.360        0.855           7.5              904         Quarterly   from 2002
Business Inventories                         0.748        0.862           7.7              566
Capacity Utilization                         1.367        1.291           6.6              548
Personal Income                              1.251        1.621           6.4              537
Unemployment Rate                            7.819        3.661          22.9             1995
Obs.                                                      5497
R-squared                                                 0.105
Note: Suffix A, S, T, F, P denotes 'Advance', Second', 'Third', 'Final', and 'Preliminary'




                                                                        46
                                              Price Discovery Rate
         1.20

         1.00

         0.80

         0.60

         0.40

         0.20
                                               year 1999         year 2003    year 2011          year 2017

         0.00
                    0     60     120    180     240      300     360    420         480         540          600
                                          Time (sec) from the announcement



                                  Liquidity Recovery Rate measured as Bid-Ask Spread
         1.4

         1.3

         1.2

         1.1

           1

         0.9

         0.8

         0.7                                               year 1999                      year 2003
                                                           year 2011                      year 2017
         0.6
                0                60            120                180                240
                                          Time (sec) from the announcement



                        Figure 3: Price discovery and liquidity recovery after the news
The definition of price discovery and liquidity recovery are presented in equation (12) and (13). The panel above
shows the  , =600 and the one below shows , =300 .




                                                           47
                          Table 3: Correlation coefficients of independent variables
                                  Quote    Liquidity            Surprise of # of quote Time
                           2                           Depth                                   Y2009    Y2010    Y2011    Y2012    |OIB|/VOL VOL
                                  Count    recovery             news       revision   trend

2 measure                 1.00     -0.12    -0.03       0.04      0.00        0.04     -0.04    -0.02    -0.07    -0.06    -0.06    -0.07    0.18
Quote Count at (t,u+k)    -0.12     1.00     0.17       0.22     -0.02        0.07      0.46    -0.16    0.17     -0.02    0.13      0.12    -0.27
Liq. recovery rate at
                          -0.03     0.17     1.00       0.12      0.01      -0.07      -0.07    0.06     0.03     -0.05    -0.07     0.02    -0.03
(t,u+k) x 100
Depth at (t,u+k)          0.04      0.22     0.12       1.00      0.01      -0.23      -0.34    0.02     0.24     -0.34    -0.32    -0.02    0.12
Surprise of news          0.00     -0.02     0.01       0.01      1.00        0.03     -0.01    0.05     -0.05    -0.02    -0.01    -0.04    0.10
# of quote revision       0.04      0.07    -0.07       -0.23     0.03        1.00      0.17    0.19     0.24     0.20     0.10     -0.27    0.40
Linear time trend         -0.04     0.46    -0.07       -0.34    -0.01        0.17      1.00    -0.21    -0.14    -0.04    0.05      0.23    -0.32
Y2009                     -0.02    -0.16     0.06       0.02      0.05        0.19     -0.21    1.00     -0.09    -0.09    -0.09    -0.07    0.04
Y2010                     -0.07     0.17     0.03       0.24     -0.05        0.24     -0.14    -0.09    1.00     -0.09    -0.09    -0.11    0.08
Y2011                     -0.06    -0.02    -0.05       -0.34    -0.02        0.20     -0.04    -0.09    -0.09    1.00     -0.09    -0.08    0.03
Y2012                     -0.06     0.13    -0.07       -0.32    -0.01        0.10      0.05    -0.09    -0.09    -0.09    1.00     -0.04    -0.09
|OIB|/cumulative volume   -0.07     0.12     0.02       -0.02    -0.04      -0.27       0.23    -0.07    -0.11    -0.08    -0.04     1.00    -0.43
Cumulative volume         0.18     -0.27    -0.03       0.12      0.10        0.40     -0.32    0.04     0.08     0.03     -0.09    -0.43    1.00




                                                                         48
              Table 4: Regression results for the determinants of speed of price discovery
                  
             y =  ,, =600                      k=5sec    k=40sec   k=120sec  k=180sec     k=300sec           k=40sec
        2
(1)    measure                               2.365 ***  1.595 **  1.845 ***    0.7169      1.123 *          2.554 ***
                                              [0.6646]   [0.7476]   [0.7781]  [0.7958]     [0.7562]          [0.7282]
(2)   Quote Count at (t,u+k)                 -3.763 ** -4.407 **    -4.673 *   -1.944      4.727 *          -5.222 ***
                                               [1.673]    [2.533]     [3.33]   [3.566]      [3.042]           [1.965]
(3)   Liq. recovery rate at (t,u+k) x 100   -14.39 ***    -1.005     10.1 ** 15.74 ***       1.365
                                               [3.826]    [5.059]    [5.868]    [5.88]      [6.108]
(4)   Depth at (t,u+k)                         0.2582      2.091      0.379     0.887       -2.361
                                               [1.542]    [1.972]    [2.309]    [2.43]      [2.135]
(5)   |Surprise of news|                     12.64 *** 6.155 *** 4.814 ***     0.3209       0.3869
                                               [1.591]    [1.575]    [1.553]    [1.46]      [1.551]
(6)   # of quote revision                   -6.094 *** -7.389 *** -10.18 *** -11.1 ***   -6.932 ***
                                               [1.465]    [1.653]    [1.877]   [2.035]      [2.158]
(7)   Linear time trend                      11.85 *** 24.14 *** 23.13 *** 24.54 ***       14.2 ***          7.445 **
                                               [3.811]    [4.786]    [5.554]   [5.779]      [5.723]           [3.341]
(8)   Y2009                                     1.266    5.358 *      4.099  10.66 ***        4.11
                                               [3.153]    [3.472]     [3.49]   [3.912]      [3.613]
(9)   Y2010                                     3.852      4.222   7.699 **  10.16 ***        2.08
                                               [3.073]    [3.414]    [3.511]   [3.679]      [3.551]
(10) Y2011                                      2.644   8.049 **      3.535      5.49        1.506
                                               [3.402]    [3.893]    [4.063]   [4.597]      [4.381]
(11) Y2012                                      3.995      4.541      2.661     3.461        1.536
                                               [3.367]     [3.86]    [3.971]   [4.056]      [3.935]
(12) |OIB|/cumulative volume x100           -0.03651 *   0.04118 0.1752 *** 0.2429 ***   0.3077 ***
                                             [0.02729]  [0.04413]  [0.06303] [0.07624]    [0.08481]
(13) cumulative volume                      3.794 *** 8.398 ***    9.74 ***  11.78 ***    11.15 ***
                                               [0.781]   [0.9528]    [1.115]   [1.197]      [1.372]
      constant                               89.85 ***  62.4 ***  76.62 *** 59.14 ***     53.04 ***         63.28 ***
                                               [14.81]    [15.48]    [16.61]   [17.17]      [17.06]           [3.45]
      N                                         3007        3013       2925      2882        2880              3013
      R-squared                                 0.070      0.042      0.039     0.039        0.030           0.0074
Note: Independent variable (1) is logit transformation of 2 , variables (2), (4), (6), (13) are taken log. Standard errors
are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% level
The dependent variable is a measure of price discovery for each announcement time t, defined as
                                                      |(,  + ) -   (,  +  )|
                                         ,, =600 =                           .
                                                      |(,  +  ) -  (,  +  )|
This expression is a realized version of the price discovery measure (12). Overshooting of  and  by 100% is
omitted from the sample. Independent variable (1) is a R-squared of following regression over t:
                     (,  + 600) =  +   (, ) + (, ),  = 1,2,  , # of different news.
This is a news-by-news version of regression equation (11). LHS takes a value only when each news i is observed. This
measures the information held by informed traders. We estimate the regression equation by a rolling regression with
window of 12 periods. This procedure generates R-squared for each i at each t. For each t, we employ a max of such
R-squared over i for the independent variable (1). (2) quote count (t,u+k) is the number of traders submitting limit
order at (t,u+k). This is a proxy of the number of traders inhabited with the market at each time. (6) the number of
quote revision plus and minus 10 minutes around the announcement. (7) time trend is the linear trend from 2006 to
2017, scaled by N. Year-by-year dummies are introduced for four years after the global financial crisis.




                                                             49
             Table 5: Regression results for the determinants of speed of liquidity recovery
                     = ,, =300                  k=5sec       k=10sec      k=40sec      k=60sec     k=150sec      k=10sec
         2
  (1)    measure                                -0.2853      -0.4636 *      -0.3507     -0.08903    -0.3879 *   -0.4555 *
                                                [0.3309]      [0.2918]     [0.2768]     [0.2658]     [0.2662]    [0.3105]
  (2)   Quote count at (t,u+k)                25.37 ***       22.1 ***    10.84 ***    7.801 ***   3.315 ***    18.66 ***
                                                [0.6526]      [0.7076]      [1.331]      [1.585]      [1.256]    [0.6356]
  (3)   PD rate at (t,u+k) x100                -1.526 **      -1.036 *     1.289 **    1.534 ***   1.671 ***
                                                [0.8158]      [0.7842]     [0.6722]     [0.6386]     [0.6244]
  (4)   Depth at (t,u+k)                      -6.928 ***    -6.166 ***   -2.799 ***   -2.491 ***    -1.776 **
                                                [0.7568]      [0.7405]     [0.8108]     [0.9813]     [0.8347]
  (5)   Surprise of news                         0.1552     1.444 ***      0.7945 *    0.9929 **     -0.08586
                                                [0.6903]      [0.5944]     [0.5491]     [0.5382]     [0.4777]
  (6)   # of quote revision                     -0.8276       -0.3127      0.08382        0.539        0.1385
                                                [0.7949]      [0.6988]     [0.7217]     [0.7085]     [0.6961]
  (7)   Linear time trend                     -28.63 ***     -27.1 ***   -16.11 ***    -12.1 ***   -5.093 ***   -20.08 ***
                                                 [1.826]       [1.799]       [2.05]      [2.198]      [1.967]     [1.357]
  (8)   Y2009                                 6.466 ***     3.833 ***        1.017      0.01929       -0.3303
                                                 [1.648]       [1.399]      [1.325]      [1.278]      [1.177]
  (9)   Y2010                                 11.36 ***     5.554 ***     -2.481 **       -1.33       -0.8933
                                                 [1.567]       [1.337]      [1.171]      [1.116]       [1.04]
 (10) Y2011                                    -19.2 ***    -17.92 ***   -9.778 ***   -7.607 ***   -4.862 ***
                                                 [2.071]       [1.977]      [1.765]      [1.874]      [1.638]
 (11) Y2012                                   -19.78 ***    -19.48 ***   -9.304 ***   -6.802 ***       -1.043
                                                 [1.546]       [1.463]      [1.526]      [1.694]      [1.516]
 (12) |OIB|/cumulative volume x100             0.003099      0.005166      0.01515      0.01219       0.02284
                                               [0.01351]     [0.01303]    [0.01658]    [0.01913]    [0.02334]
 (13) cumulative volume                         -0.4807       -0.1474       -0.2942    -0.5785 *       0.2105
                                                 [0.406]      [0.3617]      [0.373]       [0.39]     [0.4277]
        constant                              101.2 ***      97.45 ***    96.47 ***    96.75 ***   100.1 ***    69.25 ***
                                                 [7.442]       [6.596]      [6.073]      [6.112]       [5.31]    [1.039]
        N                                         2986          3043          2997         2953         2964      3043
        R-squared                                 0.447         0.330        0.075        0.039         0.010     0.248
Note: Independent variable (1) is logit transformation of 2 , variables (2), (4), (6), (13) are taken log. Standard errors
are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% level
The dependent variable is a measure of liquidity recovery for each announcement time t, defined as
                                                          (,  + ) -1
                                         ,, =300 =                   ,
                                                         {(,  +  )}
where VWBAS is volume weighted bid and ask spread. In fact, this is an element of liquidity recovery measure (12).
Overshooting of  and  by 100% is omitted from the sample. The definition of independent variables is the
same as Table 4.




                                                            50
       Table 6: Regression results for the determinants of speed of price discovery (tick-time)
                         
                    y =  ,n, =600                  n=5tick       n=50tick    n=100tick      n=200tick         n=100tick
         2
(1)      measure                                  2.588 ***      1.398 **      1.198 *      2.557 ***          2.554 ***
                                                    [0.6566]      [0.7849]     [0.8309]       [0.7908]          [0.7282]
(2)     Quote Count at (t,n)                       -8.96 ***    -7.174 ***   -9.015 ***     -10.63 ***        -5.222 ***
                                                     [1.376]       [1.932]      [2.505]        [3.018]           [1.965]
(3)     Liq. recovery rate at (t,n) x 100          -0.0265 *     0.002167      0.01563        -0.00527
                                                   [0.01923]     [0.02245]    [0.02217]      [0.02275]
(4)     Depth at (t,n)                             3.171 **         1.687     4.416 **          2.033
                                                     [1.473]       [1.992]      [2.058]        [2.342]
(5)     Surprise of news                          15.15 ***      7.03 ***     5.736 ***      3.845 ***
                                                     [1.561]       [1.644]      [1.635]        [1.649]
(6)     # of quote revision                       -8.084 ***    -7.466 ***   -9.955 ***     -14.28 ***
                                                     [1.547]       [1.757]      [1.815]        [1.753]
(7)     Linear time trend                          15.06 ***     20.75 ***    29.88 ***      24.23 ***         7.445 **
                                                      [3.88]       [5.005]      [5.005]        [5.695]          [3.341]
(8)     Y2009                                       -4.049 *        3.331        1.543       8.284 **
                                                     [3.061]       [3.449]      [3.722]        [3.981]
(9)     Y2010                                         2.301         2.727        3.739         5.686 *
                                                     [2.982]       [3.298]      [3.568]        [3.798]
(10)    Y2011                                      7.005 **      11.43 ***    9.605 ***      12.8 ***
                                                     [3.181]       [4.366]       [3.94]        [4.417]
(11)    Y2012                                     12.81 ***      9.761 ***     6.299 *          4.502
                                                     [3.362]       [3.986]      [4.109]        [4.084]
(12)    |OIB|/cumulative volume                   0.1909 **    0.04276 ***   0.0219 ***    0.01419 ***
                                                   [0.09718]    [0.009086]   [0.004988]     [0.002845]
(13)    cumulative volume(t,u+k)                 -0.04921 **      0.03596      -0.8715         5.925 *
                                                    [0.0292]      [0.5967]     [0.9264]         [4.35]
        constant                                  92.04 ***       100 ***     116.9 ***      179.9 ***        63.28 ***
                                                     [14.54]       [17.24]      [18.51]        [17.92]          [3.45]
        N                                              2770         2753          2688           2620            3013
        R-squared                                     0.084         0.036        0.038          0.051          0.0074
Note: Independent variable (1) is logit transformation of 2 , variables (2), (4), (6), (13) are taken log. Standard errors
are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% level.
The dependent variable is a measure of price discovery for each announcement time t, defined as
                                                         |(,  + ) -   (,  +  )|
                                             ,, =600 =                          .
                                                         |(,  +  ) -  (,  +  )|
Contrary to the specification in Table 4, we use tick-time to define the speed of price discovery. The numerator of the
measure is indexed by the tick-time n, instead of the physical time k. Other specifications are identical to that of Table
4.




                                                               51
                            Table 7: Regression analysis with news type dummies
                                                               
   Independent variables Interaction dummies              y =  ,, =600                             = ,, =300
                                                   k=40sec         k=40sec              k=10sec           k=10sec
   With controls                                     No               Yes                 No                   Yes


(1) 2 measure              None                   2.425 ***        1.723 **            -0.5952 **         -0.4787 *
                                                   [0.7446]         [0.7525]            [0.2948]           [0.2921]
(2) Quote Count at (t,n)   None                     -2.715          -3.183             18.16 ***          20.58 ***
                                                   [2.207]           [2.59]             [0.7449]           [0.8409]
(3) Time trend             None                     3.892          22.13 ***           -16.79 ***         -24.55 ***
                                                   [3.722]          [4.948]             [1.475]            [1.912]


(4) 2 measure              GDP Dummy                -19.85          -21.35               4.708              4.177
                                                   [18.05]          [18.48]             [5.358]            [5.361]
(5) Quote Count at (t,n)   GDP Dummy                -8.163          -9.513             15.26 ***          11.5 ***
                                                   [12.61]          [12.88]             [4.597]            [4.367]
(6) Time trend             GDP Dummy                29.44            22.57             -32.19 ***         -23.61 ***
                                                   [37.44]          [38.26]             [7.983]            [7.615]


(7) 2 measure              Labor Stat. Dummy       -9.219 *        -8.412 *            5.449 ***          4.414 **
                                                   [5.907]          [5.938]             [2.201]            [2.156]
(8) Quote Count at (t,n)   Labor Stat. Dummy       0.1862           -2.949             5.723 ***            2.909
                                                   [6.796]          [6.491]             [2.253]            [2.393]
(9) Time trend             Labor Stat. Dummy       20.08 *           15.37             -23.46 ***         -17.68 ***
                                                   [15.31]          [14.65]             [3.341]            [3.422]


   N                                                3013             3013                3043               3043
   R-squared                                        0.012            0.044               0.321              0.336



Note: Independent variable (1) is logit transformation of 2 , variables (2), (4), (6) are taken log. *, **, *** indicate
significance at 10%, 5%, 1% level. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Control variables include depth at (t,n),
surprise of news, number of quote revisions, year dummies, |OIB|/cumulative volume, and cumulative volume(t,u+k).
Each news type dummy takes one if the news type is Labor statistics (or GDP advance) and takes zero otherwise.




                                                              52
                                         1.00                                                                 1.40
                                                               Price discovery rate                                              Liquidity recovery rate
                                         0.90
                                                                                                              1.20
                                         0.80

                                         0.70
                                                                                                              1.00
                                         0.60

                                         0.50                                                                 0.80

                                         0.40
                                                                                                              0.60
                                         0.30

                                         0.20
                                                                                                              0.40
                                         0.10

                                         0.00                                                                 0.20
                                                2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017          2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
                                                     'AUD/USD'             'EUR/USD'            'GBP/USD'
                                                     'NZD/USD'             'USD/CAD'            'USD/CHF'
                                                     'USD/CNH'             'USD/JPY'

                                          40
                                                                              R^2                                                     quote count at (t,u+k)
                                                                              liquidity recovery rate at (t,u+k) x 100                depth at (t,u+k)
  t-stat of each independent variables




                                          30                                  surprise                                                # of quote rev.
                                                                              time trend
                                          20

                                          10

                                            0

                                         -10

                                         -20
                                                 0   20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280 300 320 340 360 380 400 420 440 460 480
                                                                                              Sec after the announcement


                                           Figure 4: Panel regression (t-stat in different k) and yearly changes in market quality
Top panels.    Yearly changes in price discovery rate (k=40, T=1800) and liquidity recovery rate (k=5, T=60) for
each eight currency pairs. The way of construction is the same as Table 1.
Bottom panel. In addition to EUR/USD, other seven currency pairs are taken account: AUD/USD, GBP/USD,
NZD/USD, USD/CAD, USD/CHF, USD/CNH, USD/JPY. Fixed effect panel regression is employed. The dependent
                                                                                  |(,+)-(,+ )|
variable is a measure of price discovery for each announcement time t, defined as |(,+ )-(,+ )|
                                                                                                where T=600.

The set of independent variables is the same as Table 4. R-squared measure for EUR/USD and surprise of news are
common, and other four variables are calculated for each pair. The panel plots the t-statics of independent variables
in different k.




                                                                                                          53
                                    0.040
                                                                  k=2         k=4             k=6         k=8           k=10
                                    0.035
     Model Price Discovery Rate V




                                    0.030

                                    0.025

                                    0.020

                                    0.015

                                    0.010

                                    0.005

                                    0.000
                                            5   7   9   11   13    15   17   19   21     23   25    27   29   31   33   35     37   39   41
                                                                             # of informed trader N


Figure 5: Model Simulation of Price Discovery as a Function of the number of Informed Trader
This plot is the variance ratio  ()  Var(() - ())/Var(), a measure of price discovery, with the informed
trader's signal precision  shifting from the monopolistic competition (when k is small) toward informed competition
(when k is large). Specifically,
                                                                               1
                             (, ) = ()  + (1 - ())  , () =                                ,
                                          fix                          1 + exp(-( -  ))
where fix = 4 and  = 5 are assumed. The downward sloping curve is consistent with our empirical findings.




                                                                                    54
                             0.065
                                               E = 0.0004         E = 0.0012          E = 0.002
                                               E = 0.0028        E = 0.0036
                                                                 
                             0.055


                             0.045
   Model (Price Impact)^-1




                             0.035


                             0.025


                             0.015


                             0.005


                             -0.005
                                      5   7   9   11   13   15   17   19   21   23   25   27   29   31   33   35   37   39   41
                                                                       # of informed trader

           Figure 6: Model Simulation of Liquidity as a Function of the Number of Informed Traders
This plot is the inverse of price impact (), a measure of liquidity, as a function of  , with different  . Upward
sloping curve is consistent with our empirical findings. Increasing  of reducing liquidity, our empirical findings, is
observed in the region of sufficiently high number of informed traders.




                                                                           55
                            6.0


                            4.0
   cumulative return (bp)




                                                                 (Negative largest) 1               3               5          (Positive Largest) 7
                            2.0


                            0.0


                            -2.0


                            -4.0


                            -6.0
                               -1200   -600    0    600   1200   1800      2400   3000       3600       4200    4800    5400    6000     6600    7200
                                                                 time (sec) from announcements
                              0.2                                   year 1999                           year 2003                    year 2007
                                                                    year 2011                           year 2015                    ALL
                            0.15

                              0.1

                            0.05
   auto-correlation




                                   0

                            -0.05

                             -0.1

                            -0.15

                             -0.2

                            -0.25
                                       0      100   200    300       400        500      600            700     800      900      1000       1100
                                                                                k (Second)

                                              Figure 7: Predictability of return after the announcements
Top panel. Top panel plots the average cumulative return over two hours (+ 20 minutes) surrounding macro
announcements. Each plot is an average of sample stratified by the news surprise defined as (10). Bin 1 represents the
largest negative surprise (i.e., depreciates USD and earns positive returns on EUR/USD) and Bin 7 represents the
largest positive surprise (i.e., appreciates USD and earns negative returns on EUR/USD). Bin 4 consists of zero surprise
sample.
Bottom panel. Bottom panel plots the predictability of return after announcements, measured by the autocorrelation
of returns defined as Corr ((,  + ) - (, ), (,  + 3hours) - (,  + )),  = 0,100sec, 200sec, ... , where t denotes
announcement days and u denotes intraday announcement time. Each plot is grouped by years.




                                                                                        56
