                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




HOMETOWN TIES AND THE QUALITY OF GOVERNMENT MONITORING: EVIDENCE
               FROM ROTATION OF CHINESE AUDITORS

                                         Jian Chu
                                      Raymond Fisman
                                        Songtao Tan
                                      Yongxiang Wang

                                     Working Paper 27032
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27032


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2020




Fisman and Wang would like to thank the National Science Foundation (grant numbers 1729806
and 1729784 respectively) for financial support. Rui Dong,Junkai Huang and Yiming Cao
provided excellent RA work. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jian Chu, Raymond Fisman, Songtao Tan, and Yongxiang Wang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Hometown Ties and the Quality of Government Monitoring: Evidence from Rotation of Chinese
Auditors
Jian Chu, Raymond Fisman, Songtao Tan, and Yongxiang Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 27032
April 2020
JEL No. D73,G3,H83,M42

                                          ABSTRACT

Audits are a standard mechanism for reducing corruption in government investments. The quality
of audits themselves, however, may be affected by relationships between auditor and target. We
study whether provincial chief auditors in China show greater leniency in evaluating prefecture
governments in their hometowns. In city-fixed-effect specifications ­ in which the role of shared
background is identified from auditor turnover ­ we show that hometown auditors find 38 percent
less in questionable monies. This hometown effect is similar throughout the auditor's tenure, and
is diminished for audits ordered by the provincial Organizations Department as a result of the
departure of top city officials. We argue that our findings are most readily explained by leniency
toward local officials rather than an endogenous response to concerns of better enforcement by
hometown auditors. We complement these city-level findings with firm-level analyses of
earnings manipulation by state-owned enterprises via real activity manipulation (a standard
measure from the accounting literature), which we show is higher under hometown auditors.


Jian Chu                                        Songtao Tan
School of Business                              School of Finance
Nanjing University                              Renmin University of China
Anzhong Building 820                            Mingde Main Building 604
Nanjing                                         Beijing
China                                           China
chujian@nju.edu.cn                              Tansongtao@126.com

Raymond Fisman                                  Yongxiang Wang
Department of Economics                         Marshall School of Business
Boston University                               University of Southern California
270 Bay State Road, 304A                        Los Angeles, CA 90089
Boston, MA 02215                                Yongxiang.Wang@marshall.usc.edu
and NBER
rfisman@bu.edu
1     Introduction
Government investment provides essential (and potentially very productive) public amenities, such
as transport infrastructure and schools. At the same time, public investment may be particularly
prone to corruption (e.g., Tanzi and Davoodi (1998)). One common prescription to limit theft from
and mismanagement of public projects is the threat of ex post evaluation and audit, which in turn
raises the concern that preexisting relationships between the auditor and those under investigation
may allow corrupt or inept officials to avoid detection and/or punishment. Thus, there is an
emphasis on the role of independent auditors to ensure effective enforcement (Dabla-Norris et al.
(2012)).
    While conflict-of-interest rules restrict the most obvious relationships between monitor and tar-
get, such as family ties or business relationships, less visible or more diffuse ties may nonetheless
facilitate auditor-target collusion, or otherwise compromise the objectivity of oversight. In this
paper, we examine how such ties affect the findings of provincial audits of municipal fund expen-
ditures in China. We focus on the provincial chief auditor's city of birth as a source of potential
connection to audit targets.1 Hometown connections are a natural focus in our setting, as such ties
are a well-documented nexus of favor exchange in China (Fisman et al. (2018)), Vietnam (Do et al.
(2017)) and countries with weak institutions more generally (Hodler and Raschky (2014)) which,
we argue, may lead to greater leniency in evaluations of "hometown" expenditures.
    We explore this hypothesis of "hometown favoritism" toward local officials by looking at the
outcomes of audits in 277 Chinese prefectures during the years 2006-2016. According to the Audit
Law of the People's Republic of China, evaluations are carried out ­ either directly or indirectly
­ by province-level audit departments.2 The chief officers of province-level audit departments,
like many top officials in China, experience frequent rotation, providing plausible variation for
identifying whether lead auditors show greater leniency for audits of their hometown governments.
In our preferred specification ­ which includes city fixed effects so that the hometown auditor
effect is identified from auditor turnover ­ we find that audits turn up 38 percent fewer suspicious
expenditures when the lead auditor is investigating his hometown (we do not find that a hometown
auditor conducts fewer audits).3
   1 We use the terms prefecture and city interchangably throughout, and elaborate on the definition of a prefecture

in the next section.
   2 In the case of indirect audits, the prefecture-level audit departments carry out the audits, supervisied by the

province-level audit department. Major expenditures must be audited directly by the province-level audit department,
according to the Audit Law. Even in cases in which the audit is carried out by the prefecture audit department, the
city's chief auditor reports directly to the province's chief auditor.
   3 We cannot distinguish between auditor-target corruption versus an auditor's preference for leniency toward

hometown officials. In either case, investigations turn up little suspicious activity. This distinction is analogous to
the "active" versus "passive" waste in the corruption literature, which is rarely able to differentiate between the two



                                                          2
    A natural alternative interpretation for this finding is based on the idea that a well-connected
and well-informed hometown auditor may more effectively deter misbehavior. The net effect of
"hometown deterrence" on observed suspicious expenditures is theoretically ambiguous ­ if home-
town auditors deter misbehavior, local government officials will engage in less underlying suspicious
activity, but a greater fraction of such activities will be uncovered. We further show that, even if
the former effect dominates, deterrence is unlikely to account for our main results, based on a pair
of heterogeneity analyses. First, we look at the hometown auditor effect as a function of his tenure.
Chief auditor assignments are made in each province by its Organization Department of the Party
Standing Committee (one of the province's highest authority). As we explain in the next section,
these appointments are governed by a range of considerations, and would be exceedingly difficult for
prefecture-level bureaucrats (or indeed the chief auditors themselves) to predict. This uncertainty
in the assignment process implies that, in the earlier years of his tenure, a chief auditor oversees
evaluations of projects that were planned and implemented before local officials could anticipate
the arrival of a hometown auditor. Thus, if anticipation of strict enforcement were responsible for
the hometown effect, we would expect the relationship between hometown audits and suspicious
expenditure to be muted early in an auditor's tenure. We do not, however, find any evidence of a
differential effect in the auditor's first year, or as a function of the auditor's tenure more generally.
    We next examine whether the hometown auditor effect differs in years in which one of the city's
top two officials (the party secretary and the mayor) leaves office. Central government regulation
dictates that, following such departures, audits be directly carried out by the provincial Audit
Department and overseen by the provincial CPC committee's Organization Department, among
the most powerful departments in the province (whose leader always serves on the the provincial
Standing Committee). We argue that Organization Department oversight will constrain the chief
auditor, and as a result any hometown favoritism will be attenuated in years of top officials' de-
partures. Consistent with the disciplining role of this higher-level oversight, the hometown auditor
effect drops by nearly half in party secretary and mayor turnover years (that is, we observe less
hometown favoritism when one of the city's top two officials leaves office).
    Finally, we complement our city-year analyses with firm-level analyses on earnings manipulation
at state-owned enterprises. Since state-owned enterprises also fall under the purview of provincial
auditors, we examine whether questionable accounting practices are more common in the presence
of a hometown auditor. We focus on earnings management through real activities manipulation
(RAM) which, while not strictly illegal, captures expenditure changes which reside in a legal gray
zone that would naturally raise auditors' concerns, a point we discuss in more detail below. In the
paper that develops this measure, Roychowdhury (2006) suggests that it captures firms' use of price
without direct observation of bribery. See Bandiera et al. (2009) for an exception.



                                                         3
discounts to temporarily boost sales, overproduction to report lower cost of goods sold, and reduced
discretionary expenditures to improve reported margins (Roychowdhury (2006) further shows that
firms deploy such techniques to meet analyst earnings expectations).
  The SOE findings complement our main results on government audits in several ways. First, our
RAM analyses further serve to assess whether the hometown audit effect is the result of favoritism
or anticipated enforcement. In contrast to audit outcomes, in which favoritism and deterrence
potentially yield the same prediction, for real activities manipulation the two theories generate
opposing predictions: In the presence of a lenient auditor, a firm will engage in more questionable
accounting practices, whereas anticipation of greater scrutiny will lead firms to avoid accounting red
flags. Second, our SOE sample allows for a more disaggregated analysis, so we may better account
for attributes of potential audit targets. Third, it allows us to examine whether the hometown
audit effect manifests itself in public expenditure audits as well as evaluations of quasi-public state
enterprises (which, in our sample, are partially privatized). Our analyses of earnings manipulation in
state-owned firms reinforces the view that auditors show greater leniency toward hometown officials:
RAM is on average about a quarter of a (within-firm) standard deviation higher in the presence of
a hometown auditor. This result survives the inclusion of city as well as firm fixed-effects.
   Our work contributes to several related literatures that collectively aim to understand the im-
pediments to effective oversight of both public projects and private firms. In particular, a sizeable
literature in accounting and finance focuses on the monitoring role of external auditors, and em-
phasizes the potential conflicts that result from ties between a firm's leadership and and ostensibly
independent auditors. He et al. (2017), for example, show for a sample of Chinese firms that audit
quality is poorer when external auditors share school ties with audit committee members, and a
large number of earlier papers show that social ties between executives and external auditors sim-
ilarly impair the quality of external auditors' work (see, e.g., Guan et al. (2016) for China, and
Baber et al. (2014) for the U.S.).
   These papers focus exclusively on oversight of private firms by outside monitors that are effec-
tively hired on behalf of shareholders to monitor its agents (i.e., the executive), and highlight the
potential conflicts that arise when executives and the board play a role in monitor selection. A
closely related set of concerns arise with the hiring of so-called third party auditors, to monitor
firms' compliance with national laws and regulations. As observed by Duflo et al. (2013), third-
party auditors are also often hired by the firm, which creates a similar set of conflicts of interest as
for external auditors.
    To our knowledge, we are the first to study potential conflicts in monitoring by government
auditors. Our setting is quite distinct from the oversight of private firms ­ whether by external
auditors to monitor shareholders' interests or third-party auditors to monitor regulatory compliance


                                                   4
­ examined in earlier work. We look at monitors selected by independent bureaucrats who should
be less subject to the conflicts of interest that afflict a firm's executive or board. Furthermore, our
focus on oversight of public rather than private activities has distinct political economy and welfare
implications.
   Given our focus on hometown connections, we also contribute to the literature on the role of
social ties in the functioning of bureaucracies in general and in China in particular. This literature
has generally emphasized favoritism as the dominant force (e.g., Fisman et al. (2018) and others),
though Fisman et al. (2019) and Fisman et al. (2017) emphasize that other considerations ­ whether
better information, enforcement or other concerns ­ may also play an important role in some
settings.
    Finally, our finding that social ties are associated with greater leniency in oversight has direct
policy implications for the design of conflict-of-interest rules. In general, there is a tradeoff in
restricting well-connected candidates from monitoring positions: a locally-connected monitor may
have better information or ability to enforce compliance than an outsider, an advantage that needs
to be weighed against the costs of potential favoritism. Our results suggest that favoritism may
be a dominant factor in our setting, which provides a rationale for the existence of rules against
assignment to one's home region precisely to reduce the potential for collusion or self-dealing (see
Fisman et al. (2017)). Furthermore, our results suggest potential future directions for the growing
body of work that uses the results of external audits to study accountability and corruption (e.g.,
Ferraz and Finan (2008),Ferraz and Finan (2011) Gerardino et al. (2017), and Avis et al. (2018)).
These studies take audit reports as unbiased, whereas we highlight the fact that audits themselves
might be corrupted.


2     Background and Data
2.1    Monitoring and evaluation of Chinese municipal governments
The system of oversight for Chinese governments' revenues and expenditures was delineated in the
Constitution of the People's Republic of China, adopted in 1982. The Constitution stipulated the
creation of a central government body, estabilshed by the State Council, to "supervise through
auditing the revenue and expenditure of all departments under the State Council and of the lo-
cal governments at various levels, and the revenue and expenditure of all financial and monetary
organizations, enterprises and institutions of the state" (Article 91 of the Constitution). The Consti-
tution further required that local governments also establish auditing organs. These were required
for governments at the county-level (one level below prefecture/city) and higher. Article 109 of the



                                                  5
Constitution specified that, "the local auditing organs...should report to the corresponding local
government and also auditing organs at the higher level." That is, the audit department at the
county-level was mandated to report to the prefecture-level audit department (in addition to report-
ing to the county government), the prefecture audit department to the provincial audit department
(and also the prefecture government), and so forth. Thus, from the initial establishment of China's
governmental audit system, the provincial audit chief's direct authority over the prefectural audit
chief has been codified in law.
   The laws contained in the 1982 Constitution also led to the formal establishment of the National
Audit Office of the People's Republic of China in September, 1983, which is a cabinet-level ministry,
one of twenty-six such departments that comprise the State Council, China's chief administrative
body. Among other responsibilities, the National Audit Office supervises provincial audit offices
throughout the country. By the end of 1983, all provinces had established their own Audit Depart-
ments, with the exception of Shanghai, Qinghai, Fujian and Guangxi, which established theirs in
1984.
   The laws formalizing the roles and responsibilities of audit offices at various levels were not put
in place until the passage of the 1994 Audit Law, which went into effect on January 1, 1995. The
audit law was substantially revised in February 2006, so as to give expanded responsibilities to
each audit office. In particular, the law specified that the local office was required to audit all local
government branches and local SOEs, and also that the local chief audit officer would be selected
by the local Party Standing Committee. More importantly (and of particular relevance for our
setting), Article 16 of the law specified that a local audit office has the authority to directly audit
lower-level government sectors and SOEs (that is, the provincial audit office has the authority to
audit any prefectural government department and any SOE controlled by the prefecture.)4
   In general, provincial auditors tend to focus primarily on more significant audits. While there is
no formal delineation of investigations of municipal expenditures conducted at the prefecture- versus
provincial-level, a review of the practices of several provinces (Hunan, Jiangsu, Sichuan) suggests a
few commonalities. Provincial auditors generally audit the implementation of the fiscal budgeting
(revenues and expenditures) of prefecture government departments. Furthermore, when an entire
sector (e.g., the finance industry or public utilities) faces an audit across the entire province, it is
managed by the provincial audit department, as it requires coordination across multiple prefectures.
Larger individual investments in fixed assets, such as roads or buildings, may fall under the purview
of provincial auditors. SOEs owned by the provincial government are also overseen by the provincial
auditor, rather than the prefectural auditor in the city where the SOE is located. Furthermore, the
   4 The full text of China's audit regulations may         be   found   at   http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2019-
07/15/content_5409738.htm last accessed January 29, 2020.



                                                    6
provincial Party Standing Committee can order "special audits" at its discretion, which provides
wide latitude for the provincial audit office in its oversight of prefectures.
    Finally, the departure of top prefecture officials, by law, automatically triggers an audit by the
provincial audit office.5 More specifically, the government responsibilities or sectors under direct
supervision of the departing officer are targeted for provincial audit. For the mayor, the prefecture
government's office would be audited, as well as any other sectors or departments assigned to him
for supervision. For example, if the mayor were mainly in charge of the Education and Finance
Departments (not an unusual situation in Chinese cities), while the vice-mayor supervised the Price
and Police Departments, then Finance and Education would be audited when the mayor departs, but
not Price and Police. This audit cannot be undertaken by the prefecture office, since top prefecture
officials outrank the prefecture's chief auditor. Crucially, audits conducted immediately following
the departure of one or both of the prefecture's chief officers also take place under the leadership
and guidance of the province's Organization Department, one of the highest administrative body
in the province. The Organization Department is essentially the human resource manager for
the Communist Party of China, which makes promotions and other HR decisions for the CPC
bureaucracy. Precisely because of its consequences for future promotion or demotion decisions, the
audits conducted as top officials leave office are more scrutinized than the routine fiscal audits that
occur in other years.6 As a result, the provincial chief auditor has less discretion in his oversight of
a prefecture in the years of a city chief officer's departure.
    We summarize the structure and responsibilities of the CPC bureaucracy as it pertains to the
audit department and its various roles in Figure 1. As the diagram emphasizes, there exists a
parallel hierarchy within the audit offices, with the audit department at each level of government
supervised by the one above it. The figure also highlights the audit responsibilities of the provincial
and municipal audit offices. In particular, it illustrates that the provincial audit office is directly
responsible for a combination of provincial and municipal audits, and supervises the various mu-
nicipality audit departments under its jurisdiction, as well as top city leaders (which, as the figure
shows, supervise the city audit department and so cannot be audited by them).
   5 This requirement was put in place for county-level leaders in the Interim Provisions on the Audit of Economic

Responsibilities of Party and Government Leading Cadres at the County Level in May 1999. An expansion of these
provisions were implemented in January 1, 2005, that extended the audit requirements to officials with ranks up to
that of mayor (Ting Ju Ji in Chinese Pinyin). See the Opinion on Expanding the Scope of the Economic Responsibility
Audit of Party and Government Leading Cadres to the Level of the Ting Ju Ji, released Nov 24, 2004.
   6 The departure year oversight is further bolstered by the involvement of the provincial Discipline Inspection

Commission (DIC), the provincial division of the CPC Central Commission for Discipline Inspection. While departure
year audits are initiated by the OD, if suspicions are raised around the leader's behavior as a result of the audit, the
case may be referred to the DIC for disciplinary action.




                                                           7
2.2        Selection of the provincial audit chief
In each provincial audit department, the chief auditor is assisted by, on average, six vice-chief audit
officers. It is possible for any government officials with the same rank as, or one level below, the
provincial audit chief to be selected as a chief auditor. We obtained the name of each provincial chief
auditor from the China Audit Yearbooks (see Section 2.3), and hand-collected information on the last
job title/position for each individual. Many chief auditors held lower-level positions as auditors or
finance/tax officials within the same province: 38 percent of provincial chief auditors were provincial
vice-chief auditors immediately before their appointments (which is defined as PastAuditor ); 15
percent came from the provincial Finance Department or Tax Bureau, either as vice-chief officer
(thus the appointment was a promotion) or chief officer (so that the appointment to chief auditor was
a lateral move), which is defined as PastFinance. However, many also come from less closely aligned
branches of the bureaucracy: 30 percent served as the vice-chief or chief officer7 of a prefecture within
the province, which is defined as PastCityLeader ; 5 percent came from the provincial Commission for
Discipline Inspection or provincial Supervision Department, as vice-chief officer (PastDiscipline ).8
The remaining 12 percent came from different departments within the provincial government (e.g.,
the Education Department, Price Department) or the central government.
    The chief auditor is appointed by the provincial Standing Committee (subject to the rubber
stamp approval of the provincial People's Congress), based on the Organization Department's
recommendation. The timing of the appointment is itself uncertain, as it depends on the career
opportunities of the incumbent chief auditor, who may be promoted by the provincial Standing
Committee to higher office. Furthermore, as the distribution of successors makes clear, there is a
wide range of candidates for the position ­ even for the 38 percent that are provincial vice-chief
auditors, the provincial Standing Committee has 6 candidates to choose among. Overall, both the
timing of turnover and the identity of the successor for the chief auditor position would be difficult
for prefectural officials to anticipate, a point we return to below.


2.3        Data
The main outcome variables throughout come from public records of prefecture-level audits, recorded
in China Audit Yearbooks. Since 2003, these annual publications have included the number of audit
assignments undertaken and the amount of questionable monies uncovered, aggregated to the city-
level. We utilize the years 2006 to 2016 as the investigations covered by the yearbooks expanded
   7 That is, vice-mayor, mayor, party secretary, or vice-party-secretary.
   8 For all but the largest prefectures, the provincial chief auditor has the same rank as the prefecture mayor or
party secretary, so that the appointment of a prefectural chief officer as provincial chief auditor would be seen as a
lateral move, whereas for vice-chief officers it would be a promotion.



                                                          8
substantially in 2006.9
    Our sample consists of all Chinese prefectures, with the exception of Beijing, Chongqing, Shang-
hai and Tianjin, which are directly under the administration of the central government. Note that
while we use the terms prefecture and city interchangeably, Chinese prefectures are administrative
subdivisions of provinces that encompass a combination of urban and rural areas, with populations
as high as 15 million.
    Our hand-collected audit data are complemented by hand-collected information on the back-
ground of each provincial chief audit officer, using a range of sources, including the China Audit
Yearbooks, official websites of each provincial Audit Office, and as needed the website Baidu (China's
Google). Using these sources, we were able to identify the birth city of the full set of 66 provin-
cial chief auditors in our data. We use these background characteristics to generate the following
officer-level controls: years as chief auditor (Tenure ), age, gender, dummy variables to denote the
department of the official's previous position (PastAuditor, PastFinance, PastCityLeader, PastDis-
cipline ), and education category variables to capture highest degree (Education: 4 for doctorate, 3
for master's, 2 for undergraduate degree, 1 for some college or less) and whether he has a finance
background (EduFinance ).
    To identify dates of turnover of top city officials (which, recall, triggers an audit overseen by the
Organization Department), we use the Chinese Local Leader Database, accessed via CSMAR, the
most widely used data vendor in China.
    We also include (time-varying) city-level variables, which all come from the Chinese City Statis-
tical Yearbooks. City-level covariates include basic political and economic variables, in particular:
the logarithm of GDP per capita, the logarithm of city population, the ratio of industrial output
to GDP, the logarithm of total government revenues, the fiscal balance (government expenditures
divided by revenues), foreign direct investment as a fraction of GDP, and average years of educa-
tion.10 Finally, we include in our summary statistics below the ratio of suspicious expenditures to
total expenditures, as well as government expenditures to municipal GDP.
    We note that the city-year panel is unbalanced because of missing data, as well as changes
in administrative units. For example, in 2011 Chaohu prefecture was split into three parts and
absorbed by surrounding cities, and thus disappears from our dataset. Tongren, by contrast, only
became a prefecture-level administrative unit in 2011, and so only appears in our data from that
year. Overall, 249 cities have data for all 11 years of our data, comprising 93.2 percent of our
city-year data.
    Finally, for our analysis of SOE earnings management, we use firm-year level data, also taken
   9 In the earlier years that prefecture-level audits were reported, the scale and outcome variables differed across

years ­ it was only in 2006 that the National Audit Office put in place consistent reporting criteria.
  10 Years of education is a provincial-level variable, as city-level figures are not available.




                                                         9
from CSMAR, for the period of 2006 to 2018. Our main outcome variable is real activity manip-
ulation (RAM), using the standard definition from Roychowdhury (2006). Intuitively, the RAM
measure aims to capture the extent to which a firm's activities are adjusted in order to improve
reported margins. It includes manipulation along three dimensions: cash flow from operations (cash
discounts to boost short-term sales), production costs (overproduction to reduce per-unit costs),
and discretionary expenditures (e.g., cutbacks to R&D). In practice, each component of RAM is
calculated by generating deviations from predicted values. For example, "abnormal" cash flow from
operations (CFO) is generated as the residuals from a regression in which cash flow is a function of
the level and growth in sales:

               CF Oit                1           Salesit       Salesit
                         = 0 + 1            + 1            + 2            +            it
              Assetsit-1         Assetsit-1     Assetsit-1     Assetsit-1

Following Cohen et al. (2008), we sum the (normalized) values of the three measures of activities
manipulation, to generate our overall RAM measure. As an alternative measure of questionable
accounting practices, we use accrual manipulation (AM), as pioneered by Dechow et al. (1995),
calculated as the difference between total accruals (revenues and expenses booked but not realized
in a given year) and non-discretionary accruals, which are in turn estimated from a model based
on the gap between revenue and receivables growth.
   In our SOE analyses we include the same set of chief auditor controls as for our city-level
analyses, as well as the following firm-level covariates: the logarithm of total assets, leverage (total
liabilities divided by total assets), ROA (return on assets), MB Ratio (the ratio of market cap to
book value of total equities), log(BoardSize), ownership share of the largest shareholder, whether
the chairperson is also the CEO, the ratio of independent directors to total number of directors,
ownership share of top (vice-CEO and above) managers, and a dummy indicating whether the
aduitor is one of the Big 4 Audit firms (PwC, Deloitte, Ernst & Young, and KPMG).


2.4    Data overview
We begin by presenting an overview of the patterns in the data, which will help to motivate some
features of our empirical specifications in the next section.
  In Figure 2, we show a series of figures depicting some of the time series patterns in the data.
We begin in Figure 2a by showing the average of the logarithm of suspicious expenditures per
audit across the years in our sample. There is a distinct increase in 2013, a natural result of the
well-publicized anti-corruption crackdown initiated by China's central government in November
2012. In Figure 2b, we show that there is an associated shift in auditor background ­ there is a



                                                  10
drop in appointments of former city leaders as chief auditors, and a corresponding increase in chief
auditors who are hired directly from the ranks of provincial or prefecture auditors. This is also a
natural consequence of the anticorruption crackdown, with a shift away from political/patronage
appointments toward those based more on expertise (although this shift comes with the perhaps
unintended consequences we documented in this paper: professional auditors' conflicts-of-interest
or hometown favoritism, which may have undermined anticorruption efforts).
   Our main takeaway from these initial graphs is that it will be essential to control throughout for
the anti-corruption period, both directly via year fixed effects, and also potentially via interactions
with our main control variables.
   In Figure 2c, we show the log of suspicious expenditures uncovered per audit over time, splitting
the sample based on whether the chief auditor was born in the prefecture. Across the full sample,
suspicious expenditures uncovered are lower in cities when overseen by hometown provincial chief
auditors, a pattern that persists when we add auditor and city-year controls (Appendix Figure A1).
In the next section, we will explore how this pattern is affected when we also include city fixed
effects, and thus identifies the relationship from (within-city) auditor turnover.
   Before proceeding to our regression analyses, we provide summary statistics on the main vari-
ables we use, both for the city-year and firm-year analyses, in Tables 1a and 1b respectively. Several
figures warrant elaboration. The mean ratio of suspicious to annual expenditures is 0.183 (median
0.08). There are two reasons why the ratio may be relatively high. First, audited projects may have
expenditures that extend back a number of years, so that total audited expenditures may be some-
what higher than current expenditures. Second, improper revenue generation may also contribute
to the total value of suspicious expenditures.11 We also observe that the municipal expenditure to
GDP ratio is very high in our sample with a mean of 0.162 (median 0.146). This is consistent with
the central role of municipal governments in the economy, particularly in China.12
   In Table 2, we compare the city-year attributes of observations with Hometown = 0 versus
Hometown = 1. While we emphasize that we will be identifying the role of hometown ties in city
fixed effect specifications, which exploit auditor turnover to identify the hometown effect, we also
note that the two groups of cities are statistically indistinguishable from one another in their basic
attributes such as income and government expenditure.
  11 Revenues that are flagged as suspicious or improper include, for example, the shifting forward of revenues in

order to improve the city's fiscal balance, or giving questionable tax breaks to local firms.
  12 China's local governments play an outsized role even when compared to other emerging market economies. For

example, based on IMF data, the ratio of local government revenue to GDP was 0.24 in China in 2010, as compared
to 0.075, 0.076, and 0.082 for Russia, South Africa, and Brazil respectively (International Monetary Fund (2018)).




                                                       11
3     Results
The main specification for our analyses of audit outcomes is as follows:


    log (SuspiciousExpenditurescy ) = Hometowna(c)y + a Xa(c)y + c Xcy + c + y +                          cy   (1)

 is the coefficient of interest, relating the hometown status of the chief auditor a(c) in city c to the
suspicious expenditures turned up by his audit. The vectors Xa(c)y and Xcy reflect (time-varying)
auditor and city attributes, while c and y are fixed effects for each of the 277 cities and 11 years
in our data. We cluster standard errors at the city-level throughout.
    In columns (1) ­ (4) of Table 3, we present specifications that include progressively more controls,
adding in city fixed effects (column (2)), auditor controls (column (3)), city-year controls (column
(4)), and finally auditor fixed effects (column (5)).13 We suppress the coefficients on control variables
to conserve space, but include the full set of results in Appendix Table A1.
   Across all specifications the coefficient on Hometown is significant at least at the 5 percent level.
In our favored specification, which includes controls for auditor and city characteristics,  ^ =0.471,
indicating that suspicious expenditures uncovered by a hometown auditor were 38 percent (i.e.,
1 - e-0.471 ) lower than those found by non-hometown auditors . In column (6) we limit our sample
to prefectures for which there is within-city variation in Hometown and obtain a similar (though
marginally smaller) coefficient on Hometown. We also find very strong correlations between sus-
picious expenditures and several other auditor attributes, most notably the two variables which
capture whether the official has a background in finance, either based on education or past em-
ployment. While this correlation is interesting in its own right, there are many reasons that might
account for the relationship: auditors with finance training tend to be technocrats who may have a
different standard for suspicious behavior; they may have less access to networks that allow them to
detect suspicious behavior; or their finance expertise may act as a deterrent. We leave exploration
of these possibilities for future work.
    In the final two columns of Table 3, we examine whether the link between hometown auditor and
suspicious expenditures is driven by the number of audits undertaken, versus the value of suspicious
expenditures per audit. In theory both are possible, given the provincial audit office's discretion
in whether to conduct audits in particular areas. We find that the hometown-expenditure relation
is driven entirely by the per audit rate of suspicious expenditures (column (7)) rather than the
number of audits (column (8)). While ex ante we have no strong prior expectations of whether
hometown ties affect the number or intensity of audits, the fact that we find evidence only for the
  13 A single observation drops out with the addition of city fixed effects, because for Wuzhong prefecture we have

only a single year of data.



                                                        12
latter is most plausibly the result of fixed government rules dictating the audits that take place in
each city, which may limit auditor discretion on this margin.
    Given the extremely large increase in suspicious expenditures found under the anti-corruption
crackdown, in Table 4 we allow for the effect of a hometown auditor as well as other covariates
to differ post-2103. We define the variable P ost2013 to denote years 2013 and later, and include
the interaction term Hometown  P ost2013 our basic specification in equation (1). We include
city and auditor controls, as well as city and year fixed effects (column (1), and also a full set of
interactions with control variables (i.e., P ost2013  Xa(c)y and P ost2013  Xcy ) in column (2).
In both cases, the direct effect of Hometown is marginally more negative than in the preceding
column, and the coefficient on Hometown  P ost2013 is positive, though smaller in magnitude and
does not approach statistical significance. Overall, we cannot reject the existence of a comparable
effect of Hometown before versus during the anticorruption campaign.14 In columns (3) and (4) we
present analogous results allowing for a differential effect in 2011 and 2013, the years in which the
National Audit Office conducted its audits of local government debt. Ex ante, one might expect a
moderating effect in those years because of the additional scrutiny resulting from central government
oversight (though the NAO audits focused primarily on assessing whether local debt was excessive
overall). The interaction of NAO and Hometown is positive in both specifications (indicating a
lesser impact of Hometown in NAO audit years) but in neither case can we reject that it is equal
to zero. Overall, the results in Table 4 suggest that the hometown effect is reasonably stable across
years ­ while we find suggestive between-year differences in the coefficient on Hometown, we are
plausibly underpowered to detect systematic differences.
    There are two primary explanations for the low rate of suspicious expenditures uncovered in chief
auditors' hometowns, which have very different implications for the role of hometown ties. The two
accounts build on the classic tradeoff implicated by social connections more broadly ­ favoritism
versus reduced information frictions, each of which may result from stronger social ties. Under
the alternative information frictions interpretation (which we refer to as the "deterrence" interpre-
tation), hometown auditors may have insider knowledge or networks that facilitate more rigorous
enforcement. Anticipating more stringent oversight, city officials may engage in less suspicious ac-
tivity. (A related possibility ­ with overlapping predictions ­ is that auditors may be particularly
  14 In this exercise, our aim is to assess whether the 2013 anti-corruption campaign acts as a confounder for the

relationship between hometown auditors and suspicious expenditures, rather than speculating about whether this
relationship should change as a result of the crackdown. We note that corruption ­ while possibly related to hometown
ties ­ is a distinct phenomenon, so that a decline in corruption does not necessarily affect hometown favoritism. The
lack of any change in the homeotwn audit effect after 2013 has many candidate explanations: it may reflect that the
campaign was politically-driven, as many have speculated, or that its priorities lay in domains other than auditing.
For the purposes of our paper, the main takeaway is that the hometown effect is statistically indistinguishable in the
pre- versus post-2013 periods.




                                                         13
concerned for hometown welfare, and thus be particularly tenacious in their oversight of officials in
their hometowns.) As we note in the introduction, hometown deterrence has an ambiguous effect on
reported suspicious activity overall ­ while it reduces underlying suspicious expenditures, it should
increase the rate at which they are uncovered. Thus, exploring the possibility of deterrence as an
underlying explanation implicitly assumes that the former effect dominates.
   One natural approach to testing for the deterrence interpretation is to consider whether the
hometown auditor effect varies across his tenure. As we discuss in Section 2.1, there are many
candidates for the provincial chief auditor position, and also uncertainty over the timing of an
incumbent auditor's departure. As a result, it would be very difficult for city officials to forecast
the timing of the incumbent's departure or the identity of his successor. Hence, first-year audi-
tors conduct audits of prefecture officials who likely did not anticipate the chief auditor's changed
hometown status.
   In Table 5 we provide three specifications that assess the extent to which the deterrence story is
likely to play a first-order role. In column (1) we add the interaction term F irstY ear  Hometown
(as well as the direct effect, F irstY ear) to capture whether there is a differential effect of hometown
auditors in their first year in the position. The coefficient on the interaction term is positive, though
small in magnitude. It is relatively imprecisely measured, but still implies that one may reject that
the coefficients on F irstY ear  Hometown and Hometown sum to zero (i.e., that the hometown
effect when F irstY ear = 1 is equal to zero) at the 1 percent level. In column (2), instead of
focusing only on the first year, we allow the hometown effect to vary linearly as a function of the chief
auditor's tenure (T enure  Hometown), and in column (3) we also introduce a quadratic interaction
(T enure2  Hometown). In neither of these cases is there any evidence that the hometown effect is
stronger in the earlier years of an auditor's tenure.
   We may exploit a second dimension of heterogeneity both to assess the plausibility of the de-
terrence view, as well as to further bolster the view that the auditor's hometown ties ­ rather than
some other correlated attribute ­ accounts for our main results. Specifically, we take advantage
of the differential timing of turnover for prefectures' chief officers which, as noted in Section 2.1,
automatically triggers an audit jointly overseen by the provincial chief auditor and the provincial
Organization Department. We argue that the additional layer of oversight provided by the Orga-
nization Department ­ the province's most powerful administrative body ­ limits the provincial
auditor's scope for leniency, while not limiting his ability to use inside knowledge to evaluate pre-
fecture expenditures. Thus, if leniency accounts for the our main hometown effect, we expect it
will be reduced in turnover years; we do not expect this to be the case if deterrence is behind the
lower rate of suspicious expenditures. We define the indicator variable CityT urnovercy to denote
any year y that the mayor or party secretary of prefecture c leaves his position.


                                                   14
   In column (1) of Table 6 we provide estimates of Equation (1), adding CityT urnover and
CityT urnover  Hometown as covariates. The direct effect of CityT urnover is quantitatively small,
and statistically insignificant. Of greater interest, the coefficient on CityT urnover  Hometown
(0.38) is more than half the size of the coefficient on Hometown, but of opposite sign, and significant
at the 5 percent level. Thus, turnover-induced audits overseen by the Organization Department
turn up relatively more suspicious expenditures when targeting the hometown of the province's
chief auditor. Paralleling our presentation of results in Table 3, we show the decomposition of this
effect into suspicious expenditures per audit versus number of audits. As before, we find that the
effect comes entirely from the expenditures-per-audit margin.
   Before turning to our firm-level analyses on earnings manipulation, we conclude with a set of
further robustness tests and heterogeneity analyses, which we collect in Table 7. We first consider
whether some other attribute of provincial leaders that is plausibly correlated with Hometown
might account for our main findings, and then explore heterogeneity by prefecture characteristics.
We begin in column (1) by including Homeprovincea(c)y , an indicator variable which captures
whether the auditor was born in the province that contains city c. This variable is uncorrelated
with suspicious expenditures, highlighting the distinct role played by hometown ties, which has
been emphasized in the literature (see Fisman et al. (2018) among many others). In column (2)
we include the variable SameHometown_Leadersa(c)y which captures whether the auditor of city
c in year y shares his hometown with either the city mayor or party secretary (i.e., the two highest-
ranking city officials). The coefficient on this shared background variable is close to zero, and
does not affect the point estimate on Hometown coefficient. In columns (3) and (4) we take two
approaches to assessing whether connections to other top provincial leaders might account for our
results. First, we simply exclude the set of cities that is the hometown of the province's governor
or party secretary in at least one year during our sample period. Because this is a relatively rare
event, it reduces the sample by less than 10 percent, and does not impact our main result. We
further show in column (4) that having a hometown provincial leader is uncorrelated with suspicious
expenditures.
   We now turn to examine heterogeneity by city attributes. In column (5), we control for whether
the chief auditor's hometown is adjacent to city c (NearbyHometown ) to capture potential geo-
graphic spillovers; its coefficient is close to zero and does not affect the Hometown coefficient, again
emphasizing the particular role of hometown ties. Column (6) excludes capital cities and again our
main results are unchanged.
   Finally, columns (7) and (8) look at the interactions of Hometown with two basic city features,
log (GDP percapita) and log (P opulation). Both interactions are negative, indicating less of a home-
town effect for larger, more developed prefectures, and the GDP interaction is significant at the 10


                                                  15
percent level. Given that the result is only marginally significant (and furthermore one of several
heterogeneity tests) we would not ascribe too strong an interpretation to this finding.
   Taking stock of the results presented thus far, we argue that they are most easily reconciled with
the view that that chief auditors show greater leniency when assessing their hometown governments.


Firm-level results on SOE earnings manipulation
We next present a set of analyses at the firm-level of locally-owned state-owned enterprises. These
results complement our city-level findings in two ways. First, they allow us to assess the association
between hometown auditors and audit outcomes for a distinct set of organizations ­ it may give
greater confidence in our interpretation if we find consistent results across the two sets of analyses.
Second, we may build on the vast literature in accounting on earnings manipulation to relate the
presence of a hometown auditor to suspicious behaviors of audited entities, rather than findings of
suspicious behaviors uncovered by the auditor. The latter case, which is what we measure in our
city-level analyses, potentially conflates suspicious actions with the auditor's ability or willingness
to uncover suspicious actions.
   As outlined in Section 2.3, we measure earnings management by SOEs primarily based on
Real Activities Manipulation (RAM). Recall that this measure aims to capture three types of
manipulation: cash flow via cash discounts to generate short-term sales, overproduction to generate
higher margins, and the postponement of discretionary expenditures (e.g., R&D) to boost short-
term earnings.
   Before proceeding to our results, we clarify why ex ante one might expect real activities ma-
nipulation to result from relatively lax monitoring. Conceptually, RAM is in a legal gray area in
China ­ not explicitly illicit, though not clearly legal either ­ indeed, it may constitute exactly the
type of suspicious (though not illegal) expenditure that auditors are meant to uncover.This line of
reasoning has also motivated a substantial literature in accounting, which links audit quality and
quantity to various measures of earnings management (e.g., Caramanis and Lennox (2008)). At the
same time, RAM constitutes only a rough proxy for suspicious activity at SOEs, rather than the
direct measure available for city government spending. As such, the results in this section should
be treated with appropriate caution.
   Our main specification is similar to Equation 1, except that the level of observation is at the
firm-year (f y ):



    RAMf y = Hometowna(c(f ))y + a Xa(c(f ))y + c Xc(f )y + + c Xf y + f + y +               fy    (2)



                                                  16
As implied by the specification in (2), we maintain our full set of time-varying auditor and city
controls, and add in a set of firm-level control variables. In our preferred specification, we include
firm fixed effects (f ), which absorb the city fixed effects we employed in the preceding analyses.
Standard errors are clustered at the city level, to account for the level of identifying variation.
   We present results based on equation 2 in Table 8. In column (1) we show results including only
year and firm fixed effects as controls, so that we may identify the hometown-RAM relationship
from auditor turnover. We observe a positive relationship, with a coefficient of 0.027 on Hometown.
We add progressively more controls in the next set of columns, including auditor characteristics
(column (2)), firm characteristics (column (3)), and city characteristics (column (4)). The addition
of auditor controls leads to a coefficient on Hometown of 0.030 (significant at the 5 percent level),
so that the presence of a hometown auditor is associated with an increase of about a quarter of the
within-firm standard deviation in RAM of 0.121 (assuming that real activities do not change with
the presence of a hometown auditor for reasons other than earnings manipulation). The further
addition of firm and city controls has little effect on the estimated relationship. In Appendix Table
A2, we use accruals manipulation (Dechow et al. (1995)) as the outcome. While we observe a
positive correlation between the presence of a hometown auditor and earnings manipulation, the
correlation is quite weak.15
    Finally, in Appendix Tables A3 and A4 we repeat our analyses of RAM for two sets of firms
not overseen by the provincial auditor: centrally-owned SOEs, which are audited by the central
government, and non-SOE firms. We may view these as placebo tests for the association between
hometown auditors and earnings manipulation. In both cases, the coefficients on Hometown are
uniformly small in economic magnitude and statistically indistinguishable from zero.


4     Conclusion
In this paper we show robust statistical evidence that provincial chief auditors turn up fewer sus-
picious expenditures in audits of government activities in their hometowns. Consistent with these
results reflecting leniency toward hometown governments, this effect is reduced in years that audits
are overseen by the province Organization Department, which limits the provincial chief auditor's
discretion. We find supporting evidence in our analyses of earnings manipulation by locally-owned
SOEs, also overseen by the provincial chief auditor.
    To our knowledge, we are the first to document the consequences of shared backgrounds on the
quality of government audits. Our findings have implications for the optimal design of government
 15 As suggested by Cohen et al. (2008), accruals versus real activity manipulation may be substitutes. If so, one

may not necessarily expect both measures to be positively correlated with opportunities for manipulation.



                                                       17
monitoring institutions ­ we highlight the importance of accounting for a wider range of potential
conflicts-of-interest in the assignment of monitors ­ and also for researchers in political economy,
in modeling the role of social ties in bureaucracies.




                                                  18
References
Avis, E., C. Ferraz, and F. Finan (2018). Do government audits reduce corruption? estimating the
  impacts of exposing corrupt politicians. Journal of Political Economy 126 (5), 1912­1964.

Baber, W. R., J. Krishnan, and Y. Zhang (2014). Investor perceptions of the earnings quality
  consequences of hiring an affiliated auditor. Review of Accounting Studies 19 (1), 69­102.

Bandiera, O., A. Prat, and T. Valletti (2009). Active and passive waste in government spending:
  evidence from a policy experiment. American Economic Review 99 (4), 1278­1308.

Caramanis, C. and C. Lennox (2008). Audit effort and earnings management. Journal of accounting
  and economics 45 (1), 116­138.

Cohen, D. A., A. Dey, and T. Z. Lys (2008). Real and accrual-based earnings management in the
  pre-and post-sarbanes-oxley periods. The accounting review 83 (3), 757­787.

Dabla-Norris, E., J. Brumby, A. Kyobe, Z. Mills, and C. Papageorgiou (2012). Investing in public
  investment: an index of public investment efficiency. Journal of Economic Growth 17 (3), 235­
  266.

Dechow, P. M., R. G. Sloan, and A. P. Sweeney (1995). Detecting earnings management. Accounting
  review , 193­225.

Do, Q.-A., K.-T. Nguyen, and A. N. Tran (2017). One mandarin benefits the whole clan: hometown
  favoritism in an authoritarian regime. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 9 (4),
  1­29.

Duflo, E., M. Greenstone, R. Pande, and N. Ryan (2013). Truth-telling by third-party auditors
  and the response of polluting firms: Experimental evidence from india. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 128 (4), 1499­1545.

Ferraz, C. and F. Finan (2008). Exposing corrupt politicians: the effects of brazil's publicly released
  audits on electoral outcomes. The Quarterly journal of economics 123 (2), 703­745.

Ferraz, C. and F. Finan (2011). Electoral accountability and corruption: Evidence from the audits
  of local governments. American Economic Review 101 (4), 1274­1311.

Fisman, R., D. Paravisini, and V. Vig (2017). Cultural proximity and loan outcomes. American
  Economic Review 107 (2), 457­92.



                                                  19
Fisman, R., J. Shi, Y. Wang, and W. Wu (2019). Social ties and the selection of china's political
  elite. Technical report.

Fisman, R., J. Shi, Y. Wang, and R. Xu (2018). Social ties and favoritism in chinese science.
  Journal of Political Economy 126 (3), 1134­1171.

Gerardino, M. P., S. Litschig, and D. Pomeranz (2017). Can audits backfire? evidence from public
  procurement in chile. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Guan, Y., L. N. Su, D. Wu, and Z. Yang (2016). Do school ties between auditors and client
  executives influence audit outcomes? Journal of accounting and economics 61 (2-3), 506­525.

He, X., J. A. Pittman, O. M. Rui, and D. Wu (2017). Do social ties between external auditors and
  audit committee members affect audit quality? The Accounting Review 92 (5), 61­87.

Hodler, R. and P. A. Raschky (2014).      Regional favoritism.   The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 129 (2), 995­1033.

International Monetary Fund (2018). Government Finance Statistics, Volume 32. International
  Monetary Fund.

Roychowdhury, S. (2006). Earnings management through real activities manipulation. Journal of
  accounting and economics 42 (3), 335­370.

Tanzi, V. and H. Davoodi (1998). Corruption, public investment, and growth. In The welfare state,
  public investment, and growth, pp. 41­60. Springer.




                                               20
Figure 1: The Organization of Chinese Audits




                    21
Figure 2a: The Distribution of log(SuspiciousExpenditures per Audit) across Years




  Notes:          This      figure     shows      the       distribution of
  log (SuspiciousExpenditures per Audit) across the years in our sample.
  Each dot indicates the average of log (SuspiciousExpenditures per Audit).
  The shaded area shows the 95 percent confidence interval.




                                       22
      Figure 2b: The Distribution of Auditor Background across Years




Notes: This figure shows the distribution of auditor background across years.
Each dot indicates the fraction of auditors from different backgrounds. The
shaded area shows the 95 percent confidence interval.




                                     23
Figure 2c: The Average of log(SuspiciousExpenditures per Audit) across Years for Hometown
                              versus non-Hometown Auditors




       Notes:            This       figure      shows    the      distribution    of
       log (SuspiciousExpenditures per Audit) across years, splitting the sam-
       ple based on whether the chief auditor was born in the prefecture. Each dot
       indicates the average of the log (SuspiciousExpenditures per Audit) uncovered
       by auditors from different backgrounds. The shaded area shows the 95 percent
       confidence interval.




                                            24
  Table 1a: Summary Statistics, City-Year Aggregates

Variable Name                            Mean     StdDev   Obs
log (SuspiciousExpenditures)             11.661    1.889   2940
log (SuspiciousExpenditures per Audit)   5.754     1.830   2940
SuspiciousExp/GovExp                      0.183    0.265   2940
log (P rojects Audited)                   5.908    0.682   2940
Hometown                                  0.056    0.230   2940
Gender                                    0.163    0.075   2940
Age                                       0.883    0.321   2940
T enure                                  54.571    3.232   2940
T enure2                                  4.589    2.729   2940
Education                                28.502   30.016   2940
EduF inance                               2.405    0.782   2940
P astAuditor                              0.375    0.484   2940
P astF inance                             0.420    0.494   2940
P astDiscipline                           0.168    0.374   2940
P astCityLeader                           0.080    0.271   2940
Log (GDP pc)                             0.238     0.426   2940
IndustrialRatio                          10.271    0.762   2940
Log (P opulation)                         0.494    0.099   2940
Log (GovRev )                             5.893    0.623   2940
GovBalance                               13.421    1.091   2940
F DI/GDP                                  2.626    1.457   2940
AvgEdu                                    0.020    0.019   2940




                              25
         Table 1b: Summary Statistics, Firm-Year Aggregates for Locally-Owned SOEs

                               Variable Name     Mean     StdDev   Obs
                               RAM                0.008    0.193   5996
                               AM                -0.004    0.112   5266
                               log (Assets)      22.305    1.238   5996
                               Leverage           0.521    0.195   5996
                               ROA                0.030    0.055   5996
                               M BRatio           3.220    3.394   5996
                               T opOwnership      0.370    0.152   5996
                               log (BoardSize)   2.318     0.179   5996
                               Dual               0.120    0.325   5996
                               Ind Dir Ratio      0.367    0.051   5996
                               M gtshare          0.004    0.021   5996
                               Big 4Audit         0.048    0.213   5996

Notes: log (SuspiciousExpenditures) is the logarithm of total questionable expenditures found
during the audit. log (SuspiciousExpenditures per Audit) is the logarithm of total questionable
expenditures per audited project. log (P rojects Audited) is the logarithm of number of audited
projects. Hometown is an indicator variable denoting that the provincial chief auditor was born
in city c. Gender is an indicator variable denoting that the chief auditor is male. Age is the age
of the chief auditor. T enure is the tenure of the chief auditor. Education is the education of the
chief auditor: 4 for doctor, 3 for master, 2 for bachelor, 1 for college or lower level. EduF inance
is an indicator variable denoting whether the chief auditor has a business finance background.
P astAuditor is an indicator variable denoting whether the chief auditor previously worked in the
auditing department. P astF inance is an indicator variable denoting if the chief auditor previously
worked in the finance/taxation department. P astDiscipline is an indicator variable denoting if
the chief auditor worked previously in the disciplining department. P astCityLeader is an indica-
tor variable denoting if the chief auditor worked previously as a city official with rank vice-mayor
or higher. Log (GDP pc) is the logarithm of city GDP per capita. IndustrialRatio is the ratio
of industrial output to total GDP. Log (GovRev ) is the logarithm of fiscal revenue of the city.
F DI/GDP is foreign direct investment scaled by GDP. GovBalance the ratio of municipal govern-
ment expenditures to revenues. RAM is real activity manipulation. AM is accrual manipulation.
Leverage is total liabilities divided by total assets. log (Assets) is the logarithm of total assets.
ROA is return on assets. M BRatio is the ratio of market capitalization to book value of total
equity. T opOwnership is the ownership share of the largest shareholder. log (BoardSize) is the
log of the number of board members. Dual is an indicator variable denoting that the chairperson
is also the CEO. Indep Ratio is the ratio of independent directors to total number of directors.
M gtshare denotes the fraction of shares held by management at the level of vice-CEO and higher.
Big 4Audit is an indicator variable denoting whether the firm's auditor is one of the Big 4 global
audit firms.




                                                  26
                 Table 2: Comparison of City Attributes, by Hometown Status

                                  Hometown = 1       Hometown = 0          Difference
           Varible Name          Mean   StdDev      Mean   StdDev   Difference t-statistic
           Log (GDP pc)          10.316  0.627      10.268  0.769     0.048         0.472
           IndustrialRatio       0.491   0.092       0.494  0.099    -0.004         -0.227
           Log (P opulation)      5.942  0.556       5.890  0.627     0.052          0.470
           Log (GovRev )         13.507  0.950      13.416  1.098     0.091          0.570
           GovBalance            2.681   1.266       2.622  1.468     0.058          0.265
           GovExp/GDP            0.167   0.076       0.162  0.075     0.005          0.361
           F DI/GDP              0.020   0.023       0.020  0.019     0.000          0.054
           AvgEdu                8.526   0.661       8.646  0.616    -0.120         -1.053
           CityLeaderHometown    0.122   0.328       0.097  0.296     0.025          0.522

Notes: Hometown is an indicator variable denoting if the provincial chief auditor was born a given
city. See the notes to Table 1 for detailed definitions of the variables.




                                               27
                        Table 3: The Relationship Between Auditor Hometown and Government Audit Outcomes

                             (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)                (7)                      (8)
     Dependent Variable                        log (SuspiciousExpenditures)                     log (SuspExp/Audit)   log (P rojects Audited)
     Hometown              -0.331     -0.520 -0.473 -0.471 -0.413                  -0.426             -0.445                    -0.020
                            (0.158)    (0.176)     (0.148)    (0.143)   (0.111)     (0.130)            (0.136)                 (0.050)
     Year FEs                 Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes                Yes                     Yes
     City FEs                            Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes                Yes                     Yes
     Auditor Controls                                Yes        Yes                   Yes                Yes                     Yes
     Auditor FE                                                           Yes
     City Controls                                              Yes       Yes        Yes               Yes                     Yes
                                                                                  Within-City
     Sample                  Full       Full       Full       Full       Full                          Full                    Full
                                                                                   Variation
     Observations           2940        2939      2939       2939       2939         339               2939                    2939
     R-Squared              .553         .81      .826       .827       .839         .822              .807                    .787
     Mean of Dep. Var.      11.7        11.7      11.7       11.7       11.7         11.7              5.75                    5.91
28




      Notes: Standard errors clustered by city in parentheses. The sample covers the period from 2006 to 2016. The depen-
      dent variable in columns (1)-(6) is log (SuspiciousExpenditures), which denotes the logarithm of total questionable ex-
      penditures found during the audit. The dependent variable in columns (7) is log (SuspiciousExpenditures per Audit),
      which denotes the logarithm of total questionable expenditures per audited project. The dependent variable in columns
      (8) is log (P rojects Audited), which denotes the logarithm of number of projects audited. The sample in column (6)
      is limited to cities that have variation in Hometown during the sample period. Hometown is an indicator variable
      denoting that the provincial chief auditor was born in city c. Auditor Controls include Gender, Age, T enure, T enure2 ,
      Education, EduF inance, P astAuditor, P astF inance, P astDiscipline, and P astCityLeader. City controls include
      Log (GDP pc), IndustrialRatio, Log (P opulation), Log (GovRev ), GovBalance, F DI/GDP , and AvgEdu. The coef-
      ficients and standard errors of the control variables are suppressed to conserve space. See the notes to Table 1 for
      detailed definitions of the control variables.
      Significance: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
     Table 4: Differences in hometown auditor effect across time periods

                                    (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)
         Dependent Variable               log (SuspiciousExpenditures)
         Hometown                 -0.516 -0.507 -0.517 -0.511
                                   (0.135)      (0.103)   (0.150)    (0.152)
         Hometown  P ost2013        0.106        0.199
                                   (0.267)      (0.222)
         Hometown  N AO                                    0.247       0.201
                                                          (0.174)    (0.176)
         Year FEs                    Yes          Yes       Yes         Yes
         City FEs                    Yes          Yes       Yes         Yes
         Auditor Controls            Yes          Yes       Yes         Yes
         City Controls               Yes          Yes       Yes         Yes
         City*Post2013 Controls                   Yes
         City*NAO Controls                                              Yes
         Observations               2939         2939      2939        2939
         R-Squared                   .827         .84       .827        .829
         Mean of Dep. Var.           11.7         11.7      11.7        11.7

Notes: Standard errors clustered by city in parentheses. The sample cov-
ers the period from 2006 to 2016. The dependent variable in all columns is
log (SuspiciousExpenditures), which denotes the logarithm of total question-
able expenditures found during the audit. Hometown is an indicator variable
denoting that the provincial chief auditor was born in city c. P ost2013 denotes
years 2013 and later, and N AO is an indicator variable denoting the years 2011
and 2013 when the National Audit Office audited local government debt. Audi-
tor Controls include Gender, Age, T enure, T enure2 , Education, EduF inance,
P astAuditor, P astF inance, P astDiscipline, and P astCityLeader. City con-
trols include Log (GDP pc), IndustrialRatio, Log (P opulation), Log (GovRev ),
GovBalance, F DI/GDP , and AvgEdu. The coefficients and standard errors
of the control variables are suppressed to conserve space. See the notes to Table
1 for detailed definitions of the control variables.
Significance: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                          29
                      Table 5: The Role of Auditor Tenure

                                            (1)         (2)      (3)
               Dependent Variable       log (SuspiciousExpenditures)
               Hometown                -0.504         -0.313  -0.259
                                         (0.148)     (0.209) (0.248)
               F irstY ear                 0.054
                                         (0.079)
               F irstY ear  Hometown       0.215
                                         (0.170)
               T enure                    -0.057    -0.075 -0.073
                                         (0.041)     (0.031) (0.032)
               T enure  Hometown                      -0.040  -0.070
                                                     (0.032) (0.097)
               T enure2                  0.006      0.008    0.007
                                         (0.004)     (0.003) (0.003)
               T enure2  Hometown                              0.003
                                                             (0.009)
               Year FEs                     Yes        Yes      Yes
               City FEs                     Yes        Yes      Yes
               Auditor Controls             Yes        Yes      Yes
               City Controls                Yes        Yes      Yes
               Observations                2939        2939    2939
               R-Squared                   .827        .827     .827
               Mean of Dep. Var.           11.7        11.7     11.7

Notes: Standard errors clustered by city in parentheses. The sample cov-
ers the period from 2006 to 2016. The dependent variable in all columns is
log (SuspiciousExpenditures), which denotes the logarithm of total question-
able expenditures found during the audit. Hometown is an indicator vari-
able denoting that the provincial chief auditor was born in city c. Auditor
Controls include Gender, Age, T enure, T enure2 , Education, EduF inance,
P astAuditor, P astF inance, P astDiscipline, and P astCityLeader. City con-
trols include Log (GDP pc), IndustrialRatio, Log (P opulation), Log (GovRev ),
GovBalance, F DI/GDP , and AvgEdu. The coefficients and standard errors
of the control variables are suppressed to conserve space. See the notes to Table
1 for detailed definitions of the control variables.
Significance: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                       30
     Table 6: City Turnover, Administrative Oversight, and Audit Outcomes

                                  (1)                 (2)                       (3)
                          log (Suspicious
Dependent Variable                           log (SuspExp/P roject)   log (P rojects Audited)
                          Expenditures)
Hometown                      -0.670               -0.638   
                                                                              -0.024
                               (0.168)              (0.159)                  (0.056)
CityT urnover                   -0.012               0.001                    -0.015
                               (0.029)              (0.031)                  (0.012)
CityT urnover  Hometown        0.378                0.367                      0.007
                               (0.178)              (0.175)                  (0.044)
Year FEs                         Yes                  Yes                       Yes
City FEs                         Yes                  Yes                       Yes
Auditor Controls                 Yes                  Yes                       Yes
City Controls                    Yes                  Yes                       Yes
Observations                     2939                2939                      2939
R-Squared                        .828                 .808                     .787
Mean of Dep. Var                 11.7                 5.75                      5.91

  Notes: Standard errors clustered by city in parentheses. The sample cov-
  ers the period from 2006 to 2016. The dependent variable in columns (1) is
  log (SuspiciousExpenditures), which denotes the logarithm of total question-
  able expenditures found during the audit. The dependent variable in columns
  (2) is log (SuspiciousExpenditures per Audit), which denotes the logarithm
  of total questionable expenditures per audited project. The dependent vari-
  able in columns (3) is log (P rojects Audited), which denotes the logarithm of
  number of projects audited. Hometown is an indicator variable denoting that
  the provincial chief auditor was born in city c. T urnover denotes years in
  which the prefecture mayor or party secretary departs, which triggers audit
  oversight by the province-level Organization Department. Auditor Controls in-
  clude Gender, Age, T enure, T enure2 , Education, EduF inance, P astAuditor,
  P astF inance, P astDiscipline, and P astCityLeader. City controls include
  Log (GDP pc), IndustrialRatio, Log (P opulation), Log (GovRev ), GovBalance,
  F DI/GDP , and AvgEdu. The coefficients and standard errors of the control
  variables are suppressed to conserve space. See the notes to Table 1 for detailed
  definitions of the control variables.
  Significance: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                            31
                                             Table 7: Robustness and heterogeneity

                                            (1)        (2)       (3)          (4)        (5)       (6)       (7)        (8)
         Dependent Variable                                           log (SuspiciousExpenditures)
         Hometown                        -0.471     -0.473     -0.436 -0.472 -0.470 -0.367                 -0.452     -0.461
                                          (0.143)    (0.143)    (0.156)     (0.143)    (0.147)   (0.163)    (0.144)    (0.139)
         Homeprovince                      -0.006
                                          (0.103)
         SameHometownLeaders                          -0.025
                                                     (0.080)
         P rovLeaderHometown                                                -0.063
                                                                           (0.138)
         NearbyCity                                                                    0.004
                                                                                      (0.079)
         Hometown  log (P opulation)                                                                        -0.190
                                                                                                           (0.227)
         Hometown  log (GDP percapita)                                                                                -0.226
                                                                                                                      (0.122)
         Excluding Mayor/PS hometowns?                           Yes
         Excluding Prov capitals?                                                                 Yes
32




         Observations                      2939       2939       2698       2939       2939       2654      2939       2939
         R-Squared                         .827       .827       .827       .827       .827       .824      .827       .827
         Mean of Dep. Var.                 11.7       11.7       11.6       11.7       11.7       11.6      11.7       11.7

     Notes: Standard errors clustered by city in parentheses. The sample covers the period from 2006 to 2016. Column (2)
     excludes cities that, at some point during this period, was the hometown of the provincial governor or party secretary
     for the province where c is located. Column (6) excludes provincial capital cities. The dependent variable in all columns
     is log (SuspiciousExpenditures), which denotes the logarithm of total questionable expenditures found during the au-
     dit. Hometown is an indicator variable denoting that the provincial chief auditor was born in city c. Homeprovince is
     an indicator variable denoting that the provincial chief auditor was born in province of city c. SameHometownLeader
     is an indicator variable denoting that the provincial chief auditor had the same hometown as the city mayor or party
     secretary. P rovLeaderHometown is an indicator variable denoting that the provincial governor or party secretary
     was born in city c. All regressions include the following auditor controls: Gender, Age, T enure, T enure2 , Education,
     EduF inance, P astAuditor, P astF inance, P astDiscipline, and P astCityLeader. All regressions include the follow-
     ing city controls: Log (GDP pc), IndustrialRatio, Log (P opulation), Log (GovRev ), GovBalance, F DI/GDP , and
     AvgEdu. The coefficients and standard errors of the control variables are suppressed to conserve space. See the notes
     to Table 1 for detailed definitions of the remaining control variables.
     Significance: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Table 8: Firm Level Regressions on Locally-Owned SOE Real Activity Manip-
ulation

                                     (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)
             Dependent Variable         Real Activity M anipulation
             Hometown             0.027 0.030 0.034 0.038
                                  (0.014) (0.013)      (0.013)   (0.016)
             Year FEs               Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
             Firm FEs               Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
             Auditor Controls                 Yes        Yes       Yes
             Firm Controls                               Yes       Yes
             City Controls                                         Yes
             Observations           5950      5950       5950     5331
             R-Squared              .561      .563       .596      .607
             Mean of Dep. Var.     .0072     .0072      .0072     .0054

Notes: Standard errors clustered by city in parentheses. The sample cov-
ers the period from 2006 to 2018. The sample includes all locally-controlled
state-owned enterprises The dependent variable in all columns is real ac-
tivity manipulation (RAM ). Hometown is an indicator variable denot-
ing that the provincial chief auditor was born in city c. Auditor Con-
trols include Gender, Age, T enure, T enure2 , Education, EduF inance,
P astAuditor, P astF inance, P astDiscipline, and P astCityLeader. Firm
controls include log (Assets), Leverage, ROA, M BRatio, T opOwnership,
log (BoardSize), Dual, Indep Ratio, M gtshare, and Big 4Audit. City con-
trols include Log (GDP pc), IndustrialRatio, Log (P opulation), Log (GovRev ),
GovBalance, F DI/GDP , and AvgEdu. The coefficients and standard errors
of the control variables are suppressed to conserve space. See the notes to Ta-
ble 1 for detailed definitions of the control variables, and the text for further
description of real activity manipulation.
Significance: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                        33
Figure A1: The Average of log(SuspiciousExpenditures per Audit) across Years for Hometown
        versus non-Hometown Auditors, Controlling for Auditor and City Attributes




       Notes:        This   figure     shows    the    (residual)  distribution  of
       log (SuspiciousExpenditures per Audit) across years, splitting the sample
       based on whether the chief auditor was born in the prefecture. In generating
       the graph, we control for the auditor and city controls included in Table 3.
       Each dot indicates the average of the log (SuspiciousExpenditures per Audit)
       uncovered by auditors from different backgrounds. The shaded area shows the
       95 percent confidence interval.




                                           34
 Table A1: The Relationship Between Auditor Hometown and Government Audit Outcomes, All Covariates Listed

                                  (1)        (2)            (3)           (4)       (5)        (6)                  (7)                    (8)
           Dependent Variable                         log (SuspiciousExpenditures)                       log (SuspExp/Audit)   log (P rojects Audited)
           Hometown             -0.331     -0.520       -0.473       -0.471    -0.413       -0.426             -0.445                    -0.020
                                 (0.158)    (0.176)       (0.148)      (0.143)   (0.111)     (0.130)             (0.136)                (0.050)
           Gender                                          0.023        0.055                 0.520               0.004                 0.076
                                                          (0.096)      (0.099)               (0.265)             (0.105)                (0.045)
           Age                                             0.013        0.011                 -0.006            0.022                   -0.010
                                                          (0.009)      (0.009)               (0.025)             (0.011)                (0.005)
           T enure                                       -0.079       -0.077                  -0.041           -0.102                   0.026
                                                          (0.032)      (0.031)               (0.085)             (0.031)                (0.013)
           T enure2                                      0.008        0.008                    0.005            0.009                   -0.002
                                                          (0.003)      (0.003)               (0.008)             (0.003)                (0.001)
           Education                                       0.037        0.037                 -0.251              0.073                  -0.039
                                                          (0.063)      (0.064)               (0.191)             (0.064)                (0.027)
           EduF inance                                  -0.307       -0.306                   -0.047           -0.285                    -0.012
                                                          (0.072)      (0.072)               (0.239)             (0.073)                (0.032)
           P astAuditor                                   0.147         0.125                  0.001               0.079                  0.035
                                                          (0.074)      (0.076)               (0.218)             (0.079)                (0.036)
           P astF inance                                -0.425       -0.418                 -1.029             -0.332                   -0.097
                                                          (0.109)      (0.109)               (0.324)             (0.112)                (0.050)
           P astDiscipline                                 0.022        -0.010                 0.004              0.055                  -0.045
                                                          (0.130)      (0.138)               (0.464)             (0.137)                (0.055)
           P astCityLeader                                0.235       0.239                   0.482             0.239                    -0.007
                                                          (0.105)      (0.104)               (0.242)             (0.107)                (0.051)
           Log (GDP pc)                                                  0.274     0.480       0.356              0.437                  -0.089
                                                                       (0.293)   (0.334)     (1.266)             (0.312)                (0.162)
           IndustrialRatio                                              -0.977  -1.891        -2.543             -1.537                   0.546
                                                                       (0.822)   (0.904)     (2.878)             (0.846)                (0.399)
           Log (P opulation)                                           1.522      0.631        0.219             1.333                    0.176
                                                                       (0.679)   (0.660)     (2.062)             (0.696)                (0.306)
           Log (GovRev )                                                 0.206     0.004       0.778              -0.019               0.229
                                                                       (0.190)   (0.188)     (0.616)             (0.200)                (0.087)
           GovBalance                                                   0.064     0.022        0.264              0.037                   0.032
                                                                       (0.047)   (0.048)     (0.160)             (0.053)                (0.030)
           F DI/GDP                                                     -1.569    1.317       -6.903              -2.052                  0.398
                                                                       (2.292)   (2.539)     (6.371)             (2.296)                (0.992)
           AvgEdu                                                       -0.112    -0.234      -0.157              -0.170                 0.040
                                                                       (0.156)   (0.178)     (0.403)             (0.166)                (0.071)
           Year FEs               Yes        Yes            Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes                 Yes                    Yes
           City FEs                          Yes            Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes                 Yes                    Yes
           Auditor FE                                                               Yes
                                                                                           Within-City
           Sample                 Full       Full         Full        Full        Full                          Full                    Full
                                                                                            Variation
           Observations          2940        2939         2939       2939         2939         339              2939                    2939
           R-Squared             .553         .81         .826       .827         .839        .822              .807                    .787
           Mean of Dep. Var.     11.7        11.7         11.7       11.7         11.7        11.7              5.75                    5.91


Notes: Standard errors clustered by city in parentheses. The sample covers the period from 2006 to 2016. The depen-
dent variable in columns (1)-(6) is log (SuspiciousExpenditures), which denotes the logarithm of total questionable ex-
penditures found during the audit. The dependent variable in columns (7) is log (SuspiciousExpenditures per Audit),
which denotes the logarithm of total questionable expenditures per audited project. The dependent variable in columns
(8) is log (P rojects Audited), which denotes the logarithm of number of projects audited. The sample in column (5)
is limited to cities that have variation in Hometown during the sample period. Hometown is an indicator variable
denoting that the provincial chief auditor was born in city c. Auditor Controls include Gender, Age, T enure, T enure2 ,
Education, EduF inance, P astAuditor, P astF inance, P astDiscipline, and P astCityLeader. City controls include
Log (GDP pc), IndustrialRatio, Log (P opulation), Log (GovRev ), GovBalance, F DI/GDP , and AvgEdu. See the
notes to Table 1 for detailed definitions of the control variables.
Significance: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                             35
Table A2: Firm Level Regressions on Locally-Owned SOE Accrual Manipula-
tion

                                    (1)         (2)      (3)       (4)
              Dependent Variable           AccrualM anipulation
              Hometown              0.009     0.010    0.008     0.009
                                   (0.011) (0.011) (0.011) (0.010)
              Year FEs                Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes
              Firm FEs                Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes
              Auditor Controls                 Yes      Yes       Yes
              Firm Controls                             Yes       Yes
              City Controls                                       Yes
              Observations           5222     5222     5222       5081
              R-Squared              .113      .115     .179      .179
              Mean of Dep. Var.     -.0041   -.0041   -.0041    -.00418

Notes: Standard errors clustered by city in parentheses. The sample cov-
ers the period from 2006 to 2018. The sample includes all locally-controlled
state-owned enterprises The dependent variable in all columns is accrual
manipulation (AM ). Hometown is an indicator variable denoting that
the provincial chief auditor was born in city c. Auditor Controls include
Gender, Age, T enure, T enure2 , Education, EduF inance, P astAuditor,
P astF inance, P astDiscipline, and P astCityLeader. Firm controls include
log (Assets), Leverage, ROA, M BRatio, T opOwnership, log (BoardSize),
Dual, Indep Ratio, M gtshare, and Big 4Audit.             City controls include
Log (GDP pc), IndustrialRatio, Log (P opulation), Log (GovRev ), GovBalance,
F DI/GDP , and AvgEdu. The coefficients and standard errors of the control
variables are suppressed to conserve space. See the notes to Table 1 for detailed
definitions of the control variables, and the text for further description of real
activity manipulation.
Significance: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                          36
Table A3: Firm Level Regressions on Centrally-owned SOE Real Activity Ma-
nipulation

                                      (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)
              Dependent Variable        Real Activity M anipulation
              Hometown              -0.014    0.004     0.009    0.002
                                   (0.014) (0.016) (0.014) (0.019)
              Year FEs               Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes
              Firm FEs               Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes
              Auditor Controls                 Yes       Yes      Yes
              Firm Controls                              Yes      Yes
              City Controls                                       Yes
              Observations           2353      2353     2353      2072
              R-Squared              .508      .513      .544     .558
              Mean of Dep. Var      .0234     .0234     .0234    .0243

Notes: Standard errors clustered by city in parentheses. The sample covers
the period from 2006 to 2018. The sample includes all centrally-controlled
state-owned enterprises The dependent variable in all columns is real ac-
tivity manipulation (RAM ). Hometown is an indicator variable denot-
ing that the provincial chief auditor was born in city c. Auditor Con-
trols include Gender, Age, T enure, T enure2 , Education, EduF inance,
P astAuditor, P astF inance, P astDiscipline, and P astCityLeader. Firm
controls include log (Assets), Leverage, ROA, M BRatio, T opOwnership,
log (BoardSize), Dual, Indep Ratio, M gtshare, and Big 4Audit. City con-
trols include Log (GDP pc), IndustrialRatio, Log (P opulation), Log (GovRev ),
GovBalance, F DI/GDP , and AvgEdu. The coefficients and standard errors
of the control variables are suppressed to conserve space. See the notes to Ta-
ble 1 for detailed definitions of the control variables, and the text for further
description of real activity manipulation.
Significance: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                        37
 Table A4: Firm Level Regressions on non-SOE Real Activity Manipulation

                                      (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)
              Dependent Variable        Real Activity M anipulation
              Hometown              -0.006    -0.005   -0.005    -0.007
                                   (0.010) (0.010) (0.009) (0.011)
              Year FEs               Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
              Firm FEs               Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
              Auditor Controls                 Yes       Yes       Yes
              Firm Controls                              Yes       Yes
              City Controls                                        Yes
              Observations          10504     10504    10504      8883
              R-Squared              .594      .596      .625     .636
              Mean of Dep. Var     -.00396 -.00396 -.00396       -.0054

Notes: Standard errors clustered by city in parentheses. The sample cov-
ers the period from 2006 to 2018. The sample includes all non-state-owned
(fully private) enterprises The dependent variable in all columns is real ac-
tivity manipulation (RAM ). Hometown is an indicator variable denot-
ing that the provincial chief auditor was born in city c. Auditor Con-
trols include Gender, Age, T enure, T enure2 , Education, EduF inance,
P astAuditor, P astF inance, P astDiscipline, and P astCityLeader. Firm
controls include log (Assets), Leverage, ROA, M BRatio, T opOwnership,
log (BoardSize), Dual, Indep Ratio, M gtshare, and Big 4Audit. City con-
trols include Log (GDP pc), IndustrialRatio, Log (P opulation), Log (GovRev ),
GovBalance, F DI/GDP , and AvgEdu. The coefficients and standard errors
of the control variables are suppressed to conserve space. See the notes to Ta-
ble 1 for detailed definitions of the control variables, and the text for further
description of real activity manipulation.
Significance: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                        38
