                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




BILATERAL INFORMATION DISCLOSURE IN ADVERSE SELECTION MARKETS WITH
                    NONEXCLUSIVE COMPETITION

                                        Joseph E. Stiglitz
                                          Jungyoll Yun
                                        Andrew Kosenko

                                      Working Paper 27041
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27041


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




We are grateful to several anonymous referees, to the audiences at Sciences Po, and to Gerry
Jaynes for helpful comments on an earlier draft, to Michael Rothschild and Richard Arnott, long
time collaborators, to Byoung Heon Jun, Debarati Ghosh, Andrea Gurwitt, and Lim Nayeon for
research and editorial assistance, and to the Institute for New Economic Thinking and the Ford
Foundation and Fulbright Foundation for financial support. The companion paper
"Characterization, Existence, and Pareto Optimality in Insurance Markets with Asymmetric
Information with Endogenous and Asymmetric Disclosures; Revisiting Rothschild-
Stiglitz" (Stiglitz et al 2018) contains more results. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Joseph E. Stiglitz, Jungyoll Yun, and Andrew Kosenko. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Bilateral Information Disclosure in Adverse Selection Markets with Nonexclusive Competition
Joseph E. Stiglitz, Jungyoll Yun, and Andrew Kosenko
NBER Working Paper No. 27041
April 2020
JEL No. D43,D82,D86

                                         ABSTRACT

We study insurance markets with nonexclusive contracts, introducing bilateral endogenous
information disclosure about insurance sales and purchases by firms and consumers. We show
that a competitive equilibrium exists under remarkably mild conditions, and characterize the
unique equilibrium outcome. With two types of consumers the outcome consists of a pooling
contract which maximizes the well-being of the low risk type (along the zero profit pooling line)
plus a supplemental (undisclosed and nonexclusive) contract that brings the high risk type to full
insurance (at his own odds). We show that this outcome is extremely robust and constrained
Pareto efficient. Consumer disclosure and asymmetric equilibrium information flows are critical
in supporting the equilibrium.

Joseph E. Stiglitz                              Andrew Kosenko
Uris Hall, Columbia University                  Marist College
3022 Broadway, Room 212                         School of Management
New York, NY 10027                              3399 North Road
and NBER                                        Poughkeepsie, NY 12601
jes322@columbia.edu                             ak2912@columbia.edu

Jungyoll Yun
Department of Economics,
Ewha University,
Seoul
Korea
jyyun@ewha.ac.kr
1   Introduction

In 1976 Rothschild and Stiglitz characterized equilibrium in a competitive market with
exogenous information asymmetries in which market participants had full knowledge of
insurance purchases. Self-selection constraints affected individual choices; but unlike the
monopoly equilibrium (Stiglitz (1977)), no single firm framed the set of contracts among
which individuals chose. There never existed a pooling equilibrium (in which the two
types bought the same policy); if there existed an equilibrium, it entailed the high risk
getting full insurance, and the low risk individual only getting partial insurance; and
under plausible conditions--e.g. if the two types were not too different--a competitive
equilibrium did not exist; finally, the single-crossing condition on preferences was nec-
essary but not sufficient for an equilibrium. The results were disquieting, as in reality
equilibrium seemed to exist, and often entailed pooling.
    A vast literature has applied the Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976) model (henceforth sim-
ply RS), to labor, capital, and product markets in a variety of contexts, with many empir-
ical applications. A smaller literature focused on remedying the deficiencies in the un-
derlying framework by formalizing the insurance "game", by changing the information
assumptions, and by changing the equilibrium concept.
    This paper introduces bilateral endogenous information disclosure about insurance
purchases: each firm and each consumer make a decision about what information to dis-
close to whom. Thus, information about contract purchases is both endogenous, and po-
tentially asymmetric - a firm may disclose information about a consumer to some firms,
but not others, depending on what the consumer discloses. We are motivated by the
following observations: the outcomes with full information disclosure (exclusivity is en-
forceable, so the RS model applies, and a pooling equilibrium is impossible), and with
no information disclosure (in which case pooling again cannot be an equilibrium), are
known. Without consumer disclosure, any disclosure that firms make has to be symmet-
ric, since they have no basis for differentiation; as we show later such disclosure cannot
underpin an equilibrium. The question of what happens if disclosure is bilateral, endoge-
nous, and thus potentially asymmetric, is thus natural.
    The results are surprising: (i) asymmetries in information about insurance purchases
turn out to be nontrivial and important; (ii) equilibrium exists under mild assumptions
(notably, the single crossing property need not hold); and (iii) equilibrium always entails
a pooling component. The unique insurance allocation (an allocation describes the sum
of benefits and premia over all insurance companies for each individual) consists of the
pooling contract which maximizes the well-being of the low risk individual subject to
the zero-profit constraint plus, for the high-risk individual, a supplemental contract that
brings him to full insurance at his own odds. While the equilibrium allocation is unique,



                                             2
it can be supported by alternative information disclosure strategies.
   We begin by characterizing the set of constrained Pareto efficient (CPE) allocations in
the presence of a secret contract. We then show that the CPE allocation which maximizes
the well-being of the low risk individual is the unique equilibrium allocation and can be
supported by simple yet illuminating information disclosure strategies. As in RS, firms
offer insurance contracts, but now they have an option to reveal (possibly partial) informa-
tion about insurance purchases to other firms. In RS, it was assumed that contracts were
exclusive, e.g. implicitly, that if a firm discovered a purchaser had violated the exclusiv-
ity restriction, the coverage would be cancelled. (It was also assumed that the insurance
firm had the information necessary to enforce exclusivity.) Here we consider a broader
range of possible restrictions and under a broader set of assumptions concerning the in-
formation available to insurance firms. Obviously, the enforceability of any conditions
imposed is dependent on information available to the insurance firm. Consumers, too,
have a slightly more complicated life: they have to decide which policies to buy, aware
of the restrictions in place and the information that the firm may have to enforce those
restrictions. And they also have to decide on what information to reveal to which firms.
A competitive equilibrium in this model is a set of insurance contracts, such that no one
can offer an alternative contract or set of contracts and make positive profits. A contract
is defined by the benefit, the premium, any restrictions associated with the contract, and
the firm's disclosure policy. And in assessing the consequences of offering an alternative
contract, each firm takes into account the consumers' response to the set of contracts on
offer, both with respect to insurance purchases and disclosures.
   The intuition behind our result is this: in RS, a pooling equilibrium can always be
broken by a deviant policy which will be purchased only by low risk individuals, and as
a result, is profitable. But that deviant contract will be purchased only by low risk indi-
viduals because the deviant firm can enforce exclusivity. If high risk individuals can sup-
plement the deviant contract (one breaking the putative pooling equilibrium) with secret
insurance at their own odds, that policy will be purchased by high risk individuals, and
thus make a loss. Hence, the deviant policy will not be offered and the pooling contract
can be sustained. The trick is to find an information disclosure strategy which ensures
that a deviant firm can't enforce exclusivity, but which also ensures that the firms selling
insurance at the pooling odds (which we refer to as "established" firms) don't "oversell":
high risk individuals would like to buy more insurance at the pooling odds than low risk
individuals. If they did so, the pooling contract would lose money. Accordingly, there
has to be information disclosure among the established firms to prevent the high risk
individuals from doing so. Thus, supporting the equilibrium allocation requires an in-
termediate amount of disclosure: one needs some information sharing (enough to prevent
overselling), but not too much (not enough to enforce exclusivity). Furthermore, disclo-


                                             3
sure has to be asymmetric in that established firms must have sufficient information, but
deviant firms (which, of course, deviate secretly) must not. But firms by themselves have
no basis for such asymmetric disclosures: without further information, they only know
whether they themselves have sold insurance to an individual.                1

    This is where consumer disclosure becomes critical: firms base the asymmetries in
disclosure on consumer-revealed information. The presence of consumer disclosure is an
essential feature distinguishing our paper from other work in this area. The equilibrium
firm information disclosure strategy that we analyze induces truth-telling by consumers
to established firms, and this in turn enables asymmetries in firm disclosures of infor-
mation about insurance purchases. Thus, endogenizing consumer disclosure is not just a
natural modeling postulate - it is necessary for the outcome we characterize.
    One can obtain this result by formalizing this setting as a game with appropriately
defined strategy spaces, and focusing on the outcome in a perfect Bayesian equilibrium;
however, doing so would introduce unnecessary complexity2 , thus detracting attention
from the basic insight of our analysis. For this reason, we pursue the route of the original
Rothschild-Stiglitz paper, positing only the elements that are absolutely necessary to make
the point in the simplest possible setting that nevertheless has all of the features we are
interested in, using an equilibrium concept that is in the spirit of competitive equilibrium.
    The paper is organized in six sections. Section two lays out the model; we characterize
the set of CPE contracts in the presence of secret insurance in section three. Section four
provides details on contracts, information disclosure strategies, the equilibrium concept,
and shows that there is a unique allocation that an equilibrium if it exists, has to imple-
ment. Such an equilibrium is explicitly constructed in section five, while section six relates
our results to previous literature.
    We note that while this paper demonstrates the existence of a robust asymmetric infor-
mation equilibrium with endogenous information disclosure in a simple context with two
types of individuals and where deviant firms attempt to break the equilibrium by offer-
ing a single alternative contract, the results can, with considerable increase in complexity,
be extended to multiple (or even a continuum) of types and to contexts where deviant
firms offer a menu of contracts. The equilibrium insurance allocation described in this pa-
per can be shown to be supported by alternative endogenous disclosure rules, including
rules that entail sequential disclosure, i.e. where firms may disclose information to other
firms that has been revealed to them by still other firms.
   1 This is essentially the point that Hellwig (1988) makes in criticism of Jaynes (1978) argument that with
endogenous information, there always exists an equilibrium. In contrast, he shows that "there does not exist
a sequential equilibrium. . . " He shows that Jaynes' equilibrium requires that each firm's communication
strategy be conditioned on the set of contracts that are offered by other firms, making the equilibrium a
reactive equilibrium, like that of Wilson, not a competitive equilibrium as in RS.
   2 We work through a model along these lines in Stiglitz et al. 2016.




                                                     4
2     Model

We employ the standard insurance model with adverse selection. An individual, indexed
by i  [0, 1], is faced with the risk of an accident. The two types of individuals - high risk
(t = H ) and low-risk (t = L) - differ only in the probability of accident, Pt , with PH > PL .
The type is privately known to the individual, while the proportion  of high-risk types is
common knowledge. The average probability of accident for an individual is P, where

                                           P =  PH + (1 -  ) PL                                           (1)

An accident involves damages. The cost of repairing the damage in full is d. An insurance
firm pays a part of the repair cost,   d. The benefit is paid in the event of accident,
whereas the insurer is paid an insurance premium  when no accident occurs. The price
                        
of insurance is q          . The expected utility for an individual with a policy (, ) is

                           Vt (, ) = Pt U (w - d - ) + (1 - Pt )U (w - )                                  (2)

We assume that U is continuously differentiable and increasing. Sometimes we refer to a
policy A = {, }, and to the expected utility generated by that policy as Vt { A}. A policy
A, with insurance level  and price q can also be described by the vector {, q}. We do
not require the preferences to be convex for our results on the existence of equilibrium, nor
that the single-crossing property of preferences be satisfied. The key property of Vt (, ),
which we assume is satisfied throughout the paper, is that the income consumption curve
                             Pt
at the insurance price      1- Pt   is the full insurance line3 , implying that at full insurance, the
slope of the indifference curve equals the relative probabilities,

                                             Vt (, )
                                                             Pt
                                         -     
                                                       =           qt                                     (3)
                                             Vt (, )       1 - Pt
                                               


so that will full information, equilibrium would entail full insurance for each type at their
own odds.
     The profit t of a contract (, ) that is chosen by type t is t (, ) = (1 - Pt )  -
Pt . t (, ) = 0 is defined as the t-type's zero profit locus (the line along which firms
selling to type-t make zero profit). We sometimes write the profits associated with policy
A purchased by type t as t { A}. Figure 1 illustrates the zero-profit locus for a firm selling
insurance to a t-type (OB and OC, respectively) or both types of individuals (OD) by
                                                                Pt                P
a line from the origin with the slope being qt (               1- Pt )   or q    1- P
                                                                                        , respectively. The
latter is referred to as the "zero profit pooling line." There are N firms and the identity
    3 Thatis, even if the indifference curve is not quasiconcave, after being tangent to a given isocline with
       Pt
slope 1- Pt , at full insurance, it never touches the isocline again.



                                                       5
 




                                          C VH               VH
                        PH
           qH =        1- PH                      C
                                                         D                  VL

                    P
           q=      1- P


                                                                                        -d = 
                                                                             PL
                         B                                       qL =       1- PL

O                                                                                               
Figure 1: Breaking the RS separating equilibrium ( B, C ) in the presence of undisclosed
contracts at high-risk odds. VH is an indifference curve of type H , VL is an indifference
curve of type L, the line  - d =  is the full insurance line.


of a firm is represented by j, with j  M ( 2, . . . , N )4 . An individual may purchase
multiple policies. A set of benefits and premiums of the insurance policies purchased
in the aggregate by each type of individual, denoted by E = {(t ,  t )t= L, H } is called an
allocation, with t =  j t, j .


3      Pareto Efficiency with Secret Contracts, and RS without Exclu-
       sivity

Central to RS was the assumption that there was sufficient information to enforce exclu-
sivity; an individual could not buy insurance from more than one firm. As Rothschild
and Stiglitz realized, once we introduce into the analysis unobservable contracts in ad-
    4 If   there is only one firm, it can trivially impose exclusivity, being a monopolist.



                                                            6
dition to observable ones, the whole RS framework collapses, because exclusivity cannot
be enforced. We now discuss briefly the consequences of introducing secret contracts; the
interested reader is referred to the companion paper Stiglitz et al. (2018) for details.
    Exclusivity in RS implied, among other things, the existence of contracts that break
a putative pooling equilibrium. Without exclusivity some of these contracts no longer
do so, because they will be taken up by not only low risk individuals, but also high risk
individuals who will supplement the given contract with undisclosed insurance at price
q H . Such secret insurance breaks even and so will always be on offer. Yet it turns out
that there always exists some contract that even with secret insurance breaks a pooling
equilibrium. But without exclusivity, the separating contracts from RS are also not equi-
librium contracts, as illustrated in figure 1. The RS separating contracts are { A, C }, where
C provides full insurance to the high risk individual at his own odds; and A is the contract
at the low risk individual's odds which just satisfies the self-selection constraints, i.e. will
not be purchased by the high risk individual. But obviously, if the high risk individual
can supplement A with secret insurance at the high risk odds, he will purchase A. But
if high and low risk individuals both purchase A it makes a loss. It can easily be shown
that there exists no separating equilibrium. Since there can neither exist a pooling or a
separating equilibrium it follows that with a fixed information structure (where firms that
disclose their sales always do so and those that don't never do so) there never exists a RS
competitive equilibrium.
    For the rest of this section we consider the set of efficient insurance allocations under
the premise that there exists a secret (undisclosed) policy being offered at the price q H . We
characterize the set of "constrained Pareto Efficient" allocations - where the constraint is
that the government cannot proscribe the secret provision of insurance, unlike the Pareto
Efficient allocations associated with the RS model, where government could restrain such
provision. We use the following ex-interim variant5 of constrained Pareto efficiency:

Definition 1. An allocation E = {(t ,  t )t= L, H } is constrained Pareto-efficient (CPE for short)
if the government cannot force disclosure and there does not exist another allocation that at least
breaks even, and leaves each type of consumer as well off and at least one type strictly better off.

    In the presence of a contract that secretly offers any amount of insurance at a price
q H , therefore, a high-risk individual with a less-than-full insurance policy (say, A or B in
figure 2) would always supplement it by purchasing additional insurance at q H to reach
a full-insurance policy C or C in figure 2. Thus, the only CPE pooling allocation is full
insurance along the pooling line ( D in figure 1).
   5 See also Prescott and Townsend (1984), Hammond (1987), Bisin and Gottardi (2006), and Attar, Mariotti,

and Salanie (2019) for important discussions of Pareto efficiency in related contexts; earlier versions of the
present paper were the first to explicitly consider the "constrained Pareto efficiency" concept introduced
here, allowing for secret contracts as well as disclosed contracts.



                                                      7
    The set of CPE can now be easily described: it consists of a pooling contract, i.e. a
contract along the pooling line OA D in figure 3) plus a supplemental contract, for the
high risk individual only, bringing him to full insurance at the high risk odds. { A , C }
is a typical CPE. A is the pooling contract that maximizes the utility of the low risk
individual. The set of CPE entails equal or more insurance than A , i.e. the pooling
policy lies between A and D. Later, we will show that { A , C } is the unique competitive
equilibrium allocation.
    In characterizing CPE allocations, we will first provide an analytic representation of
the possible set of allocations for a high risk individual, given that he can purchase secret
insurance, and prove a general result concerning his level of expected utility. Next, we
narrow down the set of allocations that satisfy the zero-profit constraint to those satisfying
the self-selection constraints in the presence of the undisclosed contracts, which enables
us to fully characterize the set of CPE.
    If a high risk individual can purchase a policy (, q), he will supplement it by pur-
chasing additional insurance at q H to reach a full-insurance policy {(, q), (, q)},
where
                                                1
                                ( ,  q ) =          [d + (q H - q)]                        (4)
                                             1 + qH
and
                                                        1
                       ( ,  q ) = d -  ( ,  q ) =           [q H d - (q H - q)]            (5)
                                                     1 + qH
    The derivations of (4) and (5) can be found in the appendix. Denoting by H (, q) the
expected utility that a high-risk individual with a less-than-full insurance policy (, q)
(where (1 + q) < d) can obtain by supplementing it with the desired amount of insurance
at a price q H , we show the following lemma:

Lemma 3.1. H (, q) is decreasing in q while it is increasing (respectively, decreasing) in  if
q <(respectively, >) q H .

Proof. Using (4) and (5), we have

                              H (, q)  VH ((, q), (, q)) =                                 (6)

                                                            1
                 = U (W - d + (, q)) = U (W +                   [(q H - q) - q H d])       (7)
                                                         1 + qH
from which lemma 3.1 follows by inspection.

    Lemma 3.1, which plays a critical role for the results in this paper, implies that a high-
risk individual would always like to purchase more insurance (up to full insurance) at a
price lower than q H in the presence of the undisclosed supplemental purchase of insur-
ance at q H .


                                                 8
  




               qH

                                 C VH (C)(= H (^ , q))
                                    C     VH (C )(= H (^ + S
                                                           L , q ))




                                     VL
                         B
q^              A
          q                                                   qL

 O
                    ^
                                          ^ + S
                                              H
                                                                                            
                        ^+
                             S
                             L

Figure 2: An allocation ( B, C ) can be decomposed as A (a pooling contract) and ( AC, AB)
(supplemental insurance at the individual's odds). Allocation ( B, C ) is not feasible as it
does not satisfy the self-selection constraints in the presence of undisclosed policies at
high-risk odds q H , while ( A, C ) is feasible; q = slope of OB(< q).


    Lemma 3.2 provides a characterization of all zero profit allocations.

Lemma 3.2. Any allocation {(t ,  t )t= L, H } yielding zero profit can without loss of generality be
represented as a sum of a pooling allocation (^, ^ ) and a set (S , S ) of type-specific supplemental
                                                                  t   t
allocations:

               t = ^ + S        ^   S       ^
                       t ,  t =  +  t where  = q ^ , S      S       S
                                                     t = qt t , and t = t - ^                     (8)

    The proof can be found in the appendix. Lemma 3.2 is illustrated in figure 2, which
shows how an allocation ( B, C ) (that yields zero profit) can be decomposed into a pooling
allocation A and the two supplemental allocations ( AC, AB). When (t ,  t ) is a pooling
full insurance allocation, ^ = 1 d, ^ = q d, S = S = 0. Lemma 3.2 implies that an
                                   1+ q        1+ q    t      t


                                                  9
allocation yielding zero profit can be characterized by the three parameters ^ , S     S
                                                                                 H and  L .




  




             qH

                                 C
                                     C




                           A

                            VL
q              A
         q                                                  qL

 O                               
                               ^ H
                                                                                         
Figure 3: Pareto Efficient Allocations { Zt (^ )}t , denoted by ( A , C ), and the equilibrium
                                   
allocation { Zt ()} denoted by ( A , C )

   An allocation is said to be feasible if it satisfies self-selection constraints - i.e. if given
that allocation, neither type will choose to deviate to another allocation, given the pres-
ence of undisclosed insurance at price q H . Lemma 3.3 shows that the self-selection con-
straints in the presence of the undisclosed policies result in the following restrictions on
allocations:

Lemma 3.3. Any feasible allocation must satisfy
             1                                1
 i) S
    H =    1+ q H ( d   -^ (1 + q)) for ^    1+q d.

 ii) S
     L = 0.

   Lemma 3.3 i) follows directly from eq. (4). To see lemma 3.3 ii), note that if S
                                                                                  L > 0 the
allocation would not satisfy the self-selection constraint, since then high-risk individuals,


                                                      10
after choosing (^, ^ q) ( A in figure 2), would supplement it by choosing supplemental
policy AB (= S   S
             L ,  L q L ), and supplement that with secret insurance BC , bringing them to
                                                                                        1
full insurance which yields H (^ + S
                                   L , q )(= VH (C ) in figure 2), where q =          ^ +S
                                                                                      
                                                                                            (q ^+
                                                                                          L
q L S
    L ) < q. By lemma 3.1, H ( ^ + S  L , q ) > H (  ^ , q), because q < q and ^+     S
                                                                                      L >   ^ . Of
course, lemma 3.ii implies that ( L ,  L ) = ( ^, ^ ).
    A feasible allocation for type t is denoted by Zt (^ ), which is completely characterized
by the parameter ^ by lemma 3.3:


                                 ZH (^ ) = ((^, ^ q ),  ( ^, ^ q))                               (9)

                                        ZL (^ ) = (^, ^ q)                                      (10)
             1                                                        1
where ^  0, 1+ q d . The feasible allocation { Zt ( ^ )}t with ^ =   1+ q d   is the full-insurance
allocation, whereas that with ^ = 0 implies that the low risk individual gets no insurance.
    Only a subset of the feasible allocations are CPE. Define  as

                                     = arg max VL (^, ^ q)                                      (11)
                                                ^
                                                

 is the amount of insurance that is the most preferred by low-risk individuals given a
price q, as illustrated by A in figure 3. Lemma 3.1 implies that VH ( ZH (^ )) or H (^ , q) is
increasing in ^ because q < q H . It also implies that a feasible allocation { Zt (^ )}t is not
CPE if ^ < , because both types of individuals could be made better off as ^ increases to
. Also, a feasible allocation { Zt (^ )} with ^ >  does not Pareto-dominate the allocation
{ Zt ()}, implying that { Zt (   ^ )} is also CPE. Under the assumption of convex preferences,
a feasible allocation { Zt ( ^ )}t is also CPE if ^ >  because VH ( ZH ( ^ )) > VH ( ZH ()) while
VL ( ZL (^ )) is decreasing in  ^ for  ^ >  (see figure 3). This establishes the following:

Proposition 1. With convex preferences, the set of CPE allocations is { Zt (^ )}t , with ^  .

    In particular, the allocation { Zt ()}t is CPE. It entails a pooling policy (, q) for the
high-risk type, and the pooling policy supplemented by additional insurance at price q H
up to full insurance for the high-risk type.


4   Contracts and Equilibrium

Individuals are allowed to purchase one or more policies from one or more firms. An
individual or his insurer may disclose to other firms all or some information about the
set of policies purchased or sold, respectively. Information revealed must be truthful, but
individuals or firms may choose not to reveal some or all information. What is critical
about the information disclosure in the model is that they cannot reveal the fact that they



                                                11
have not purchased a particular policy.6


4.1       Setting

We employ a two-stage framework consistent with the conventional setting of a screening
model.

      · First stage: each firm offers a contract specifying a set of policy offers and a rule of
          information disclosure. The policy offers come with restrictions on what insurance
          individuals can buy from other insurers, but the implementation of those restrictions
          depends on the information available to the insurer.

      · Second stage: consumers purchase policies and disclose information about them
          (possibly selectively) to their potential insurers, following which each firm executes
          its contract for its consumer as announced in the first stage by disclosing information
          as specified by its disclosure rule. Consumers whose insurance purchases are found
          to be inconsistent with the policy restrictions have their policies cancelled.

Firms disclose their information simultaneously in the second stage, implying the disclo-
sure rule of a firm may be made conditional only upon consumer-revealed information,
in particular, on information about which firm(s) individuals have purchased insurance
from7 . As a policy offer is subject to cancellation once a firm receives information from
other firms, on the other hand, the enforcement of the restrictions imposed within the
policy offers can rely on information disclosed by consumers and firms.
      Consumer disclosure is absolutely essential to our analysis. Another critical aspect of
this setting is that a contract offered by a firm does not depend upon those offered by
other firms - i.e., it is non-reactive.


4.2       A Simple Illustration of the Equilibrium Contract

Before conducting a formal analysis of an equilibrium we will describe how an equilib-
rium contract we propose works in a simple context to highlight the core logic of the main
argument on the existence of an equilibrium. The equilibrium we propose involves two
kinds of firms: a given number of "established" firms selling insurance at the pooling
odds, and many other "secret" firms, offering unlimited amount of insurance at price q H
without disclosure. An established firm sells a consumer insurance at the price q with the
following restriction on additional insurance purchases, and with the following disclosure
rule:
   6 In terms of the literature on strategic communication, this is a setting of verifiable disclosure, or hard
information (Milgrom (1981), Grossman (1981)).
   7 In the more general analyses of Stiglitz and Yun (2016) and Stiglitz et al. (2019) sequential disclosure rules

are also discussed.


                                                        12
    · Restriction: the total amount of revealed purchases is not greater than  (the amount
          most preferred by the low-risk consumers at price q).

    · Disclosure Rule: disclose its sale to all the other firms but those who are revealed by
          the consumer to be his insurers.

For these contracts to sustain the equilibrium allocation E , they should be able to do
the two things: 1) prevent over-purchases by high-risk individuals and 2) deter a cream-
skimming deviant contract from breaking an equilibrium. The central result of this paper
is to show that the allocation { Zt ()}t can be sustained by the above set of contracts. As-
sume, for ease of exposition, that individuals honestly reveal to all the firms from whom
they have purchased insurance all of their purchases from other firms.8 Such honesty di-
rectly prevents anyone from overpurchasing the pooling contract. (It can easily be seen
why a high risk individual would not lie. Assume he tried to over-purchase, say by pur-
chasing 1
        2  from 3 different firms, firms A, B, and C ; but disclosed only one of his other
purchases to each, say only his purchase from B to A, but not that from C to A, and sym-
metrically for the other firms. Then firm A discloses his sales to C. But then C knows that
                                     3
the individual's total purchases are 2  and his insurance is cancelled.)
    More subtle is how the asymmetric disclosure rule prevents a deviant contract from
breaking the pooling contract. Whenever a deviant firm, say A, charges a price lower than
q, the policy offered by A is always purchased, regardless of the restriction imposed by
A, by both types of consumers, yielding losses for the firm A. This is because a consumer
could always purchase the same amount  in total from the deviant firm A and another
established firm B, hence at an average price lower than q. And if the high risk individual
can always buy  at this lower price, he will always then want to supplement it with secret
insurance. Honest consumer revelation implies that the consumer discloses his purchase
from A to B, and that means that B does does not disclose to A its sale (to that consumer)
so that any restriction imposed by firm A can't be implemented. Thus, the asymmetric
disclosure rule of the established firms can deter any cream-skimming deviant contract
from upsetting an equilibrium while preventing over-purchases of the pooling contract
by high-risk individuals.
    We note the importance of asymmetric disclosure by firms based on the consumer
disclosure - which is only possible, as we have noted, because of consumer disclosure.
Without consumer disclosure, there would be no basis for the asymmetry of the firm dis-
closure in a non-reactive framework where a disclosure rule of a firm does not depend
upon that of another firm. On the other hand, if the firm disclosure is symmetric and
complete, we would obtain RS results, where a pooling allocation cannot be sustained in
equilibrium.
   8 Inthe later analysis, we both show that this is the case and that our disclosure rule supports the equilib-
rium, even if there is not full disclosure.


                                                      13
4.3     Contracts

In this and the following sections we formalize these intuitions. An insurance contract
consists of two components (i) a policy, defined by a price, q, a benefit, , and a set of
restrictions that have to be satisfied (to the knowledge of the insurer) if the policy is to go
into effect; and (ii) an information disclosure rule. The set of contracts (policies with their
restrictions, and disclosure rules) that are conceivable is quite rich; all that is required
is that firms can only disclose a subset of what they know, and can impose restrictions
that can only be implemented based on the knowledge of the insurer. But we show that
there exists an equilibrium with a simple set of contracts and disclosure rules (one which
naturally implements the allocation described in section 3). In this equilibrium, the firms
are divided into two groups. What we call the established firms offer insurance at price
q (the pooling price), with a restriction that no one (to their knowledge) purchases in
aggregate more than , the amount that maximizes the utility of low risk individuals at
that price. The firms' contracts are such as to induce everyone to comply and to reveal
that information. The remaining firms (the secret firms) sell undisclosed insurance at price
q H , which is purchased only by high risk individuals, and brings these individuals to full
insurance.
      To simplify the notation and exposition, we begin by assuming all firms have to offer
insurance with a single price9 , while possibly imposing a constraint on aggregate pur-
chases, and then show that, given the equilibrium contracts described, no firm would
want to offer any other contract(s) (e.g. with any other set of restrictions or disclosure
rules).10

   1. Policies: (, ) is given by (, q)  R2
                                                                         
                                         + (with q =                        indicating the price of insurance
        offered). With the index i being suppressed for simplicity, a policy purchased by
        individual i from firm j is represented by x ( j)  R2
                                                            +:


                                                x ( j)  ( j ,  j q j )                                   (12)

        while the set of policies purchased from all of the established insurers is denoted
           ^  { x ( j)} jK where K  M is the set of the established insurers from which
        by X
        individual i purchases insurance. The amount  j of insurance offered by a firm j
        may be required to satisfy a restriction, which can be in general represented by a set
        of insurance amounts allowed, denoted by j ( X T ), where X T  X     ^ , as defined by
                                                                     j                j

   9 See Stiglitz et al. (2017) for a generalization to the case with multiple prices and possible cross-
subsidization.
  10 Similarly, while we allow disclosure of any information available to firms, the equilibrium entails only

disclosure of information revealed to it by its consumers plus what it knows from its own sales. In more
general models with sequential revelation of information (that is, firms can reveal information that they have
from other firms to still other firms), disclosure rules can be more complex.



                                                     14
      (17) below, is the total information (about the individual's purchases) available to
      the firm j. That is,
                                                     j  j ( X jT )                                      (13)

      A policy offer by a firm j may thus be represented by (q j , j ( X jT )).

   2. Disclosure Rules: an information disclosure rule by a firm j, denoted DIS j , specifies
      a set REj ( M ) of firms receiving information from j about a particular individual,
      and information I NFjk ( X j ) to be disclosed to a firm k ( REj ), where X j (de-
      fined by (14) below) combines the information the firm has directly about j with the
      information disclosed by a consumer to firm j about his purchases (including the
      purchase from j). The information disclosed is obviously a subset of X j .
      The information disclosed by an individual i to his insurer j about purchases from
                                 ^ ), indicating that an individual cannot disclose a policy
      others is denoted by X o ( Xj
      that he does not purchase11 although he may withhold from his insurer information
      about some policies purchased. Thus, the information set of firm j about individual
      i, X j , before receiving information from other firms is


                                                  X j = x ( j)  X jo                                    (14)

      We suppose that whenever a policy x ( j) is disclosed, the identity j of the insurer is
      also disclosed. Thus, the set I ( M ) of firms (including firm j) disclosed as provid-
      ing insurance by the consumer is given by:


                                             I  {k  M| x (k)  X j }                                     (15)

      Now a disclosure rule DIS j of firm j may be represented as follows:


                                      DIS j ( X j ) = ( REj ( X j ), I NFjk ( X j ))                    (16)

      specifying what firms will be disclosed to, and, given that there is some disclosure
      to firm k, what information is disclosed. Given the disclosure rules { DIS j } j of all
      the firms, the aggregate of them will determine the information disclosed to firm j
                                                     -j
      by all the other firms, denoted by X j . Thus, all the information X jT available to a
      firm is that disclosed to firm j by the consumer, by other firms, and what it knows
      directly from its own sales:
  11 That is, the individual cannot lie about purchases he has not made; in our model, so long as there is no

negative insurance, individuals would have no incentive to make such lies.




                                                       15
                                                                  -j
                                                X jT  X j  X j                                       (17)

      A contract Cj offered by a firm j is thus represented by a policy, characterized in turn
by a price and a possible constraint on quantities purchased, and a disclosure rule:


                                    Cj = {q j ; j ( X jT ); DIS j ( X j )}                           (18)


4.4     Consumer Response

We now analyze in greater detail how consumers respond to the set of offers. An indi-
vidual consumer i responds optimally to any given set of contracts offered by firms in the
first stage. Formally, given a set {Cj } j M of contracts offered by firms, a consumer i op-
timally chooses a set K of his established insurers from which to purchase insurance, the
    ^ (= { x ( j)} jK ) of policies to be purchased from them, { X o } j M specifying which in-
set X                                                                        j
formation about his purchases to disclose to whom, and amounts (if any) of insurance to
purchase from other (the non-established) firms. If indifferent across multiple contracts,
the consumers randomly chooses one. Further, we assume that consumers tell the truth
(disclose information) unless it is in their interests not to do so, which we refer to as the
assumption of predilection for truth. It is important to emphasize that we do not assume
that consumers are always truthful ­ we only assume that if they are indifferent between
truth telling any anything else, they tell the truth. In other words, this is a tie-breaking
rule, not an assumption requiring truth-telling.
      We can formalize the optimization the consumers: they choose a set K (or K ) of estab-
lished (or secret) firms, a set of policies x (k )(= (k ,  k )) to purchase from them, and their
disclosure rules { X jo } j(KK ) ) to maximize



                                              max
                                          { k ,  k }kK K
                                                            Vt (k , k )                              (19)
                                                           k
                                                 T
                                    s.t. k  k ( Xk ),  k  K  K                                       (20)

      We say that a consumer's choice{{ x ( j)} j M , { X jo } j M } and disclosure rule is optimal if
given { x ( j)} j M , X jo , and{ DIS j ( X j )} j M no policy is ever cancelled, and { x ( j)} j M solves
the above problem


4.5     Equilibrium Allocations

An equilibrium is defined as follows:




                                                     16
Definition 2. An equilibrium is a set {Cj } j of contracts offered by firms such that, given the
contracts offered by other firms {Cj } j , there does not exist any other contract that a firm can offer
to make positive profits once consumers optimally respond to firms' announced contracts

    We allow a deviant firm to offer any policy x ( j) with any restriction and to choose any
disclosure rule based on any or all the information available to the firm. In this section,
we show that the only possible equilibrium allocation is { Zt ()t }, the CPE allocation in
the presence of undisclosed insurance which maximizes the well-being of the low risk
individual, denoted by E .


                            E  {{     
                                 t ,  t }t= L, H } = {{ Zt (  ) }t= L, H }                         (21)

For any other posited equilibrium allocation, it is possible for an entrant to attract all of the
low risk consumers and make a profit; hence that allocation could not be an equilibrium
allocation.
    While a formal proof is in the appendix, the result is almost trivial: assume that there
were some other equilibrium allocation, generated by any set of contracts purchased from
any array of insurance firms, that was not E . It cannot be preferred to the contract E by
the low risk individual, for if it were it would have been purchased by high risk individ-
uals as well; unless the contracts purchased by the high risk individuals make them even
better off. But there cannot exist such a set of contracts that make both the high and low
risk individuals better off than E , because we know that E is CPE. And it should be ob-
vious that it cannot generate a lower level of utility for the low risk individuals, because
an insurance firm that offered E would then attract all the low risk individuals, and at
least break even. The low risk individuals would purchase that contract regardless of its
information disclosure and cancellation provisions, since they will not purchase supple-
mental insurance and will not be affected by these provisions. The putative equilibrium
can thus be broken. This establishes:

Theorem 4.1. There exists a unique allocation E that an equilibrium, if it exists, has to imple-
ment.


5    Equilibrium with Endogenous Information Revelation

In this section we show that the contracts described in section 4 support the allocation E
as an equilibrium. (There may, of course, exist other equilibrium contracts. Our objective
is simply to demonstrate the existence of an equilibrium with endogenous information
that is implemented using simple, interesting, and illuminating contracts.)
    In showing that the equilibrium set of contracts Cj implements E , we first prove the



                                                  17
following lemma12 :
Lemma 5.1. Given the set of contracts Cj , no individual purchases more than  from the estab-
lished firms.
    This in turn implies that all purchase just . While a formal proof is given in the
appendix, the intuition is clear. Assume an individual purchased more than  in the ag-
gregate from the established firms. Given Cj he cannot disclose that he has purchased
more than  (to any of his insurers) because were he to do so, the policy would be can-
celled. So there must not be full disclosure. If the consumer does not disclose one of his
insurers, say purchases from firm j, then all the other insurers disclose to the firm j what
they know about the consumer's purchases (i.e., their sales to the consumer, and what the
consumer reveals to them), and then the firm knows that the individuals has purchased
more than , so j cancels its policy. But the individual would have known that, and so
would not have purchased a policy from j.
    There is one important corollary of lemma 5.1: all individuals reveal their purchases
from established firms to all established firms, since they have no reason not to (using the
assumption of predilection for truth). We now prove the main theorem of the paper:
Theorem 5.2. Suppose that the income consumption curve for insurance for type t individual at
         Pt
price   1- Pt   is the full insurance line, and let Cj = {q                    
                                                           j ;  j ( X j ); DIS j ( X j ) } be defined as follows:

   1. For established firms ( j = 1, 2, 3, . . . , n), q                   T
                                                        j = q, with  j ( X j ) given by


                                                  T                      T
                                            j ( X j ) = { [0,  ] | T ( X j )   }                             (22)

        where T ( X jT ) =  x(k)X T k . The information disclosure rule of established firms is given
                                  j
        by
                                         DIS                                
                                            j ( X j ) = ( RE j ( X j ), I NFjk ( X j ))                      (23)

        a) Disclose to all of the firms that have not been disclosed by the consumers as insurers, i.e.
            to
                                                   REj (Xj ) = M \ I (Xj )                                   (24)

        b) All the information that a firm j has about a consumer that he has obtained from the
            consumer plus his own sales:

                                                    
                                                I NFjk ( X j )  X j , k  REj                                 (25)
  12 Note that, in equilibrium, no established firm sells more than one contract to an individual. It would be

only the high-risk individuals that may be interested in purchasing multiple contracts from a firm, because
by so doing they might underreport their purchases from the insurer to another established firm (disclosing
one policy but not another) to be able to purchase more than  at q. Knowing that the only individual who
would wish to buy multiple policies is a high risk individual, an established firm would not sell multiple
contracts to an individual without charging a price equal to or higher than q H , which, however, would not
be taken by any individual.


                                                          18
         A policy is cancelled if
                                                  T ( X jT ) >                                     (26)

   2. For secret firms ( j = n + 1, n + 2, . . . , N ), qj = q H with no restrictions i.e., offering un-
      limited insurance at q H : j ( X j ) = R+ , and make no disclosure:
                                       T



                                       RE                
                                         j ( X j ) = I NFjk ( X j ) =                              (27)


   Then Cj implements allocation E .

   The equilibrium contract imposes restrictions on the amounts of insurance which an
individual can purchase from other firms. The intent of these restrictions is the same as
the exclusivity provision in RS: if possible, to exclude high risk individuals from buying
insurance, and barring that, at least to limit the amount of insurance purchased by high
risk individuals, who will be those who want to buy high levels of insurance.
   In equilibrium, the established firm succeeds in the latter, but not the former, i.e. suc-
ceeds in limiting the total amount of insurance that the high-risk individual can buy to .
More precisely, the firm offers a consumer any amount of insurance so long as aggregate
purchases of insurance (that it knows about) including its own sales is equal to or less than
. Because it knows that high risk individuals will never disclose their purchases from the
secret firms (and the secret firms won't disclose their sales), it can focus its restrictions on
(what it knows about) purchases from the established firms. If the restriction is violated,
then the policy is cancelled.

Proof. It is obvious that by lemma 5.1, the set of contracts Cj generates the equilibrium
allocation E . Because of lemma 5.1 and its corollary, every established firm has the in-
formation required to effectively implement the allocation. There is no over-insurance by
high risk individuals. They just purchase  from the established firms and supplement it
with undisclosed insurance at price q H , bringing them to full insurance. We now show
the set of contracts Cj sustains E against any deviant contract. Note first that a deviant
firm, indexed by d, cannot make profits by attracting only high-risk individuals in the
presence of firms offering secretly any amount of insurance at q H . This is because then
no individual would pay a price higher than q H since a deviant firm cannot induce the
established firms (with Cj ) to sell more than  at q under any circumstance. If the deviant
firm d attracts both high and low risk individuals, its policy would have to charge a price
qd equal to or lower than q, yielding zero profit at best. A deviant firm d can thus make
positive profits only by attracting low-risk types only, i.e., only by a cream-skimming con-
tract Cd . We will now show that in the presence of undisclosed insurance at price q H , the
contract Cd always attracts high-risk individuals. To attract low risk individuals, we must
have qd < q H . It is obvious from lemma 1 that, the high risk individual, if he could, would

                                                  19
purchase the contract OD in figure 4 plus additional pooling insurance DB in figure 4 up
to  plus supplemental undisclosed insurance ( BF in figure 4) at q H , rendering the de-
viant contract unprofitable. The deviant firm knows this, and hence must put a constraint
on the amount of supplemental pooling insurance that the individual can purchase. The
problem is that no such constraint can be enforced. The high risk individual obviously
will not disclose directly that he has made the supplemental pooling purchases. If the
high risk individual discloses his purchase of the deviant contract to the established firms
and limits his total purchases (combining what he has purchased from the deviant firm
and amounts purchased from other established firms) to , no established firm will cancel
insurance that it has sold, and, by its disclosure rule of Cj , no established firm will reveal
to the deviant firm its sales to the individual. Thus, firm d cannot enforce any restriction
entailing total purchases from itself, plus from the established firms, being less than or
equal to . Accordingly, high risk individuals will purchase the deviant contract, and it
loses money. (Because any supplemental pooling insurance purchased from another es-
tablished firm would not change the information set of the deviant firm d, the deviant
firm could not enforce any restriction on such purchases. Also, similarly, the deviant firm
cannot make its disclosure rule effectively depend on such supplemental insurance, and
so can't use the disclosure rule to deter purchases.)



6   Previous Literature

In the more than four decades since RS appeared, its disquieting results have given rise
to a large literature, which we can divide into two major strands. The first looked for
alternative equilibrium concepts or game forms, under which equilibrium might always
exist, or under which a pooling equilibrium might exist. Rothschild and Stiglitz (1997)
and Mimra and Wambach (2014) reviewed the literature as it existed to those points, with
Rothschild and Stiglitz (1997) suggesting that proposed seeming resolution of their non-
existence result contravened plausible specifications of what a competitive market equi-
librium should look like in the presence of information asymmetries. For instance, in the
"reactive" equilibrium of Riley (1979) contracts are added, while in "anticipatory" equi-
librium (Wilson (1977)), the entry of even a very small firm induces all firms to withdraw
their pooling contracts, making the deviant contract unprofitable, and enabling the pool-
ing equilibrium to be sustained. Miyazaki (1977) (in the case of two types) and Spence
(1978) (in the case of n types) extend this equilibrium concept to allow for menus of con-
tracts; the Miyazaki-Wilson-Spence (MWS) outcome is separating, jointly zero-profit con-
tracts with cross-subsidization. Dasgupta and Maskin (1986) provided a game theoretic
formulation for the RS model, showing that there was a mixed strategy equilibrium; Far-
inha Luz (2017) provides a full characterization of equilibria in this setting, and allows for

                                              20
 




            qH


                                    VH (C )(= H (, q))
                               C     VH ( F )(= H (, q ))
                                   F


                        A          VL
                                        qd
                           B

        q         D                                     qL

O                d                                                                 
                        
Figure 4: Sustaining an equilibrium against Cd (offering D); q = slope of OB(< q). High
risk individuals would always supplement D with pooling insurance ( DB) (disclosed only
to non-deviant established firms) and secret insurance ( BF). As a result VH ( F ) > VH (C ),
and accordingly, the deviant contract would make losses.


stochastic contracts, while retaining exclusivity. Ales and Maziero (2014) study nonexclu-
sive competition in this framework and obtain a separating equilibrium outcome, rely-
ing on latent (i.e. off the equilibrium path) contracts; they do not allow for information
sharing. Mimra and Wambach (2017) endogenize insurer capital by having firms choose
capital levels before playing the RS game. Mimra and Wambach (2019) add a contract
withdrawal stage to the RS model, relying on latent contracts. Netzer and Scheuer (2014)
also tackle the same model, but add another twist - firms may "opt out" of the market af-
ter observing the contract offers of other firms; the previous three papers obtain the MWS
outcome. The equilibrium we identify shares some features with the equilibrium of the
limit-order book studied by Glosten (1994), although the context is somewhat different.
    A second, more related, strand has explored the consequences of different informa-
tion structures, allowing for nondisclosed contracts. Most notable are the series of papers

                                             21
by Attar, Mariotti, Salanie (2011, 2014, 2016). The 2014 model, employing strictly convex
preferences, provides necessary conditions for the existence of an equilibrium. Applied to
the insurance market, the equilibrium (when it exists) turns out to be the allocation where
no one but the highest-risk individuals purchase insurance. The difference between their
results and ours, where we have focused on endogeneity of information disclosure, are
marked. In their 2016 model they showed that an equilibrium entailing the allocation E
which we identified as the PE allocation which maximizes the welfare of the lowest risk
individuals may exist only under a very restrictive set of preferences. When equilibrium
exists, it entails the use of latent policies. Again, the difference between our results, where
an equilibrium always exists and does not entail latent contracts, and theirs, which ar-
gues that undisclosed contracts makes existence less likely than in RS, is marked, and is
attributable to our assumption of information endogeneity.
   The closest works to our paper within the adverse selection literature are Pauly (1974),
and especially Jaynes (1978, 2011) and Hellwig (1988), who analyze a model with a kind
of strategic communication among firms about customers' contract information. Jaynes
(1978) analyzes the same allocation E that we do. However, as Hellwig clarified, in Jaynes
(1978) two-stage framework, the strategy of firms, including the associated strategic com-
munication, is not a Nash but a reactive equilibrium, with firms responding to the pres-
ence of particular deviant contracts, and thus Jaynes' formulation was subject to the same
objections to reactive equilibria raised earlier. Hellwig formulated a four-stage game, in
which E emerges as the sequential equilibrium, but as he emphasizes, it has the unattrac-
tive property that firm behavior (in the final two stages) is conditioned on knowing the
offers of all firms, including the deviant firm. Thus, in contrast to our model, a firm cannot
offer a contract in secret. Moreover, as Hellwig observes, "it is not the endogenous treat-
ment of interfirm communication that solves the existence problem of Rothschild, Stiglitz,
and Wilson. Instead the existence problem is solved by the sequential specification of firm
behavior which allows each firm to react to the other firms' contract offers."
   While our work differs from that of Jaynes (1978, 2011) and Hellwig (1988) in several
ways, perhaps most important is that we consider information revelation by consumers
as well as firms. This allows the creation of asymmetries of information about insurance
purchases between established firms and deviant firms, which, in turn, enables the pool-
ing contract to be sustained. As we have noted, there is a delicate balance: on one hand,
one has to prevent overinsurance by high risk individuals purchasing pooling contracts
(which requires established firms to know certain information), and on the other, one has
to prevent a deviant firm from having enough information to enforce an exclusive contract
that would break the pooling equilibrium. The consumer and firm information strategies
which we describe achieve this. In contrast, at least in a simple setting, models relying
on just firm information strategies cannot do this, because they do not have any basis on


                                              22
which to engage in this necessary kind of selective disclosure.


Appendix

Derivations of equations (4) and (5):
    Assume an individual with a policy (, q) supplements it by purchasing S (> 0) at
q H to reach full insurance, ( + S , q + q H S ), where q + q H S = d - ( + S ). Note that
S > 0 if  + q < d. Then

                                                    1
                          ( , q  ) =  +  S =            [d + (q H - q)]                         (28)
                                                 1 + qH

which determines (, q) as B(, q) = d - (, q).

Proof. (Lemma 3.2): Consider any set {(t ,  t )t= L, H } of policies that yield zero profit, i.e.,

 H ( H ,  H ) + (1 -  ) L ( L ,  L ) =  {(1 - PH )  H - PH  H } + (1 -  ){(1 - PL )  L - PL  L } = 0
                                                                                                (29)
Let each policy (t ,  t ) be represented as the sum of (^ t, ^ t ) and     (S    S
                                                                            t ,  t ),   where

                    t = ^ t + S        ^     S       ^
                              t ,  t =  t +  t while  t = q ^ t , S      S
                                                                  t = qt t .                    (30)

It will then suffice to show that ^H = ^ L . Since t (S    S
                                                      t ,  t ) = 0 for t = H , L we have


                             H (^ H, ^ H ) + (1 -  )  L ( ^ L, )^ L = 0.                        (31)

Using t = qt and rearranging the terms, we have

                             [ P - PH ]^ H + (1 -  )[ P - PL ]^ L = 0.                          (32)

Using the result that  [ P - PH ] + (1 -  )[ P - PL ] = 0, this implies that

                                     [ P - PH ](^H - ^ L) = 0                                   (33)

i.e., ^H = ^ L.

Proof. (Theorem 4.1): Suppose, to the contrary, there were another equilibrium allocation
~ = E , implemented by an arbitrary set of contracts, and let E
E                                                              ~ = {(~ L, q
                                                                          ~ L ), (               ~
                                                                                        ~ H ) }. E
                                                                                   ~ H, q
                                                 ~t be the average price for type t.
may be pooling, fully separating, or hybrid; let q
               ~
  Decompose E using lemma 3.2:

                                           ~L = 
                                                ^ +~S
                                                    L                                           (34)


                                                23
                                             ~H = 
                                                  ^ +~S
                                                      H                                               (35)

    If ~ L = , by lemma 3.3, the allocation is infeasible. So it must be that ~ L =  (or
equivalently, ~S                    ~ L > q. Then a firm could enter, offer a contract (, q),
               L = 0). Suppose that q
                                                                 ~ L ), and so the low-risk
selling at most one policy for each individual. VL (, q) > VL (, q
types prefer this to their putative equilibrium allocation, purchase it, so  (, q)  0. Thus,
E~ cannot be an equilibrium.
   Suppose now that q ~ L < q. By lemma 3.2,     ~H =  +   ~S
                                                            H , by lemma 3.1, ~S
                                                                               H > 0, and
thus both types purchase  L . Then  (~ L, q              ~
                                          ~ L ) < 0, and E cannot be an equilibrium, since
firms selling this policy are making a loss.
                                                    ~ coincides with E , which concludes
                    ~ L = q. But then by lemma 3.1, E
    So we must have q
the proof.

Proof. (Lemma 5.1): Given the equilibrium contract, a consumer purchasing more than
 must not reveal his full purchases to any firm. We first prove the following result:
given the equilibrium disclosure rules, in spite of this non-disclosure by consumers, there
is at least one firm that knows all the firms from whom the individual has purchased
insurance. Assume a consumer purchases more than  from K firms, and suppose the
consumer makes any set of disclosures. Pick up first the firm that is the most informed
(by the consumer) , say firm j1 (< K ), who knows about the consumer's purchases from
firms 1, . . . , j1 (including his own sales) and does not know about his purchases from firms
j1 + 1, . . . , K, a group of firms undisclosed to j1 . (When there is a tie in which firm is the
most informed, choose any of those; j1 = 1 if a consumer does not disclose anything to
any firm). Focus then upon the firms ( j1 + 1, . . . , K ) undisclosed to j1 , and consider a firm
who is the most informed of the purchases from those firms, say j2 , who knows about
the purchases from j1 + 1, . . . , j2 . Similarly, we consider the most informed of the firms
undisclosed to j2 and j1 , say j3 . We can continue until we get jk , where k = K. Then,
clearly, the purchase from firm jk is undisclosed to firms j1 , j2 , . . . , jk-1 . Now consider
the disclosures by firms. As a firm discloses to any other firm that is undisclosed by the
consumer as his insurer, all the firms j1 , j2 , . . . , jk-1 (at least) will disclose to the firm jk their
own sales and information received from the consumer, implying that the firm jk knows
all of the K purchases.
    The result of lemma 5.1 is now immediate: since that firm knows all of the individual's
purchases, it knows that the individual has purchased more than , and so cancels the
policy. But the individual would not make those purchases, knowing that they would be
cancelled.




                                                    24
References

[1] Akerlof, George A. (1970). The market for `lemons': Quality Uncertainty and the Mar-
  ket Mechanism. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3), pp. 488-500.

[2] Ales, Laurence and Pricila Maziero (2014). Adverse Selection and Non-exclusive Con-
  tracts. Working Paper, Carnegie Mellon University.

[3] Arnott, Richard J. and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1987, 2013). Equilibrium in competitive insur-
  ance markets with moral hazard. in The Selected Works of Joseph E. Stiglitz, Volume II:
  Information and Economic Analysis: Applications to Capital, Labor, and Product Mar-
  kets, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013, pp. 660- 689. Edited version of Princeton
  University Discussion Paper 4, 1987

[4] Arnott, Richard J. and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1991, 2013). Price Equilibrium, Efficiency, and
  Decentralizability in Insurance Markets. in The Selected Works of Joseph E. Stiglitz,
  Volume II: Information and Economic Analysis: Applications to Capital, Labor, and
  Product Markets, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013, pp. 632-659. Edited version
  of NBER Working Paper 3642, 1991.

[5] Attar, Andrea, Thomas Mariotti, and Franc
                                            ¸ ois Salani´
                                                        e (2011). Nonexclusive competi-
  tion in the market for lemons. Econometrica, 79(6), 1869-1918.

[6] Attar, Andrea, Thomas Mariotti, and Franc
                                            ¸ ois Salani´
                                                        e (2014). Nonexclusive Competi-
  tion under Adverse Selection. Theoretical Economics, 9(1), pp. 1-40.

[7] Attar, Andrea, Thomas Mariotti, and Franc
                                            ¸ ois Salani´
                                                        e (2016). Multiple Contracting in
  Insurance Markets. Working Paper, TSE-532.

[8] Andrea Attar, Thomas Mariotti, and Franc
                                           ¸ ois Salani´
                                                       e. (2019). The Social Costs of Side
  Trading. TSE Working Paper, n. 19-1017, June 2019, revised October 2019.

[9] Bisin, A., and Gottardi, P. (2006). Efficient Competitive Equilibria with Adverse Selec-
  tion. Journal of Political Economy, 114(3), 485-516.

[10] Dasgupta, Partha and Eric Maskin (1986). The Existence of Equilibrium in Discontin-
  uous Games: I. Review of Economic Studies, 53(1), pp. 1-26.

[11] Glosten, L.R. (1994). Is the Electronic Open Limit Order Book Inevitable? Journal of
  Finance, 49(4), 1127­1161

[12] Greenwald, Bruce (1979), Adverse Selection in the Labor Market, Routledge: New York.

[13] Greenwald, Bruce (1986). Adverse Selection in the Labor Market. The Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, Volume 53, Issue 3, p. 325

                                             25
[14] Greenwald, Bruce, J. E. Stiglitz, and A. Weiss (1984). Informational Imperfections
  in the Capital Markets and Macroeconomic Fluctuations. American Economic Review,
  74(2), May 1984, pp. 194-199

[15] Greenwald, Bruce and J. E. Stiglitz (1986). Externalities in Economies with Imperfect
  Information and Incomplete Markets. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101(2), pp. 229-
  264.

[16] Hammond, Peter J. (1987). Markets as Constraints: Multilateral Incentive Compati-
  bility in Continuum Economies. The Review of Economic Studies, 54(3), pp. 399­412,

[17] Hellwig, Martin F. (1987). Some Recent Developments in the Theory of Competition
  in Markets with Adverse Selection. European Economic Review, 31(1-2), pp. 309-325.

[18] Hellwig, Martin F. (1988). A note on the specification of interfirm communication
  in insurance markets with adverse selection. Journal of Economic Theory, 46(1), pp.
  154-163.

[19] Holmstrom, B., and Myerson, R. (1983). Efficient and Durable Decision Rules with
  Incomplete Information. Econometrica, 51(6), 1799-1819.

[20] Jaynes, Gerald D. (1978). Equilibria in monopolistically competitive insurance mar-
  kets. Journal of Economic Theory, 19(2), pp. 394-422.

[21] Jaynes, Gerald D. (2011). Equilibrium and Strategic Communication in the Adverse
  Selection Insurance Model. Working Paper, Yale University.

[22] Jaynes, Gerald D. (2018). Endogenous Beliefs and Institutional Structure in Compet-
  itive Equilibrium with Adverse Selection. Working Paper, Yale University.

[23] Grossman, S. J. (1981). The Informational Role of Warranties and Private Disclosure
  about Product Quality. The Journal of Law and Economics, 24(3):461­483.

[24] Milgrom, P. R. (1981). Good News and Bad News: Representation Theorems and
  Applications. The Bell Journal of Economics, 12(2):380­391.

[25] Mimra, W., and Wambach, A. (2014). New Developments in the Theory of Adverse
  Selection in Competitive Insurance. The Geneva Risk and Insurance Review, 39(2), 136-
  152.

[26] Mimra, W., Wambach, A. (2017). Endogenous Insolvency in the Rothschild­Stiglitz
  Model. Journal Risk and Insurance, 86: 165-181.

[27] Mimra, W., Wambach, A. (2019). Contract withdrawals and equilibrium in competi-
  tive markets with adverse selection. Econ Theory 67, 875­907.

                                           26
[28] Netzer, N. and Scheuer, F. (2014), A Game Theoretic Foundation of Competitive Equi-
  libria with Adverse Selection. International Economic Review, 55: 399-422.

[29] Miyazaki H. (1977). The rat race and internal labor markets. Bell J. Econ. 8:394­418

[30] Pauly, M. (1974). Overinsurance and Public Provision of Insurance: The Roles of
  Moral Hazard and Adverse Selection. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 88(1), 44-
  62.

[31] Prescott, E., and Townsend, R. (1984). Pareto Optima and Competitive Equilibria
  with Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard. Econometrica, 52(1), 21-45.

[32] Riley, J. (1979). Informational Equilibrium. Econometrica, 47(2), 331-359.

[33] Rothschild, Michael and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1976). Equilibrium in competitive insur-
  ance markets: An essay on the economics of imperfect information. Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 90, pp. 629-649.

[34] Rothschild, Michael and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1997). Competition and Insurance Twenty
  Years Later. Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance Theory, 22(2), pp. 73-79.

[35] Spence, M. (1978). Product differentiation and performance in insurance markets. J.
  Public Econ. 10(3), 427­447.

[36] Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1977). Monopoly, Non-Linear Pricing and Imperfect Information:
  The Insurance Market. Review of Economic Studies, 44(3), pp. 407-430.

[37] Stiglitz, Joseph E (2009). Introduction to Part IIB. in Selected Works of Joseph E.
  Stiglitz, Volume I: Information and Economic Analysis, Oxford: Oxford University
  Press, 2009, pp. 129-140.

[38] Stiglitz, Joseph and J. Yun (2016). Equilibrium in a Competitive Insurance Market
  with Non-exclusivity Under Adverse Selection. mimeo.

[39] Stiglitz, Joseph, Jungyoll Yun, and Andrew Kosenko (2018). Characterization, Exis-
  tence, and Pareto Optimality in Insurance Markets with Asymmetric Information with
  Endogenous and Asymmetric Disclosures: Revisiting Rothschild-Stiglitz. NBER Work-
  ing Paper No. 24711, June

[40] Wilson, C. (1977). A model of insurance markets with incomplete information. Jour-
  nal of Economic Theory, 16(2), pp. 167-207.




                                            27
