                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       IMMIGRATION POLICY LEVERS FOR US INNOVATION AND STARTUPS

                                       Sari Pekkala Kerr
                                        William R. Kerr

                                      Working Paper 27040
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27040


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




Author contact information: skerr3@wellesley.edu, wkerr@hbs.edu. Sari Pekkala Kerr is a senior
research scientist at the Wellesley Centers for Women (Wellesley College) and National Bureau
of Economic Research (NBER). William Kerr is a professor at Harvard Business School and a
Research Associate at the NBER and Bank of Finland. This is a draft chapter for an NBER
Innovation and Public Policy conference volume edited by Austan Goolsbee and Benjamin Jones.
We thank Maggie Dalton and Gorick Ng for excellent research assistance. We thank the National
Science Foundation, Smith Richardson Foundation, Harvard Business School, and the Ewing
Marion Kauffman Foundation for financial support that made this research possible. The research
in this paper was conducted while the authors were Special Sworn Status researchers of the U.S.
Census Bureau at the Boston Census Research Data Center. Research results and conclusions
expressed are the authors' own and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Census Bureau, the
NSF, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper has been screened to ensure that
no confidential data are revealed.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Sari Pekkala Kerr and William R. Kerr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Immigration Policy Levers for US Innovation and Startups
Sari Pekkala Kerr and William R. Kerr
NBER Working Paper No. 27040
April 2020
JEL No. F22,F23,J15,J44,J61,L26,M13,O31,O32,O33

                                         ABSTRACT

Immigrants account for about a quarter of US invention and entrepreneurship despite a policy
environment that is not well suited for these purposes. This chapter reviews the US immigration
policy environment that governs how skilled migrants move to America for employment-based
purposes. We discuss points of strain in the current system and potential policy reforms that
would likely increase the rate of innovation and the number of startups due to immigrants in the
country. Key areas include adjustments to the allocation of permanent residency visas,
adjustments to the H-1B visa program, and the creation of an immigrant startup visa.


Sari Pekkala Kerr
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
skerr3@wellesley.edu

William R. Kerr
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu
1    Introduction
US policy makers are always on the hunt for levers that can boost entrepreneurship and inno-
vation. Especially in a time of declining business dynamism (Decker et al., 2014) and an aging
workforce, entrepreneurship and innovation raise economic growth, provide jobs, and rebuild
government co¤ers. As America works to rebuild from the devastating e¤ects of the COVID-19
pandemic, these stimulants become ever more important. This chapter reviews potential reforms
to the US immigration system that could enhance the contribution of immigrants to the nation'      s
entrepreneurship and innovation.
    Policy makers are well aware of high-pro...le immigrant examples like Tesla and SpaceX
founder Elon Musk and Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella, who grace the cover of magazines and
are called to testify before Congress. They may be less aware, however, about the exceptional
depth that lies below these prominent examples. Immigrants account for about a quarter of
US startups and patents each year, a share that has been increasing for decades. Section 2
reviews some recent economic research about immigrant entrepreneurship and innovation and
its surprisingly deep in  uence on the US economy.
    Section 3 then discusses adjustments to US immigration policy that could boost innovation.
We mostly focus on feasible reforms that would operate within the current immigration structure
by adjusting the allocation of visas granted for employment-based purposes. The most prominent
reform would replace the lottery used for the oversubscribed H-1B visa system with an allocation
mechanism that prioritizes speci...ed uses. We also provide a short discussion of comprehensive
immigration reform, which would could fundamentally increase the relative share of immigration
for employment-based purposes compared to family-reuni...cation purposes.
    Section 4 then considers policies connected to immigrant entrepreneurs. While the United
States has visas that cover individuals capable of making substantial business investments, its
immigration structure is less accommodating than those of other countries for the admission
of business founders lacking existing ...nancial capital (e.g., an immigrant college student on a
F-1 student visa who wants to start a company after graduation). We review the approaches of
several countries to startup visas, common traits of recent US legislative proposals, and estimates
of the potential economic impact.
    Throughout this review, we strictly follow the National Bureau of Economic Research'      s pol-
icy that papers not advocate a particular policy approach. Our goal is to collect and present
economic research on how policy makers can in      uence US entrepreneurship and innovation out-
comes through the immigration process. We thus skip policies that indirectly in        uence immi-
grant entrepreneurship and innovation. An example is the work of Akcigit et al. (2016) that
shows top inventors are very sensitive to taxation rates when deciding where to conduct their
research. Many of these policies are covered elsewhere in this volume and in Bloom et al. (2019),
and these levers often operate in part by making the United States more attractive to skilled


                                                 1
immigrants. Similarly, we do not quantify what an overall expansion of US immigration rates
would do for entrepreneurship and innovation, as most of the impact would simply come from
the larger economy (Clemens, 2011).
    Our focus is narrower and arguably more useful to policy makers in today'    s immigration dis-
cussions. In America and abroad, recent growth in populism and nationalism has pushed back at
many forms of global integration, including skilled- and employment-based migration. Questions
about the appropriateness of global linkages will further intensify following the COVID-19 crisis.
Yet, the combination of a knowledge-intensive economy and rapidly aging populations in most
advanced economies suggest that competition for the world'    s mobile entrepreneurs and innova-
tors will increase in the decades ahead. Understanding what policy margins could be adjusted
is an important foundation for thinking through future national strategies for immigration and
the best mechanisms to implement them.

2     Immigrants as Founders and Innovators
While the literature on immigrant entrepreneurship and innovation is not very long, it is nonethe-
less too long to be fully reviewed here. We instead outline some key research ...ndings that provide
important background for the immigration visa discussions in the next two sections.1

    1. Immigrants account for about a quarter of US entrepreneurship and innova-
       tion. A signi...cant body of work over the last decade has quanti...ed these contributions.2
       Measuring this is harder than it ...rst appears, which results in a range of techniques and
       estimates. Nevertheless, research consistently ...nds immigrants account for about 25% of
       new ...rms and patents. As a corollary, the propensity of immigrants towards entrepreneur-
       ship and innovation is higher than it is for US natives.3 Immigrants account for about 14%
       of the US workforce and 17-18% of US college graduates according to the 2016 American
       Community Survey. Looking speci...cally at science and engineering, immigrants account
       for 29% of the United States'college-educated workforce and 52% of its doctorates.

    2. Most of the heightened impact of immigrants on US entrepreneurship and in-
       novation comes from a greater propensity of immigrants to possess the educa-
       tional backgrounds for the work. Hunt (2011, 2015) shows that immigrant propensities
       towards entrepreneurship and innovation can be mostly explained through their greater ed-
       ucational attainment and STEM ...eld focus (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math-
       ematics). While immigrants are more represented at the upper tail of scienti...c achieve-
   1
     Kerr (2019a) provides a book-length review. Summary articles include Kerr (2013), Fairlie and Lofstrom
(2014), and Kerr et al. (2016, 2017).
   2
     For example, Saxenian (1999, 2002), Anderson and Platzer (2006), Wadhwa et al. (2007), Kerr and Lincoln
(2010), Brown et al. (2019), Kerr and Kerr (2017, 2020), Bernstein et al. (2019), and Azoulay et al. (2020).
   3
     The diverse literature spans Borjas (1986), Clark and Drinkwater (2000, 2006), Lofstrom (2002), Schuetze
and Antecol (2007), Fairlie et al. (2010), Hunt (2011, 2015), Fairlie (2012), and Fairlie and Lofstrom (2014).


                                                      2
      ment4 -- accounting, for example, for a third of US-based recipients of Nobel Prizes-- their
      most signi...cant impact on the economy comes through the large quantity of immigrant
      workers trained for pursuing STEM work.

   3. Chinese and Indian immigration have been particularly strong drivers for
      growth in immigrant entrepreneurship and innovation. To provide an extended
      time horizon, Figure 1 uses ethnic name matching algorithms of Kerr (2008) to quantify
      the signi...cant growth in US patents granted to individuals of Chinese and Indian ethnicity
      working in America. Chinese and Indian ethnic inventors accounted for less than 3% of
      US patents in 1975, but more than 22% in 2018. As we discuss later, this concentration
      is leading to long delays in obtaining US permanent residency for immigrants from China
      and India due to the US allocation procedures that cap the annual number of green cards
      that can go to petitioners who were born in any given country.

   4. Immigrant entrepreneurship and innovation are quite clustered spatially and
      show no evidence of crowding out native activity in local areas. More than
      half of entrepreneurs in the San Francisco Bay area are foreign-born, and many other
      leading technology clusters show high immigrant shares (Kerr and Kerr, 2020). Empirical
      studies using geographic variation almost always ...nd positive or no impact from high-
      skilled immigration on native employment and output in innovative activities in the same
      city.5 This clustering has substantially shifted the economic geography of innovation in
      America, and the lack of a crowding-out e¤ect allows the spatial concentration of innovation
      to persist and grow. We note later the potential role of regional visas to counteract some
      of this concentration.

   5. Immigrant contributions are similarly concentrated within ...rms, with mixed
      evidence on whether native employment grows or declines. Firms such as Mi-
      crosoft and Google employ skilled immigrants to a greater degree than Procter & Gamble
      and Boeing. These di¤erences can be explained in part by their physical locations and
      industries. Studies on whether the hiring of skilled immigrants boosts the overall employ-
      ment of ...rms show mixed results (e.g., Kerr et al., 2015b; Doran et al., 2015; Mayda et
      al., 2018; Dimmock et al., 2019), an ambiguity connected to the many ways the US visa
      system can be used as described in the next section. There is evidence that high-skilled
    4
      For example, Stephan and Levin (2001), Peri (2007), Wadhwa et al. (2007), Hart and Acs (2011), and Kerr
(2019a,b).
    5
      For example, Kerr and Lincoln (2010), Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle (2010), Kerr (2010), Peri et al. (2015),
Ghimire (2018), and Buchardi et al. (2019). Lewis and Peri (2015) provide a theoretical framework and review
of literature on the e¤ects of immigration on local areas. Analyses of industries or technology areas have shown
more mixed outcomes (e.g., Borjas and Doran, 2012; Moser et al., 2014; Bound et al., 2017; Doran and Yoon,
2019; Moser and San, 2020). The clustering of entrepreneurs from a country in a narrow occupation is widespread
and studied by Chung and Kalnins (2006), Fairlie et al. (2010), Patel and Vella (2013), and Kerr and Mandor¤
(2015). See also self-employment studies of Lofstrom (2002), Fairlie and Meyer (2003), and Akee et al. (2013).


                                                       3
       immigration is a lever used by employers to keep tech workforces younger (e.g., Matlo¤,
       2003; Kerr et al., 2015a,b).6

    6. Skilled immigrants receive wages at a rate comparable to similarly skilled na-
       tives. Studies on whether immigrants receive higher or lower wages than natives yield
       mixed results. Legal factors, like the prevailing wage requirement for an H-1B worker, limit
       the extent to which pay di¤erences could exist. Moreover, even to the degree that skilled
       immigrants are slightly underpaid relative to natives of similar age and background, the
       economics of the ...rm suggest a rather limited scope for this di¤erential to inuence hiring
       decisions. The larger wage gaps instead appear between younger skilled immigrants and
       older native workers, connecting to the observation above that high-skilled immigration
       can be a mechanism for ...rms to keep workforces younger.

    7. A substantial portion of skilled immigration to America begins with migration
       for schooling. Immigrants who contribute to US entrepreneurship and innovation migrate
       at many life stages: Sergey Brin of Google migrated as a child, while Elon Musk ...rst
       moved to the United States for college. The reforms below focus on entrepreneurial and
       employment opportunities after schooling, but Kato and Sparber (2013) demonstrate a
       strong link between the opportunity to remain in the United States for work and the
       attractiveness of US colleges to migrants. Likewise, policies that govern school-to-work
       transitions play an important role.

3     Visas for Innovators
The research ...ndings in Section 2 provide a foundation for exploring how the US immigration
process can be adjusted to increase levels of entrepreneurship and innovation. This section
commences by discussing the role of immigrants in invention and innovation. The bulk of these
contributions come through the actions of paid employees in US businesses, and thus we focus
on the frameworks that connect to the quantity and composition of these workers. Section 4
considers the special case of immigrant entrepreneurs who are not well-aligned for employment-
based visas.

3.1     Cli¤notes on the US Immigration System
The US immigration system is vast and exceptionally complex, and we highlight here just a few
important background pieces.7 Most of the policies below fall under the US Citizenship and
Immigration Services (USCIS) within the Department of Homeland Security.
    6
      The transition period for native workers who are displaced appears longer in STEM-connected work than
elsewhere (Kerr and Kerr, 2013). Glennon (2019) considers how access to skilled immigrants inuence the overseas
operations of US ...rms.
    7
      A primer: https://www.migrationpolicy.org/content/explainer-how-us-legal-immigration-system-works.


                                                      4
    Other than citizenship, immigration to America culminates in obtaining permanent residency,
a.k.a. the "green card." Approximately one million green cards are granted every year, with
family-based immigration being the largest category. There is no annual limit on green cards to
reunite immediate family members (e.g., spouses, parents, and children) of American citizens,
and up to 480,000 additional visas are provided annually for extended family. Green cards
granted for employment-based purposes are subject to an annual cap of 140,000 individuals,
including family members accompanying the worker. Smaller numbers of visas are issued for
other purposes, such as refugee/humanitarian concerns.
    In parallel, temporary visas authorize individuals to visit, study, and work in the United
States. These visas are termed "non-immigrant" as the individual does not have permanent
rights to stay in the country. Temporary visas are often a predecessor to permanent residency,
as more than 80% of employment-based green cards are issued to individuals already living and
working in the United States. On the other hand, many skilled migrants work in the United
States for a period of time but have no intention to stay permanently. Consequently, the levers
by which policy makers might impact entrepreneurship and innovation extend beyond permanent
residency admissions to cover temporary visas and, as we will return to below, how these two
structures interface with each other. This section continues by describing temporary visas for
employment-related purposes (vs. to study or visit).
    A distinctive feature of the US temporary visa system is that is "employer driven," meaning
that a company like Microsoft or General Motors selects the worker it wants to employ and
applies for a visa on behalf of the worker. This individual could be living/working abroad or be
a student at a US school on a non-employment visa. This employer-driven approach contrasts
conceptually with a points-based system that scores and selects potential immigrants based upon
their attributes (e.g., degree, age, language skills, income). Kerr (2019a) reviews the trade-o¤s
between the two approaches and the de facto hybrid nature of many nations. The United
States has some elements of a points-like structure in that priority temporary visa categories
(and permanent residency admissions) exist for persons of "extraordinary ability," but the bulk
of skilled immigrant workers are admitted through temporary visas that rely on employers to
select migrants.
    The largest of these temporary employment-based categories is the H-1B visa for skilled
foreigners working in "specialty occupations" (i.e., those requiring theoretical and practical ap-
plication of specialized knowledge like engineering or accounting). Virtually all H-1B holders
have a college education or higher, and the substantial majority of visas are used for computer-
and STEM-related occupations. In 2017, immigrants from India accounted for 72% of H-1B
visas and immigrants from China were awarded another 13%. These shares have steadily risen
and demonstrate the      exibility of the system to be used in ways that employers deem ...t, with
computer- and STEM-related occupations being attractive opportunities for ...rms.
    H-1B holders are tied to their sponsoring ...rm, although visa portability is feasible with


                                                5
approval from the government (e.g., Depew et al., 2017). Firms can petition for permanent
residency on behalf of the worker. This "dual intent" feature-- where one can be a temporary
migrant but also applying for permanent residency-- is very attractive to many immigrants. The
H-1B visa is for three years and can be renewed once. If permanent residency is not obtained,
the H-1B worker must leave the United States at the end of the second visa period for one year
before applying again.
     Firms must pay the visa holder the higher of (1) the prevailing wage in the ...rm for the
position or (2) the prevailing wage for the occupation in the area of employment. Congress
designed these restrictions to prevent H-1B employers from abusing their relationships with
foreign workers and to protect the wages and employment of domestic workers. In 2016, the
average salary for H-1B visa holders was $80,000, but there was a broad range, from mid-skilled
employees of outsourcing ...rms earning $60,000 to higher-skilled workers earning greater than
$150,000 (Ruiz and Krogstad, 2018; Kerr, 2019b).8
     Figure 2 shows the annual cap on the number of new H-1B visas that can be issued to for-pro...t
...rms. The original 65,000 cap was not binding in the early 1990s, but became so by the middle
of the decade. Legislation in 1998 and 2000 sharply increased the cap over the next ...ve years
to 195,000 visas. These short-term increases expired during the high-tech downturn, when visa
demand fell short of the cap. The cap returned to the 65,000 level in 2004 and became binding
again, despite being subsequently raised by 20,000 through an "advanced degree" exemption.
The overall cap of 85,000 remains in place as of 2020.
     Another widely used but lesser known employer-based visa is the L-1. Available for the
temporary migration of foreign employees within a multinational ...rm, there were about 78,000
L-1 visas (including renewals) issued in 2017. Only employees who have been employed by the
...rm for at least one of the previous three years are eligible, and the visa has a maximum stay
of seven years. Similar to the H-1B, the L-1 is a "dual-intent" visa, whereby it provides an
opportunity to apply for a green card. Yeaple (2018) provides additional discussion of the L-1
visa.

3.2    Potential Reforms within the Existing System
Lawmakers have proposed several reforms that could boost entrepreneurship and innovation by,
more or less, adjusting the existing system (i.e., not requiring the comprehensive immigration
reform described at the end of this section). We discuss these reforms working backwards from
the green card decision.
  8
    The minimal wage e¤ects on R&D workers from expanding skilled immigration for innovation is di¤erent
from wages being bid up from R&D stimulus described by Goolsbee (1998).




                                                   6
3.2.1   Removing Country Caps to EB Permanent Residency

The United States grants 140,000 green cards for employment-based (EB) purposes each year,
a ...gure that includes the focal worker and his or her accompanying family members. This is
not the only pathway through which an immigrant inventor or entrepreneur can obtain perma-
nent residency as, for example, the individual may marry an American citizen and apply for
permanent residency through family-based allocations. Others enter the diversity lottery that
o¤ers 50,000 green cards randomly to applicants from countries with low rates of admission to
America. Nevertheless, the EB allocation is the most central and broadly accessible channel for
employment-connected immigration.
     In addition to these caps on the type of green card to be awarded (which we discuss further
below in the context of comprehensive immigration reform), the US system has an important
country-level cap. A provision within the Immigration Act of 1990, which remained in e¤ect as
of 2020, stipulated that "the total number of immigrant visas made available to natives of any
single foreign state or dependent area" not exceed 7 percent. This provision was partly designed
to encourage diversity in source countries of migrants.
     A consequence, however, has been the development of long waiting lists for employment-
based migrants from several large nations until they can obtain a green card (e.g., Kahn and
MacGarvie, 2018). EB immigrants from China and India face particularly long waiting times
given the huge demand: recall that 85 percent of H-1B visas go to immigrants from these
two countries, and Figure 1 showed their prominent role in US innovation growth. Wait time
projections for some categories of Indian migration can stretch into the decades (priorities and
wait times depend upon the skill level of the EB category). Though the H-1B temporary visa can
be extended beyond the typical six years (initial plus renewal) while the immigrant is waiting
for a green card, the long wait times impair worker mobility across employers and their capacity
to launch new ventures.
     Over the last decade, attempts have been made in both the House and Senate to amend this
policy. Proposals have suggested increasing the country cap from 7 percent to 15 percent or 25
percent and avoiding any residual, unused visas. A prominent recent example is the Fairness
for High-Skilled Immigrants Act of 2019, proposed in both the House and the Senate, which
sought to "eliminate the per-country numerical limitation for employment-based immigrants."
The proposal passed the House on a bipartisan basis and was still in committee in the Senate
as of early 2020.9
  9
    This section is sourced from these sites (accessed Dec 2019):
 https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:8%20section:1152%20edition:prelim)
 https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/senate-bill/1877/text#toc-H6343391472A44BF0884BAD0CFF83B119
 https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/senate-bill/386/text
 https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/house-bill/1044/text
 https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/house-bill/1044/text
 https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/senate-bill/386/text
 http://clerk.house.gov/evs/2019/roll437.xml


                                                7
   This adjustment would likely increase the attractiveness of the United States to foreign
entrepreneurs and innovators. For immigrants doing innovative work in large organizations, the
prospect of long waiting times can deter migration due to the uncertainty and possibly slower
wage growth while on temporary status. Hunt (2017) ...nds that mobility is reduced by about
20 percent when waiting for green card processing. The weakened mobility of workers may also
reduce the match quality between a ...rm and a worker, leading to lower productivity. Prospective
entrepreneurs can also be discouraged if they need the permanent residency transition to start
their business, either due to legal factors (visa requirements) or to the necessary con...dence that
the United States will be their long-term home.

3.2.2    Increase the Number of H-1B Visas

The most frequently proposed and debated reform to temporary migration is to raise the annual
cap on the H-1B program for for-pro...t ...rms. As of early 2020, the H-1B visa cap was 65,000
with an additional 20,000 visas for individuals with advanced degrees from US schools. Many
proposals fall in the range of 115,000 visas to 195,000 visas. Some prominent business leaders like
Eric Schmidt, Google'   s former CEO, go further to advocate for an unlimited number of visas.10
Policy makers might also consider indexing future caps to economic conditions and related
factors so that Congress does not need to spend multiple years debating one-o¤ adjustments to
a nominal ...gure.
    It is likely that such a cap increase would spur US innovation to some degree. Empirical
and quantitative studies of the prior cap adjustments when binding11 suggest this conclusion,
although a study of marginal visa awards in the non-cap-binding years of 2006 and 2007 does
not (Doran et al., 2015).
    The most frequent objection raised to a potential innovation boost is that most H-1B visa
holders are not conducting innovative work (being employed in computer- and STEM-related
positions more broadly). While true, it remains the case that innovation would likely grow if
the overall program expanded. By analogy, an expansion of the Department of Defense'       s budget
would likely result in more tanks, even though tanks are only a small portion of DoD'     s budget.
What this objection surfaces, though, is that we do not know how the overall composition of
the applicant pool would change under an expanded program. The composition could stay the
same, deteriorate on average (e.g., if ...rms apply for more marginal visa uses), or increase (e.g.,
if the greater assurance of a visa led to higher quality immigrants and ...rms prioritizing more to
  https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/senate-bill/386/actions
  10
     Schmidt said in 2017, "The single stupidest policy in the entire American political system was the limit on
H-1B." https://money.cnn.com/2017/05/04/technology/eric-schmidt-h1b-visa/. Hira (2010), by contrast, is an
example of a very skeptical view on the program.
  In a 2019 survey of Harvard Business School alumni (Porter et al. 2019), 70% of respondents favored an
increase in the H-1B cap of 50% or more. In a parallel poll of the general public, 30% of Democrats and 20% of
Republicans expressed interest in such an increase.
  11
     For example, Kerr and Lincoln (2010), Peri et al. (2015), Kerr et al. (2015a,b), Bound et al. (2017), and
Mayda et al. (2018).


                                                       8
locate in the United States).
    While many advocates propose cap expansions without reference to other policies, the inter-
action of such an expansion with other aspects of the immigration pathway should be considered
by policy makers. Most important, without potential adjustments to the 7 percent country cap
described regarding how EB green cards are allocated, the backlog of temporary visa holders
from China and India waiting for a green card would grow substantially if only the H-1B cap
were increased.

3.2.3      Adjust the H-1B Visa Allocation Mechanism

Additional proposals consider how the United States could adjust the allocation of H-1B visas.
Prior to ...scal year 2021, the visa application period opened on April 1st of each year. In most
years, the government received more applications than the available cap within the ...rst week.
The policy of the government in these oversubscribed years was to keep accepting applications
for a whole week and then conduct a lottery over the applications received. Should the cap not
be reached in the ...rst week, applications were processed on a ...rst come, ...rst served basis until
the cap was reached later in the year (and on that ...nal day, USCIS conducted a mini lottery
over the applications received on the day when the cap was reached). Figure 3 shows how
rapidly the cap ...lls up in most years. USCIS received 201,011 applications by April 5, 2019, for
the 2020 ...scal year.12 In March 2020, USCIS implemented a new two-step application process
for ...scal year 2021 with a ...rst registration from March 1st, 2020 through March 20th, 2020,
followed by a lottery selection. Early data suggested the government received approximately
275,000 registrations, again well in excess of the cap. At the time of writing this chapter, it was
uncertain if the USCIS would further modify this new process for future years.
    The lottery has important implications. A lottery randomizes applications and thus gives
equal chances to an applicant performing basic code testing for an outsourcing company as it does
to an arti...cial intelligence researcher with a proposed salary ten-fold higher. Indeed, the lottery
system likely even tilts the application pool further towards more mundane uses: it is easier for a
company to submit multiple applications for a routine software developer role, knowing that the
overall odds per applicant are in the range of 40%, than it is for a company to submit multiple
applications for a scarce skillset like arti...cial intelligence research. (In a comparable way, it is
likely that the lottery favors large companies submitting many H-1B applications over smaller
companies who have more discrete needs.)
    One recent change shifted in subtle ways the skill composition. USCIS has historically
conducted the 20,000 visa lottery for candidates with masters education from US schools before
the 65,000 regular lottery. As candidates with masters degrees from US schools could enter both
lotteries, this lottery order meant that fewer candidates with masters educations entered the
regular lottery as they had already been selected. USCIS reversed the lottery order starting
 12
      https://redbus2us.com/h1b-visa-cap-reach-dates-history-graphs-uscis-data/


                                                       9
with the H-1B applications received in April 2020 for ...scal year 2021. By reversing the order,
more of the dual lottery applicants will be chosen via the 65,000 lottery (and thus now drop out
of the 20,000 exempt lottery). Estimates suggest that this change will increase by 4,000-5,000
individuals the number of H-1B awards to holders of masters degrees. There have been some
legal challenges to the proposed change, and others have argued against the switch in lottery
order by noting, for example, that it would de-prioritize applicants with doctorate degrees from
non-US schools.13 Pathak et al. (2020) provides an extensive analysis of this rule change and
its optimality under the existing H-1B structure.
    A move away from the lottery system altogether would likely increase the innovative output
of the H-1B program. One mechanism frequently debated is to rank applicants by their proposed
wage (which is included as part of an H-1B application). This technique would use the worker'    s
wage as an imperfect proxy for the value of the potential immigrant to the US economy. A
potential advantage of this approach is that the procedure is easy to understand and convey to
the public. To the degree that wages and skills are correlated, such a prioritization would also
raise the skill content of the H-1B system signi...cantly. Sparber (2018) calculated this change
would generate a $27 billion surplus over six years, with gains even higher should better talent
become more incentivized to apply.
    There are some potential disadvantages that would need to be addressed. First, wage ranking
would naturally favor some higher-priced cities and industries (e.g., New York City ...nance, San
Francisco tech) over others, established companies over smaller ones, and established workers over
younger ones and new college graduates. Law makers would need to consider what additional
adjustments should complement and support wage ranking, such as regional and/or occupational
caps, adjustments of school-to-work transitions, etc.14 Second, the status implications to the
temporary worker of subsequent cuts in salary compared to the initial o¤er use for wage ranking
will need to be speci...ed. Finally, wage ranking might also face legal challenges from groups
that favor the current system, especially Indian outsourcing companies who argue the visas are
compliant with the World Trade Organization'    s General Agreement on Trade in Services.15
  13
     From an applicant'  s perspective, one site estimated the new lottery order would increase the likelihood of
a US masters degree holder for obtaining a visa from 51% to 55%, while reducing others from 38% to 34%.
https://www.am22tech.com/h1b-lottery-system-changes/
   Signi...cant recent debate has also centered on the H-4 authorization that allows dependent spouses of H-1B
workers with approved green card petitions to work. As of April 2020, the USCIS was considering an end to
this authorization. Some H-1B holders have expressed concern that they will not be able to a¤ord to live in the
United States without a second income. It is not clear that this rule change would impact the innovation and
entrepreneurship outcomes that are the focus of this chapter.
   Finally, several additional processing actions taken by the Trump administration appear to have targeted
reducing the number of H-1B visas awarded to IT service providers. In March 2020, a court invalidated several
of these actions, and the future legal path is uncertain (Anderson, 2020a,b).
  14
     Regional or occupation caps are also mentioned as potential H-1B reforms independent of wage ranking. Such
reforms, depending upon how they were implemented, could result in a lower innovation stimulus if they shifted
work out of tech clusters towards other purposes and regions. Related work on clusters includes Audretsch and
Feldman (1996), Zucker et al. (1998), Fallick et al. (2006), Feldman and Kogler (2010), Samila and Sorenson
(2011), Carlino and Kerr (2015), Moretti (2019), and Kerr and Robert-Nicoud (2019). Ottaviano and Peri (2006),
Nathan (2015), and Docquier et al. (2019) are examples of work on local diversity and innovation outcomes.
  15
     There could also be management challenges inside of companies. For example, many companies have salary


                                                       10
    Two other proposals are worth noting. One, which could complement wage ranking, is
to establish a minimum salary level for an H-1B worker (e.g., $100,000), possibly with bu¤er
mechanisms that would save unused visas and add them to subsequent years when demand spikes
again. These thresholds would ensure that visas are allocated to purposes other than just cost
minimization in IT roles.
    Another proposal is to auction visas to companies (e.g., Peri, 2012). Auctions would likely
bring many of the same skill increases and innovation gains as wage ranking. Auctions would
di¤er in that more of the economic surplus that immigration generates would be captured by
the government, which could then use the funds as it deems ...t. A challenge is that auctions
would likely raise the share of H-1B visas going to companies that are already large and doing
well, as they have the greatest ...nancial capacity to bid for visas.

3.2.4    Adjust School-to-Work Transitions

This chapter focuses on policy reforms and how they might impact entrepreneurship and in-
novation in the for-pro...t sector. We do not provide here an in-depth treatment of potential
reforms to immigration and the education system (Bound et al., 2020), which is an important
early pathway for many who later take temporary work visas or EB green cards. However, we
note here several important tensions within the school-to-work transition.
     US higher education is relatively unconstrained in that schools do not face caps on the number
of student visas they can issue (or H-1B worker visas, as discussed later). Over the last decade,
the number of foreign students in US schools has swelled to more than a million. Many of these
students come to the United States with the hope of later obtaining a job in America (Kato and
Sparber, 2013). Yet, the rapidly growing student population exerts pressure on the ...xed supply
of the H-1B visa system. As a consequence, many immigrant students take their ...rst job via the
Optional Practical Training (OPT) program, which lets graduates work with US companies to
gain practical experience for jobs connected to their majors, lasting for up to one year in most
...elds and three years for STEM degree holders.
     There are an unlimited number of OPT visa extensions, with roughly 175,000 active in 2017.
The OPT program accounted for about 30% of foreign-born students entering the US labor
market during the 2000s, and today more skilled immigrants start work via OPT than through
H-1B visas or permanent residency admissions (Bound et al., 2015). Many immigrants then
experience the stress of repeatedly trying the H-1B lottery, with the hopes of being selected
before their OPT runs out. If their OPT expires ...rst, the student would need to leave the
United States, obtain a di¤erent visa (e.g., O-1 or green card), or enter a new program (e.g., a
masters degree). As the number of student and exchange visitor visas issued each year has grown
to be an order of magnitude larger than the H-1B visa cap (which also covers many applicants
bands for positions that might be stressed in a company willing to o¤er a higher salary in order to obtain a
worker.



                                                    11
other than graduating students), the mismatch in program sizes has become acute.
    An important policy question is how the United States might smooth school-to-work tran-
sitions. Many countries provide a guaranteed right to work for a period of time for students
graduating their universities (e.g., 3-5 years regardless of degree); even from a narrow perspec-
tive, recent graduates and younger workers tend to be ...scal contributors by paying more in taxes
than receiving in bene...ts. Policy makers may want to consider these adjustments on their own,
but they would also become important under certain reforms contemplated above to increase
the skill content of the H-1B program. For example, with wage ranking or high H-1B minimum
wages, a fresh college graduate would be disadvantaged compared to an established worker. A
hybrid model would provide workers a greater de...ned time before they need to compete for an
H-1B slot.
    Another common proposal is to "staple" a green card to any advanced STEM degree granted
by a quali...ed US school to an immigrant. The staple proposal is a conceptually simple response
to the challenges of school-to-work transition, and it would likely boost entrepreneurship and
innovation outcomes to some degree. A challenge to the idea is the scope for unintended con-
sequences by attaching automatic rights to degrees. For example, comparable policies in other
countries have encountered "diploma mills" that o¤er qualifying degrees under conditions that
legislators had not anticipated.16 Even traditional US schools have already shown an increasing
reliance of foreign students to help support themselves ...nancially (e.g., Bird and Turner 2014,
Bound et al. 2020).

3.3     Potential Reforms to Broader Immigration Structure
Closing this section, we note brie   y the larger context of US immigration reform. The proposals
described above could all likely boost the entrepreneurial and innovation output of US immi-
gration without any change to the broad structure that favors family reuni...cation. In 2016,
approximately 12 percent of US green cards went for employment-based purposes, 68 percent
for family reuni...cation, and 20 percent for other purposes (e.g., diversity, humanitarian). This
allocation is quite di¤erent from other heavy immigrant-receiving countries like Canada, where
a majority of slots are for employment-based purposes.
    Comprehensive immigration reform could seek to change the overall level of immigration
into America (i.e., increasing or decreasing the approximately one million green cards issued
each year) or the relative allocation over types of green cards. Proposals often also connect such
a move to the adoption of a point-based system, including those seeking to reduce immigration
(e.g., the 2017 proposed Reforming American Immigration for Strong Employment (RAISE)
Act17 ) or expand it (e.g., those from the New American Economy). It is likely that an increase
  16
    http://monitor.icef.com/2015/06/uk-rolls-out-new-service-to-help-...ght-diploma-mills-and-degree-fraud/.
  17
    https://www.migrationpolicy.org/news/raise-act-dramatic-change-family-immigration-less-so-employment-
based-system



                                                     12
in levels or a composition shift towards employment-based migrants would boost entrepreneurial
and innovation outcomes. For example, Hunt (2011) shows immigrants entering through student
and work visas are more likely to conduct entrepreneurial and innovative activities than those
entering via other visa types. That said, this would constitute only one element of the substantial
mix of political, social, cultural, and economic factors that matter for comprehensive reform.

4      Visas for Entrepreneurs
While countries have for decades adopted policies to attract and admit highly skilled immi-
grants, there is a recent and increasing interest in attracting immigrant entrepreneurs. This is
especially true around high-tech and high-growth startups.18 As immigrants display higher rates
of entrepreneurship in the United States and many other countries, policy makers often consider
immigration as a way to increase the supply of would-be entrepreneurs. This has resulted in
a   urry of new entrepreneur visas: for example, Australia created a visa for immigrants with
entrepreneurial skills in 2012, the United Kingdom introduced a new entrepreneur visa in 2008,
and Canada created a similar program in 2013.
    This section considers the special case of a startup visa for America. We ...rst review some of
the established pathways for immigrant entrepreneurs under the US system and the challenges
encountered. We then examine key dimensions of startup visas seen in other countries. This
segues to a review of US legislative proposals for a startup visa act over the last decade, which
have all thus far failed to make it to law, and some of the reforms that have happened.

4.1     Traits of Immigrant Founded Companies
One newly available data source to characterize the contributions of immigrant entrepreneurs
is the 2014 American Survey of Entrepreneurship (ASE). The 2014 ASE asked ...rms about
their innovation activity and research & development (R&D) e¤orts, in addition to standard
questions regarding ...rm and owner characteristics. The ASE identi...es the birthplace of ...rm
owners, allowing us to identify ...rms as Native owners only, Immigrant owners only, or Mixed
ownership. We focus our analysis on new ...rms founded in the past ...ve years to align with
entrepreneurship activity (vs. transfer of businesses across owners) and in which one of the
current owners was an original business founder.
    Table 1 presents some simple tabulations. The full and weighted sample accounts for ap-
proximately 557,000 ...rms, with counts rounded per Census Bureau disclosure requirements. Of
these ventures, 21.3% are entirely immigrant owned and 4.5% are immigrant owned in part.
Table 1 next provides for each column the share of ventures reporting the indicated activity.
Firms with immigrant owners engage modestly more in R&D and innovation than ...rms with
  18
    Anderson and Platzer (2006), Fairlie (2012, 2013), Hegde and Tumlinson (2014), Bengtsson and Hsu (2014),
and Gompers et al. (2016) also consider immigrant roles among VC-backed companies and investors. Haltiwanger
et al. (2013) and Glaeser et al. (2015) describe employment growth and new ...rm formation.


                                                    13
only native owners. Mixed founding teams show the greatest engagement in R&D and innova-
tion, although this is partly because a mixed ownership team tends to be larger than a native-
or immigrant-only ownership team (by de...nition, there must be at least two owners on a mixed
team). Firms with immigrant owners are also more likely to be seeking expansion capital.
    The last two rows use data on startup ...nancing to isolate 6,700 ventures raising $250,000
or more in private venture investment or public grants. Many startup visa proposals suggest
providing visas to immigrant founders who can raise this amount of startup capital from either
of these external ...nancing sources. Such ventures in total account for a little over 1.2% of new
ventures in the ASE sample. Firms with exclusively immigrant owners account for 13.2% of
startups hitting these thresholds and mixed teams account for another 13.8%. Ventures raising
private venture investment or public grants at positive amounts less than $250,000 account for
about 2% of the ASE sample and have comparable immigrant ownership.
    These tabulations con...rm several important features of immigrant entrepreneurship, includ-
ing the overall role of immigrant founders and their stronger proclivity towards innovative ac-
tivities (e.g., Kahn et al., 2017). They also provide a sense of the relative shares of existing
immigrant entrepreneurship that would have quali...ed for visas under some proposals. Existing
experiences cannot forecast latent demand for new visas that are created, but they provide a
sense of what policy makers may want to target.

4.2     Pathways for Immigrant Entrepreneurs
Many countries encourage the immigration of wealthy individuals willing to invest in a business
that provides employment in the host country. The United States has an EB-5 permanent
residency track for those willing and able to invest $1.8 million into a US business. This minimum
investment is an increase from the $1 million required before November 2019. If the investment
is made into Targeted Employment Areas that are rural or struggle with high unemployment
rates, the minimum requirement is $900,000 (up from $500,000). Going forward, USCIS plans
to adjust the index every ...ve years according to in   ation. The business must generate at least
10 full-time positions for American workers. The program provides a maximum of 10,000 visas
per year, and this allotment is mostly reached each year.19
    Aspiring immigrant entrepreneurs without this personal wealth who are not US permanent
residents have two primary options for building a startup. The ...rst option involves engaging in
preliminary business planning while enrolled under F-1 status as a student, using the OPT period
to launch and build the company, and then transitioning to an employment-based visa such as
the O-1 or a self-petitioned green card via the EB-1A or EB-2 National Interest Waiver (NIW)
categories. The second option is to obtain an employment-based visa like an H-1B, engage in
preliminary business planning (without engaging in unauthorized employment or violating the
  19
     https://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/legal/visa-law0/visa-statistics/annual-reports/report-of-the-visa-
o¢ ce-2018.html
  https://www.uscis.gov/working-united-states/permanent-workers/about-eb-5-visa-classi...cation


                                                       14
terms of one' s employment agreement), and then pursuing a green card from one'     s employer or
from one of the aforementioned self-petition options. Blume-Kohout (2016) provides a complete
description of these and other rarer routes.
    These types of immigrant pathways are not well designed for entrepreneurs. The legal fees,
uncertainty, and high adjudication standard involved in obtaining an O-1, EB-1A, or EB-2 NIW
and employers' general reluctance to sponsor green cards often deter aspiring entrepreneurs.
Roach and Skrentny (2019) measure in STEM ...elds the particular under-representation of im-
migrant PhDs working in tech startups compared to both their native peers and also to the
expressed initial desire of the immigrants to be in a startup. In a companion piece, Roach et
al. (2018) identify the greater risk tolerance and alignment of personality traits of foreign PhD
students to startup activity, but the authors also show a gap between the early intentions of
these students to be entrepreneurs with their employment outcomes after graduation. Roach et
al. (2018) note that the limited capabilities of the US immigration system to support immigrant
entrepreneurs likely plays an important role.
    Consequently, a number of local attempts have sprung up to help immigrant entrepreneurs
obtain the necessary employment authorization without waiting for permanent residency. Un-
der the American Competitiveness in the Twenty-...rst Century Act of 2000, Congress made
institutions of higher education and nonpro...t organizations exempt from the H-1B numerical
cap. In 2014, the Massachusetts State Legislature created an Entrepreneur in Residence (EiR)
program whereby immigrant entrepreneurs with advanced STEM degrees could be sponsored on
cap-exempt H-1B visas via working part-time at the University of Massachusetts Boston and
part-time on their Massachusetts-headquartered startups. According to Global EiR Coalition,
13 such programs now exist at institutions such as the University of Colorado, Boulder and the
University of Missouri, St. Louis.20 Some venture capital ...rms have also devised packages that
combine employment-connected visa sponsorship (the entrepreneur works as an employee of the
VC ...rm) with monetary investment.21 ; 22

4.3     International Examples
While every country promotes the unique nature of their startup visas, they tend to share many
common features.23 In particular, startup visas tend to impose minimum requirements around
one or more of these criteria: (1) the degree of establishment of the company, (2) the extent
  20
     https://innovation.masstech.org/projects-and-initiatives/global-entrepreneur-residence-pilot-program
   https://www.globaleir.org/global-eir-locations/
  21
     https://techcrunch.com/2014/11/13/unshackled-is-a-new-3-5m-early-stage-fund-that-looks-a-lot-like-an-
accelerator/
  22
     Several local policy initiatives have also sought to attract and welcome immigrant entrepreneurs more broadly
(e.g., the Thrive competition in New York City, the O¢ ce of New Americans in Chicago). Some initiatives
focus on speci...c issues that have been found to inhibit immigrant entrepreneurs from starting or growing their
businesses (e.g., language barriers, di¢ culty navigating the legal steps to start a company, or lack of capital to
pilot projects), while others are generally focused on attracting more new businesses.
  23
     Sources for this section are given at the end of this report. An online appendix for this paper describes
country-level visa programs in greater detail.


                                                        15
of ownership of the founding team, (3) the quali...cations of the entrepreneur, (4) the economic
impact of the venture, and (5) the ...nancial self-su¢ ciency of the entrepreneur.

     Degree of establishment of the company: Countries typically require that ventures
     be less than a certain number of years old, with Singapore setting the bar at 6 months vs.
     Ireland at 6 years. Countries also require that entrepreneurs invest a minimum amount
     of money in their startups (at least e75,000 in the case of Ireland). On a qualitative
     level, countries often require that entrepreneurs submit a business plan for evaluation, as
     in the case of Denmark and Spain. Some countries may even require that companies be
     endorsed by an o¢ cial body (e.g., The UK'   s Home O¢ ce) or that founders show evidence
     of professional or commercial ties within the country (e.g., Sweden).

     Extent of ownership of the founding team: Countries typically require that petition-
     ers own a minimum share of their company, with Sweden and Canada both requiring that
     founders own a controlling stake, but with Canada permitting a founding team of up to
     ...ve.

     Quali...cations of the entrepreneur: Countries often impose requirements around lan-
     guage pro...ciency, minimum levels of related experience, and/or minimum levels of educa-
     tional attainment. For example, France seeks at least a Master'   s degree or ...ve years of
     professional work experience. Australia requires petitioners be under the age of 55.

     Economic impact of the venture: In addition to requiring the startup be located in
     their country, countries also often screen ventures on their economic impact. Sweden, for
     example, requires that startups produce and/or sell their services or goods within Sweden.
     Ireland requires evidence that a given startup plan be "capable of creating 10 jobs in Ireland
     and realizing e1 million in sales within three to four years of starting up." Some countries
     also o¤er preferential treatment to entrepreneurs who intend to build businesses within
     certain high-value sectors. New Zealand, for example, waives its minimum NZ$100,000
     (~$65,000 USD) investment requirement for companies related to science, information
     and communications technology, or "other high value export-oriented sector." Thailand'        s
     startup visa is speci...cally tailored to entrepreneurs operating within 13 priority industries
     such as Next-Generation Automotive, Smart Electronics, Agriculture and Biotechnology,
     and Food for the Future.

     Financial self-su¢ ciency of the entrepreneur: Countries typically require that en-
     trepreneurs show minimum personal assets. For example, Sweden requires SEK 200,000
     (~$21,000 USD) available for two years.

    Countries di¤er on the terms and pathways to permanent residency and citizenship they o¤er
to foreign entrepreneurs. Thailand's visa is renewable every two years, though it o¤ers no obvious

                                                16
path to permanent residence. Similarly, Ireland issues entrepreneur visas with an initial validity
period of two years, after which the visa may be extended for three years, then by ...ve years.
However, the Irish government expressly states that it "does not provide for preferential access to
citizenship for successful applicants" of its startup visa program. By contrast, Australia o¤ers a
path to permanent residence for entrepreneurs who demonstrate "2 key success factors, or 1 key
success factor and 3 supporting success factors." Examples of key success factors are employing
two or more Australians; generating an annual turnover of at least AUD300,000 (~$200,000
USD); and ...ling a provisional patent. Supporting success factors are more qualitative, such
as "adapting [one'   s] entrepreneurial activities into other business areas" and "receiving formal
awards or recognition."
    Most host countries would like to attract successful entrepreneurs, yet half of startups fail
within the ...rst ...ve years. As it is hard to predict which businesses will succeed, countries
often admit immigrant entrepreneurs who look promising and then observe their success over
the duration of their stay. These conditional visas can be renewed (or converted to a permanent
residence permit) if the business remains successful within a few years. Australia, New Zealand,
Ireland, Singapore, and the United Kingdom have established versions of this approach. It
is important to recognize, however, a tension in making startup visas conditional on success.
Policy makers often dream of attracting startups with exceptional potential for employment
growth and economic impact, but these exceptional outcomes involve lots of experimentation
over ideas (Kerr et al., 2014). Making visas conditional on success may push immigrant founders
towards less risky ventures until their permanent residency is established.
    A related point of tension is regional distribution. Some countries like Canada provide
visa set-asides or other incentives for entrepreneurs to locate outside of the most prominent
technological or economic clusters. (These policies mirror the reduced investment requirements
for a US EB-5 visa if the investment is made into Targeted Employment Areas. Regional policies
are also frequent in employment visas.) These regional policies can serve to spread out the
distribution of locations impacted by immigrant entrepreneurs, and they may be an important
aspect of gaining political buy-in. It is possible, however, that constraining the spatial choices
of entrepreneurs may lead to fewer startups pursuing high-scale growth outcomes that are often
more easily pursued in prominent clusters.

4.4    US Startup Visa Proposals
Over the last decade, both Democrats and Republicans have introduced and supported approxi-
mately two dozen bills in both the House and Senate during every session of Congress in support
of a startup visa. Though the vast majority of bills have received bipartisan support, none have
emerged successfully from committee, been approved by both chambers, and been enacted into
law.
    The spirit of most proposed bills is similar: to charge the Secretary of Homeland Security

                                                17
with authorizing a certain number of startup visas-- often 75,000-- to entrepreneurs who satisfy
minimum requirements. Requirements typically include minimum ownership (either "signi...cant
ownership" or a controlling interest), minimum funding from qualifying investors or venture
capitalists, and/or the ability to generate revenue and create full-time jobs within the United
States. Some bills have also stipulated that entrepreneurs possess a minimum amount in assets
or have an annual income exceeding a certain threshold above the federal poverty level. Some
bills have also required that entrepreneurs either possess an unexpired H-1B visa or a Master'    s
                                                                           24
degree in STEM or other relevant academic discipline from a US school.
     Shortly after the "Startup Act 3.0" act was introduced in the House and Senate in 2013,
the Ewing Marion Kau¤man Foundation published a study by Stangler and Knoczal (2013)
that estimated the job creation impact of a startup visa. When using the legislative minimum
requirements and typical venture survival rates, the authors derived their lower bound that
four-year-old startups would create nearly 500,000 new jobs after ten years. If further assuming
that half of the startup visa companies would be technology and engineering companies and
their employment levels would grow beyond the minimum thresholds to re         ect typical industry
averages, the authors derived a larger estimate of 1.6 million new jobs. Given that their method-
ology did not model the potential of startup visa companies to become high-growth, high-scale,
and positively impact innovation, GDP, and productivity, the Kau¤man Foundation deemed its
range "conservative" and "low-end."
     In 2019, the "Startup Act" was introduced on a bipartisan basis within the Senate and then
referred to committee. The bill sought to authorize the Secretary of Homeland Security to issue
up to 75,000 "conditional immigrant" visas to entrepreneurs who register a new business, employ
at least two full-time employees, and invest or raise at least $100,000 in the business within the
...rst year. For the following three years, entrepreneurs would be required to employ an average
of at least ...ve full-time employees in order to remove the conditional basis of their visa.25

4.5    US Modi...cations Related to Startup Founders
While Congressional proposals have failed to pass both the House and Senate, two recent reforms
at the Federal level in   uenced the potential vitality of US immigrant entrepreneurship: the
Matter of Dhanasar and the International Entrepreneur Rule.
    On December of 2016, the USCIS'Administrative Appeals O¢ ce (AAO) published a decision
titled "Matter of Dhanasar." The decision updated the USCIS'analytical framework for assessing
eligibility for "National Interest Waivers" (NIWs), which permit immigrants to self petition for
a green card without an employer sponsor or related labor certi...cation. Under a 1998 precedent,
petitioners for a NIW under the EB-2 category had to demonstrate that (1) the petitioner'  s area
 24
    https://www.congress.gov/bill/114th-congress/senate-bill/3510/text
 https://www.congress.gov/bill/112th-congress/senate-bill/565/text
 https://www.congress.gov/bill/112th-congress/senate-bill/565/text
 25
    https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/senate-bill/328/text


                                                    18
of employment is of "substantial intrinsic merit," (2) any proposed bene...t from the individual'  s
endeavors will be "national in scope," and (3) the national interest would be adversely a¤ected
if a labor certi...cation were required.26 The 2016 revision was due in part due to the belief that
the "third prong was especially problematic for certain petitioners, such as entrepreneurs and
self-employed individuals."
     The updated criteria now requires "(1) that the foreign national'   s proposed endeavor has
both substantial merit and national importance; (2) that the foreign national is well positioned
to advance the proposed endeavor; and (3) that, on balance, it would be bene...cial to the United
States to waive the requirements of a job o¤er and thus of a labor certi...cation." In its decision,
the AAO speci...cally noted that the ...rst prong "may be demonstrated in a range of areas such as
business, entrepreneurialism," among others. The decision also noted that the USCIS recognized
"that forecasting feasibility or future success may present challenges to petitioners and USCIS
o¢ cers, and that many innovations and entrepreneurial endeavors may ultimately fail, in whole
or in part, despite an intelligent plan and competent execution" and that it did not "require
petitioners to demonstrate that their endeavors are more likely than not to ultimately succeed."27
Though not decided with the expressed intent of spurring US immigrant entrepreneurship, the
ruling e¤ectively reformulated the EB-2 NIW category into one that is now more favorable to
aspiring immigrant entrepreneurs.
     In January of 2017, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) under the Obama Admin-
istration published the International Entrepreneur Rule, a rule permitting the DHS to extend
a discretionary grant of parole lasting up to 30 months (2.5 years) to entrepreneurs. Entrepre-
neurs must (1) possess at least 10 percent ownership interest in startup created within the last
...ve years, (2) have an active and central role in the operations and future growth of the entity,
(3) have secured a minimum of $100,000 from government grants or at least $250,000 from a
quali...ed US investor for the business, and (4) demonstrate evidence of substantial potential for
rapid business growth or job creation. On July of 2017, the DHS published a delay rule and, in
May 2018, proposed to eliminate the Rule "because the department believes that it represents
an overly broad interpretation of parole authority, lacks su¢ cient protections for US workers
and investors, and is not the appropriate vehicle for attracting and retaining international en-
trepreneurs."28
  26
     A Labor Certi...cation is required to "certify to the USCIS that there are not su¢ cient U.S. workers able,
willing, quali...ed and available to accept the job opportunity in the area of intended employment and that
employment of the foreign worker will not adversely a¤ect the wages and working conditions of similarly employed
U.S. workers." https://www.foreignlaborcert.doleta.gov/perm.cfm
  27
     https://www.justice.gov/eoir/page/...le/920996/download
   https://www.uscis.gov/working-united-states/permanent-workers/employment-based-immigration-second-
preference-eb-2
  28
     https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2017/01/17/2017-00481/international-entrepreneur-rule
   https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2017/07/11/2017-14619/international-entrepreneur-rule-delay-
of-e¤ective-date
   https://www.uscis.gov/humanitarian/humanitarian-parole/international-entrepreneur-parole




                                                      19
5    Conclusions
Immigrants have played a substantial role in US invention and entrepreneurship over the last
several decades (Kerr 2019a). Further growth in these forms of immigrant contributions will be
challenging under the current US immigration structure due to numerical caps at key transition
points, especially the H-1B program size and the country caps on the rate at which employment-
based green cards are awarded. The United States also lacks a startup visa comparable to
those developed over the last decade by many peer countries. This chapter has reviewed several
policy reforms that would likely alleviate these constraints and foster greater US invention and
entrepreneurship going forward. Like all policy choices regarding immigration, these economic
considerations are one input into larger political dynamics.




                                              20
References
 [1] Akcigit, U., Baslandze, S. and Stantcheva, S. (2016). "Taxation and the International Mo-
     bility of Inventors." American Economic Review, 106:10, 2930-2981.
 [2] Akee, R.K.Q., Jaeger, D.A. and Tatsiramos, K. (2013). "The Persistence of Self-
     Employment Across Borders: New Evidence on Legal Immigrants to the United States."
     Economics Bulletin, 33:1, 126-137.
 [3] Anderson, S. (2020a). "H-1B Denials Remain High, Especially For IT Services Companies."
     Forbes. February 26, 2020. https://www.forbes.com/sites/stuartanderson/2020/02/26/h-
     1b-denials-remain-high-especially-for-it-services-companies/.
 [4] Anderson, S. (2020b). "Court Invalidates Key Trump Administration H-1B Visa Policies."
     Forbes. March 11, 2020. https://www.forbes.com/sites/stuartanderson/2020/03/11/court-
     invalidates-key-trump-administration-h-1b-visa-policies/.
 [5] Anderson, S. and Platzer, M. (2006). "American Made: The Impact of Immigrant Entre-
     preneurs and Professionals on U.S. Competitiveness." National Venture Capital Association
     Report.
 [6] Audretsch, D. and Feldman, M. (1996). "R&D Spillovers and the Geography of Innovation
     and Production." American Economic Review, 86, 630-640.
 [7] Azoulay, P., Jones, B.F., Kim, J.D., and Miranda, J. (2020). "Immigration and Entrepre-
     neurship in the United States." Working Paper.
 [8] Bengtsson, O. and Hsu, D. (2014). "Ethnic Matching in the U.S. Venture Capital Market."
     Journal of Business Venturing, 30:2, 338-354.
 [9] Bernstein, S., Diamond, R., McQuade, T. and Pousada, B. (2019). "The Contribution of
     High-Skilled Immigrants to Innovation in the United States." Working Paper.
[10] Bird, K. and Turner, S. (2014). "College in the States: Foreign Student Demand and Higher
     Education Supply in the U.S." EdPolicyWorks Working Paper Series No. 23.
[11] Bloom, N., Van Reenen, J. and Williams, H. (2019). "A Toolkit of Policies to Promote
     Innovation." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33:3, 163-184.
[12] Blume-Kohout, M. (2016). "Imported Entrepreneurs: Foreign-Born Scientists and Engineers
     in U.S. STEM Fields Entrepreneurship." U.S. Small Business Administration Report.
[13] Borjas, G. (1986). "The Self-Employment Experience of Immigrants." Journal of Human
     Resources, 21, 487-506.
[14] Borjas, G. and Doran, K. (2012) "The Collapse of the Soviet Union and the Productivity
     of American Mathematicians." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127:3, 1143-1203.
[15] Bound, J., Braga, B., Khanna, G. and Turner, S. (2020). "A Passage to America: University
     Funding and International Students." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 12:1,
     97-126.
[16] Bound, J., Demiric, M., Khanna, G. and Turner, S. (2015). "Finishing Degrees and Finding
     Jobs: U.S. Higher Education and the Flow of Foreign IT Workers." Innovation Policy and
     the Economy, 15:1, 27-72.


                                             21
[17] Bound, J., Khanna, G., and Morales, N. (2017). "Understanding the Economic Impact of
     the H-1B Program on the U.S." NBER Working Paper No. 23153.
[18] Brown, J.D., Earle, J.S., Kim, M.J. and Lee, K.-M. (2019). "Immigrant Entrepreneurs and
     Innovation in the US High Tech Sector." Census Bureau Working Paper.
[19] Buchardi, K., Chaney, T., Hassan, T., Tarquinio, L. and Terry, S. (2019). "Immigration,
     Innovation, and Growth." Working Paper.
[20] Carlino, G. and Kerr, W.R. (2015). "Agglomeration and Innovation." In Duranton, G.,
     Henderson, V. and Strange, W. (eds.) Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics, Vol. 5,
     349-404.
[21] Chung, W. and Kalnins, A. (2006). "Social Capital, Geography, and the Survival: Gujarati
     Immigrant Entrepreneurs in the U.S. Lodging Industry." Management Science, 52:2, 233-
     247.
[22] Clark, K. and Drinkwater, S. (2000). "Pushed Out or Pulled In? Self-Employment Among
     Ethnic Minorities in England and Wales." Labour Economics, 7:5, 603-628.

[23] Clark, K. and Drinkwater, S. (2006). "Changing Patterns of Ethnic Minority Self-
     Employment in Britain: Evidence from Census Microdata." IZA Discussion Papers 2495,
     Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
[24] Clemens, M.A. (2011). "Economics and Emigration: Trillion-Dollar Bills on the Sidewalk?"
     Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25:3, 83-106.
[25] Decker, R., Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R. and Miranda, J. (2014). "The Role of Entrepre-
     neurship in US Job Creation and Economic Dynamism." Journal of Economic Perspectives,
     28:3, 3-24.
[26] Depew, B., Norlander, P. and Sorensen, T. (2017). "Inter-Firm Mobility and Return Migra-
     tion Patterns of Skilled Guest Workers." Journal of Population Economics, 30:2, 681-721.
[27] Dimmock, S.G., Huang, J. and Weisbenner, S. (2019). "Give Me Your Tired, Your Poor,
     Your High-Skilled Labor: H-1B Lottery Outcomes and Entrepreneurial Success." National
     Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 26392.
[28] Doran, K., Gelber, A. and Isen, A. (2015). "The E¤ects of High-Skill Immigration on Firms:
     Evidence from H-1B Visa Lotteries." NBER Working Paper 20668.
[29] Doran, K. and Yoon, C. (2019). "Immigration and Invention: Evidence from the Quota
     Acts." Working Paper.
[30] Docquier, F., Turati, R., Valette, J. and Vasilakis, C. (2019). "Birthplace Diversity and
     Economic Growth: Evidence from the US States in the Post-World War II Period." Journal
     of Economic Geography, forthcoming.
[31] Fairlie R.W. (2012). "Immigrant Entrepreneurs and Small Business Owners, and their Ac-
     cess to Financial Capital." U.S. Small Business Administration Report.
[32] Fairlie, R.W. (2013). "Minority and Immigrant Entrepreneurs: Access to Financial Capital."
     In Constant, A.F. and Zimmermann, K.F. (eds.) International Handbook on the Economics
     of Migration, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham UK.




                                              22
[33] Fairlie, R.W. and Lofstrom, M. (2014). "Immigration and Entrepreneurship." In Chiswick,
     B.R. and Miller, P.W. (eds.) Handbook on the Economics of International Migration, Else-
     vier.
[34] Fairlie, R.W. and Meyer, B.D. (2003). "The E¤ect of Immigration on Native Self-
     Employment." Journal of Labor Economics, 21:3, 619-650.
[35] Fairlie, R.W., Zissimopoulos, J. and Krashinsky H.A. (2010). "The International Asian
     Business Success Story: A Comparison of Chinese, Indian, and Other Asian Businesses
     in the United States, Canada, and United Kingdom." In Lerner, J. and Schoar, A. (eds.)
     International Di¤erences in Entrepreneurship, University of Chicago Press and National
     Bureau of Economic Research, 179-208.
[36] Fallick, B., Fleischman, C. and Rebitzer, J. (2006). "Job-Hopping in Silicon Valley: Some
     Evidence Concerning the Microfoundations of a High-Technology Cluster." Review of Eco-
     nomics and Statistics, 88:3, 472-481.
[37] Feldman, M. and Kogler, D. (2010). "Stylized Facts in the Geography of Innovation." In
     Hall, B. and Rosenberg, N. (eds.) Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Vol.1, Elsevier,
     Oxford, 381-410.
[38] Ghimire, K. (2018). "Supply of Immigrant Entrepreneurs and Native Entrepreneurship."
     Working Paper.
[39] Glaeser, E., Kerr, S.P. and Kerr, W.R. (2015). "Entrepreneurship and Urban Growth: An
     Empirical Assessment with Historical Mines." Review of Economics and Statistics, 97:2,
     498-520.
[40] Glennon, B. (2019). "How Do Restrictions on High-Skilled Immigration A¤ect O¤shoring?
     Evidence from the H-1B Program." Working Paper.
[41] Goolsbee, A. (1998). "Does Government R&D Policy Mainly Bene...t Scientists and Engi-
     neers?" American Economic Review, 88:2, 298-302.
[42] Gompers, P.A., Mukharlyamov, V., and Xuan, Y. (2016). "The Cost of Friendship." Journal
     of Financial Economics, 119:3, 626-644.
[43] Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R. and Miranda, J. (2013). "Who Creates Jobs? Small vs. Large
     vs. Young." Review of Economics and Statistics, 95:2, 347-361.
[44] Hart, D.M. and Acs, Z.J. (2011). "High-Tech Immigrant Entrepreneurship in the United
     States." Economic Development Quarterly, 25:2, 116-129.
[45] Hegde, D. and Tumlinson, J. (2014). "Does Social Proximity Enhance Business Relation-
     ships? Theory and Evidence from Ethnicity's Role in US Venture Capital." Management
     Science, 60:9, 2355-2380.
[46] Hira, R. (2010). "The H-1B and L-1 Visa Programs: Out of Control." EPI Brie...ng Paper,
     Washington, D.C.: Economic Policy Institute.
[47] Hunt, J. (2011). "Which Immigrants are Most Innovative and Entrepreneurial? Distinctions
     by Entry Visa." Journal of Labor Economics, 29:3, 417-457.
[48] Hunt, J. (2015). "Are Immigrants the Most Skilled US Computer and Engineering Work-
     ers?" Journal of Labor Economics, 33:S1, S39-S77.



                                              23
[49] Hunt, J. (2017). "How Restricted is the Job Mobility of Skilled Temporary Work Visa
     Holders?" NBER Working Paper 23529.
[50] Hunt, J. and Gauthier-Loiselle, M. (2010). "How Much Does Immigration Boost Innova-
     tion?" American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2:2, 31-56.
[51] Kahn, S., Mattina, G. and MacGarvie, M. (2017). "Mis...ts, Stars, and Immigrant Entre-
     preneurship." Small Business Economics, 49:3, 533-557.
[52] Kahn, S. and MacGarvie, M. (2018). "The Impact of Permanent Residency Delays for
     STEM PhDs: Who leaves and Why." NBER Working Paper 25175.
[53] Kato, T. and Sparber, C. (2013). "Quotas and Quality: The E¤ect of H-1B Visa Restrictions
     on the Pool of Prospective Undergraduate Students from Abroad." Review of Economics
     and Statistics, 95:1, 109-26.
[54] Kerr, S.P. and Kerr, W.R. (2013). "Immigration and Employer Transitions for STEM Work-
     ers." American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 103:3, 193-197.
[55] Kerr, S.P. and Kerr, W.R. (2017). "Immigrant Entrepreneurship." In Haltiwanger, J., Hurst,
     E., Miranda, J. and Schoar, A. (eds.), Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current
     Knowledge and Challenges, NBER Book Series Studies in Income and Wealth, Cambridge
     MA, 187-249.
[56] Kerr, S.P. and Kerr, W.R. (2020). "Immigrant Entrepreneurship in America: Evidence from
     the Survey of Business Owners 2007 & 2012." Research Policy, 49:3, 103918.
[57] Kerr, S.P., Kerr, W.R. and Lincoln, W.F. (2015a). "Firms and the Economics of Skilled
     Immigration." In Kerr, W.R., Lerner, J. and Stern, S. (eds.) Innovation Policy and the
     Economy Vol. 15, University of Chicago Press, 115-152.
[58] Kerr, S.P., Kerr, W.R. and Lincoln, W.F. (2015b). "Skilled Immigration and the Employ-
     ment Structures of U.S. Firms." Journal of Labor Economics, 33:S1, S109-S145.
[59] Kerr, S.P., Kerr, W.R., Özden, Ç. and Parsons, C. (2016). "Global Talent Flows." Journal
     of Economic Perspectives, 30:4, 83-106.
[60] Kerr, S.P., Kerr, W.R., Özden, Ç. and Parsons, C. (2017). "High-Skilled Migration and
     Agglomeration." Annual Review of Economics, 9, 201-234.
[61] Kerr, W.R. (2008). "Ethnic Scienti...c Communities and International Technology Di¤u-
     sion." Review of Economics and Statistics, 90:3, 518-37.
[62] Kerr, W.R. (2010). "Breakthrough Inventions and Migrating Clusters of Innovation." Jour-
     nal of Urban Economics, 67:1, 46-60.
[63] Kerr, W.R. (2017). "U.S. High-Skilled Immigration, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship: Em-
     pirical Approaches and Evidence." In Fink, C. and Miguelez, E. (eds.) The International
     Mobility of Talent and Innovation: New Evidence and Policy Implications, Cambridge Uni-
     versity Press, 193-221.
[64] Kerr, W.R. (2019a). The Gift of Global Talent: How Migration Shapes Business, Economy
     & Society. Stanford University Press, Palo Alto, CA.
[65] Kerr, W.R. (2019b). "The Gift of Global Talent: Innovation Policy and the Economy." In
     Lerner, J. and Stern, S. (eds.) Innovation Policy and the Economy, Volume 20, University
     of Chicago Press, forthcoming.

                                              24
[66] Kerr, W.R. and Lincoln, W.F. (2010). "The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa Reforms
     and U.S. Ethnic Invention." Journal of Labor Economics, 28:3, 473-508.
[67] Kerr, W.R. and Mandor¤, M. (2015). "Social Networks, Ethnicity, and Entrepreneurship."
     NBER Working Paper 21597.
[68] Kerr, W.R., Nanda, R. and Rhodes-Kropf, M. (2014). "Entrepreneurship as Experimenta-
     tion." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28:3, 25-48.
[69] Kerr, W.R., and Robert-Nicoud, F. (2019). "Tech Clusters." Journal of Economic Perspec-
     tives, in-progress.
[70] Lewis, E. and Peri, G. (2015). "Immigration and the Economy of Cities and Regions."
     In Duranton, G., Henderson, V. and Strange, W. (eds.) Handbook of Urban and Regional
     Economics, Vol. 5.
[71] Lofstrom, M. (2002). "Labor Market Assimilation and the Self-Employment Decision of
     Immigrant Entrepreneurs." Journal of Population Economics, 15:1, 83-114.
[72] Mayda, A.M., Ortega, F., Peri, G., Shih, K. and Sparber, C. (2018). "The E¤ect of the
     H-1B Quota on the Employment and Selection of Foreign-Born Labor." European Economic
     Review, 108, 105-128.
[73] Matlo¤, N. (2003). "On the Need for Reform of the H-1B Non-Immigrant Work Visa in
     Computer-Related Occupations". University of Michigan Journal of Law Reform, 36:4, 815-
     914.
[74] Moretti, E. (2019). "The E¤ect of High-Tech Clusters on the Productivity of Top Inventors."
     Center for Economic Policy Research Working Paper 13992.
[75] Moser, P. and San, S. (2020). "Immigration, Science, and Invention. Evidence from the
     Quota Acts." Working Paper.
[76] Moser, P., Voena, A., and Waldinger, F. (2014) "German Jewish Emigres and U.S. Inven-
     tion." American Economic Review, 104:10, 3222-3255.
[77] Nathan, M. (2015). "Same Di¤erence? Minority Ethnic Inventors, Diversity and Innovation
     in the UK." Journal of Economic Geography, 15:1, 129-168.
[78] Ottaviano, G. and Peri, G. (2006). "The Economic Value of Cultural Diversity: Evidence
     from US Cities." Journal of Economic Geography, 6:1, 9-44.
[79] Patel, K. and Vella, F. (2013). "Immigrant Networks and their Implications for Occupational
     Choice and Wages." Review of Economics and Statistics, 95:4, 1249-1277.
[80] Pathak, P.A., Rees-Jones, A. and Sönmez, T. (2020). "Immigration Lottery Design: En-
     gineered and Coincidental Consequences of H-1B Reforms." NBER Working Paper No.
     26767.
[81] Peri, G. (2007). "Higher Education, Innovation and Growth." In Brunello, G., Garibaldi, P.
     and Wasmer, E. (eds.) Education and Training in Europe, Oxford University Press, 56-70.
[82] Peri, G. (2012). Rationalizing U.S. Immigration Policy: Reforms for Simplicity, Fairness,
     and Economic Growth. Brookings Report.
[83] Peri, G., Shih, K. and Sparber, C. (2015). "STEM Workers, H-1B Visas and Productivity
     in US Cities." Journal of Labor Economics, 33:S1, S225-S255.

                                              25
[84] Porter, M.E., Rivkin, J.W., Desai, M.A., Gehl, K.M., Kerr, W.R. and Raman, M. (2019). "A
     Recovery Squandered: The State of U.S. Competitiveness 2019." Harvard Business School.
     https://www.hbs.edu/competitiveness/Documents/a-recovery-squandered.pdf.
[85] Samila, S. and Sorenson, O. (2011). "Venture Capital, Entrepreneurship and Economic
     Growth." Review of Economics and Statistics, 93, 338-349.
[86] Roach, M., Sauermann, H. and Skrentny, J. (2018). "Are Foreign PhDs more Entrepre-
     neurial? Entrepreneurial Characteristics, Preferences and Outcomes of Native and Foreign
     Science & Engineering PhD Students." In Ganguli, I., Kahn, S. and MacGarvie, M. (eds.)
     The Roles of Immigrants and Foreign Students in U.S. Science, Innovation, and Entrepre-
     neurship, University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.
[87] Roach, M. and Skrentny, J. (2019). "Why Foreign STEM PhDs are Unlikely to Work for
     U.S. Technology Startups." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116:34, 16805-
     16810.
[88] Ruiz, N. and Krogstad, J.M. (2018). "East Coast and Texas Metros Had the Most
     H-1B Visas for Skilled Workers from 2010 to 2016." https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-
     tank/2018/03/29/h-1b-visa-approvals-by-us-metro-area/
[89] Saxenian, A. (1999). "Silicon Valley'
                                         s New Immigrant Entrepreneurs." San Francisco: Pub-
     lic Policy Institute of California.
[90] Saxenian, A. (2002). "Silicon Valley'
                                         s New Immigrant High-Growth Entrepreneurs." Eco-
     nomic Development Quarterly, 16, 20-31.
[91] Schuetze, H.J. and Antecol, H. (2007). "Immigration, Entrepreneurship and the Venture
     Start-Up Process. The Life Cycle of Entrepreneurial Ventures." In Parker, S. (ed.) Interna-
     tional Handbook Series on Entrepreneurship, Vol. 3, Springer, New York.
[92] Sparber, C. (2018). "Choosing Skilled Foreign-Born Workers: Evaluating Alternative Meth-
     ods for Allocating H-1B Work Permits." Industrial Relations, 57:1, 3-34.
[93] Stangler, D. and Konczal, J. (2013). "Give Me Your Entrepreneurs, Your Innovators: Esti-
     mating Employment Impact of a Startup Visa." Ewing Marion Kau¤man Foundation.
[94] Stephan, P. and Levin, S. (2001). "Exceptional Contributions to US Science by the Foreign-
     Born and Foreign-Educated." Population Research and Policy Review, 20:1, 59-79.
[95] Wadhwa, V., Saxenian, A., Rissing, B. and Gere¢ , G. (2007). "America'
                                                                          s New Immigrant
     Entrepreneurs." Durham, NC: Duke University.
[96] Yeaple, S. (2018). "The Innovation Activities of Multinational Enterprises and the Demand
     for Skilled Worker, Non-Immigrant Visas." In Hanson, G., Kerr, W. and Turner, S. (eds.)
     High-Skilled Migration to the United States and its Economic Consequences, University of
     Chicago Press.
[97] Zucker, L., Darby, M., and Brewer, M. (1998). "Intellectual Human Capital and the Birth
     of U.S. Biotechnology Enterprises." American Economic Review, 88:1, 290-306.




                                              26
Startup Visa Information:

     Australia:https://immi.homea¤airs.gov.au/visas/getting-a-visa/visa-listing/
     business-innovation-and-investment-888/entrepreneur-stream#Eligibility

     Canada:https://www.canada.ca/en/immigration-refugees-citizenship/services/
     immigrate-canada/start-visa/eligibility.html

     Denmark:https://www.nyidanmark.dk/en-GB/Applying/Work/Start-up%20Denmark

     France:https://france-visas.gouv.fr/en_US/web/france-visas/international
     -talents-and-economic-attractiveness

     Ireland:http://www.inis.gov.ie/en/INIS/Guidelines%20for%20Start-up%
     20Entrepreneur%20Programme.pdf/Files/Guidelines%20for%20Start-up%
     20Entrepreneur%20Programme.pdf

     NewZealand:https://www.immigration.govt.nz/documents/forms-and-guides/inz1221.pdf

     Singapore:https://www.mom.gov.sg/passes-and-permits/entrepass/eligibility

     Spain:http://www.exteriores.gob.es/Consulados/CIUDADDELCABO/en/
     InformacionParaExtranjeros/Pages/Law-on-Visas-for-Entrepreneurs.aspx;

     Sweden:https://www.migrationsverket.se/English/Private-individuals/
     Working-in-Sweden/Self-employment.html

     Thailand:https://www.boi.go.th/index.php?page=detail_smart_visa

     UK:https://www.gov.uk/guidance/immigration-rules/immigration-rules-
     appendix-w-immigration-rules-for-workers#part-w5-speci...c-requirements­start-up.




                                             27
Figure 1: Ethnic Share of Patents Filed by Inventors Living in United States.
Series uses ethnic naming conventions applied to inventors based in the United
States. Source: Data from U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Figure 2: Evolution of H-1B Cap by Fiscal Year. Source: Data from USCIS.




Figure 3: Months until H-1B Cap is Reached from Filing Start Date by Fiscal Year.
Source: Data from USCIS.
                          Table 1: Immigrant entrepreneurship in 2014 Annual Survey of Entrepreneurs

                                                                                                              Native only      Immigrant only Mixed immigrant
                                                                                           All firms           owners             owners      and native owners
                                                                                               (1)                 (2)                 (3)                  (4)
Ownership composition of ventures in ASE (N = 557,000)                                                           74.2%               21.3%                 4.5%
    Share with granted and/or pending patents                                                 1.5%                1.3%               1.3%                  5.1%
    Share reporting positive R&D expenditures                                                 5.5%                5.1%               5.9%                 10.3%
    Share reporting owner(s) engaged in R&D                                                   4.5%                4.4%                4.8%                 3.7%
    Share reporting workers engaged in R&D                                                    2.4%                2.3%                2.6%                 4.1%
    Share seeking expansion financing                                                        27.4%               26.7%               28.4%                33.0%
    Share seeking expansion financing from venture capital firms                              1.5%                1.2%                1.6%                 5.1%

Ownership composition of ventures in ASE raising startup venture and
grant investment equal to or greater than $250,000 (N = 6,700)                              100.0%               73.0%               13.2%                13.8%
    Mean investment levels among these ventures                                           $1,057,000          $1,020,000          $1,265,000           $1,050,000
Notes: Sample includes firms founded in 2009-2014 where at least one of the current owners was a firm founder. Sample excludes firms where start-up funding source was
unknown or not reported or owner immigrant status was unknown or not reported. Venture counts are weighted and rounded per Census Bureau disclosure requirements.
Reported percentages are calculated from rounded counts.
                    Immigration Policy Levers for US Innovation and Startups
                                     DIGITAL APPENDIX
Note: This online appendix was compiled using official government and accelerator program
websites accessed during January, 2020. Details represent verbiage sourced from official websites
listed in public collections.1 This appendix does not represent a complete directory of all channels
for immigration by entrepreneurs into the countries shown nor a complete listing of all countries
with immigration schemes for entrepreneurs.

AUSTRALIA2
   Benefits:
       o Ability to carry out entrepreneurial activity in Australia
       o Ability to stay in Australia for 4 years and 3 months
       o Ability to bring eligible members of entrepreneur's family to Australia
       o Ability to apply for a permanent Business Innovation and Investment (Permanent) visa
           (subclass 888) Entrepreneur stream if certain requirements are met
   Requirements:
       o Receive an invitation to apply
       o Be nominated
       o Be under 55
       o Have a complying entrepreneur activity
       o Receive funding from an approved entity
       o Have competent English
       o Meet Australia's health requirement
       o Meet Australia's character requirement
       o Sign the Australian values statement
       o Not have had a visa cancelled or a previous application refused

CANADA3
   Benefits:
        o Permanent residence
   Requirements:
        o Have a qualifying business
        o Obtain a letter of support from a designated organization
        o Meet the language requirements
        o Bring enough money to settle

CHILE4
   Benefits:
       o A one-year working visa, free coworking space, equity-free funding, and access to
           Startup Chile resources
   Requirements:
       o Be a founder of a company with a functional product and early validation (for Seed
           Acceleration program), or
       o Be a female founder of an early stage startup (for The S Factory program), or
       o Be a founder of a project with an economic, social and environmental impact (for Huella
           Acceleration program)

1
  https://uglobally.com/startup-visa-worldwide/; https://www.g20yea.com/index.php/reports/visadir;
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Startup_Visa
2
  https://immi.homeaffairs.gov.au/visas/getting-a-visa/visa-listing/business-innovation-and-investment-
188/entrepreneur-stream#Eligibility
3
  https://www.canada.ca/en/immigration-refugees-citizenship/services/immigrate-canada/start-visa/eligibility.html
4
  https://www.startupchile.org/programs/


                                                      1 of 8
                    Immigration Policy Levers for US Innovation and Startups
                                     DIGITAL APPENDIX

CYPRUS5
   Benefits:
        o Right to economic activity and residence in the Republic for one year, and with the
           possibility of renewal for at least another year
        o Right to self-employment or right to paid employment in entrepreneur's registered
           company within the Republic
        o Prospective residence in the Republic without any maximum time restrictions, if the
           enterprise succeeds
        o Enjoyment of family reunification, if the enterprise succeeds
        o Prospective recruitment of a specific number of personnel from non-EU countries
           without prior approval of the Department of Labor, in case of success of the enterprise.
           The success or failure of the enterprise will be assessed at the end of the second year
   Requirements:
        o Be the sole founder of the business and own the majority of the enterprise's shares
        o Have access to 50,000, which may include venture capital funding, crowdfunding, or
           other sources
        o Hold an undergraduate degree or an equivalent professional qualification
        o Have very good knowledge of the Greek and/or English language

DENMARK6
   Benefits:
       o Danish residence permit for a period of up to two years with the possibility of extension
           for three years at a time
   Requirements:
       o Have a business plan that is approved by the Startup Denmark expert panel
       o Play an active part in running the business
       o Provide documentation of sufficient funds to cover one's first year in Denmark

ESTONIA7
    Benefits:
         o Temporary residence permit for up to five years, renewable with option to apply for
            permanent residency
    Requirements:
         o Possess a company conducting business activity in Estonia with a minimum investment
            of 65,000 (in the case of a self-employed person, 16,000 euros)
         o Have startup evaluated by the expert committee

FINLAND8
    Benefits:
         o Two year permit, renewable
    Requirements:
         o Have a startup team of no less than 2 founders with versatile expertise
         o Have an innovative business plan
         o Show commitment to the business idea and eventually building the company
         o Show significant holding in the company (has no less than 60% of the company)

5
  http://www.reform.gov.cy/en/growth-reform/entrepreneurship-and-investments/startup-visa
6
  https://startupdenmark.info/how-apply
7
  https://www2.politsei.ee/en/organisatsioon/organization/
8
  https://www.businessfinland.fi/en/do-business-with-finland/startup-in-finland/startup-permit/


                                                       2 of 8
                  Immigration Policy Levers for US Innovation and Startups
                                   DIGITAL APPENDIX
            o   Have access to sufficient resources and funding for the company's early stages

FRANCE9
   Benefits:
        o Residence permit with maximum validity of four years, renewable
   Requirements:
        o Prove possession of a real and serious business creation project in France
        o Invest at least 30,000 in the project
        o Hold a degree at least equivalent to a master's degree or be able to prove at least five
           years of professional experience at a comparable level

GERMANY10
   Benefits:
      o Temporary right of residence for a maximum of three years, renewable with option to
           apply for permanent residency
   Requirements:
      o Demonstrate that there exists an economic interest or regional need in the business (idea)
      o Demonstrate that the activity is expected to benefit the Berlin economy
      o Demonstrate that implementation is financially secured by equity capital or credit
      o Submit a business plan containing capital requirements, liquidity, and a profit/loss
      o Submit a certificate of health insurance cover
      o Submit a curriculum vitae of the entrepreneur

IRELAND11
    Benefits:
        o Residence for two years, renewable for a further three years. After 5 years residence,
            participants will be eligible for long term residence
    Requirements:
        o Have a proposal for a startup in the innovation economy (introduces a new or innovative
            product or service to international markets, is capable of creating 10 jobs in Ireland and
            realising 1 million in sales within three to four years, is led by an experienced
            management team, is headquartered and controlled in Ireland, is less than six years old)
        o Have funding of 75,000

ISRAEL12
    Benefits:
         o Permission to stay in Israel for up to 24 months. Should the project subsequently mature
            into a company, the foreign entrepreneur will be able to receive an `expert visa' and file a
            request for support from the Israel Innovation Authority's different programs. Such
            further support may allow entrepreneurs to stay in Israel and work on the project as an
            employee for a period of up to 5 additional years
    Requirements:
         o Possess a technological idea that entrepreneur wishes to develop into a product

9
  https://france-visas.gouv.fr/en_US/web/france-visas/international-talents-and-economic-attractiveness
10
   https://www.ihk-
berlin.de/blueprint/servlet/resource/blob/2265310/4a811090332b9d9797188153ebfa34e7/residence-and-
employment-of-foreign-nationals-and-companies-in--data.pdf
11
   http://www.inis.gov.ie/en/INIS/Guidelines%20for%20Start-
up%20Entrepreneur%20Programme.pdf/Files/Guidelines%20for%20Start-up%20Entrepreneur%20Programme.pdf
12
   https://innovationisrael.org.il/en/program/innovation-visas-program-foreign-entrepreneurs-pilot


                                                 3 of 8
                  Immigration Policy Levers for US Innovation and Startups
                                   DIGITAL APPENDIX
            o   Submit a statement regarding funding sources covering the entire period of
                entrepreneur's planned stay in Israel
            o   Be accepted into a "Landing Pad" program

ITALY13
    Benefits:
        o A startup self-employment visa, with a duration of one year which is subject to the annual
            migration quotas. Visa is renewable for a maximum of two years. It is then renewable at
            expiration and can be extended for a further two years. After five years, the non-EU
            citizen can apply for a residence permit for long-term residents, which has no expiry date
    Requirements:
        o Have an innovative startup that has been operational for three years at least
        o Assume the role of Chairman, CEO, member of the Board of Directors, or auditor
        o Prove possession of at least 100,000
        o Have academic and professional curriculum that is relevant to the core business of the
            innovative startup

JAPAN14
    Benefits:
        o Status of residence of "Designated Activities" of up to one year (needs to be renewed
            after six months) in Fukuoka City
    Requirements:
        o Submission of a new business implementation plan to Fukuoka City in the following
            fields: Knowledge creation industries (e.g., semiconductor related, software development,
            content production, robot related), Health, medical and welfare related industries (e.g.,
            drug development ventures, medical technology development, regenerative medicine,
            welfare equipment development), Environmental and energy related industries (e.g.,
            clean energy development, next-generation storage technologies, global information
            systems), Logistics related industries (e.g., global SCM services, 3PL services,
            international home delivery, drone logistics development), or Trade related industries
            (e.g., businesses that contribute to the development of overseas sales routes for goods
            produced in Fukuoka, businesses that utilize the functions of Hakata Port and Fukuoka
            Airport)
        o Submit a resume
        o Demonstrate an ability to cover one's expenses for staying in Japan for one year
        o Willingness to open an office
        o Hire at least two full-time staffs, or
        o Have capital or a total amount of investments of at least 5 million yen

LITHUANIA15
    Benefits:
        o Permission to live in the country for one year, with the possibility to extend for an
            additional year, after which entrepreneur must meet general immigration requirements
    Requirements:
        o Propose a startup that operates in one of the following fields: Biotechnologies,
            Nanotechnologies, Information Technologies, Mechatronics, Electronics, Laser
            Technologies

13
   http://italiastartupvisa.mise.gov.it/media/documents/Guidelines%20ISV%20ENG%2020_03_2018%20def.pdf
14
   https://www.city.fukuoka.lg.jp/keizai/r-support/business/startupviza_2_2.html
15
   https://startupvisalithuania.com/faq


                                                 4 of 8
                    Immigration Policy Levers for US Innovation and Startups
                                     DIGITAL APPENDIX
             o   Be legally at least a part owner of the newly founded firm
             o   Have enough financial resources to achieve your set business goals for 1 year

MALAYSIA16
   Benefits:
       o A Professional Visit Pass valid for 1 year (for new entrepreneurs)
       o A Residence Pass valid up to 5 years (for established entrepreneurs) with permission to
           bring immediate family members such as a husband / wife, child, adopted child or
           stepchild under the age of 18, and/or a disabled child (no age limit) verified by experts
   Requirements:
       o Present a pitch deck presenting the idea, market opportunity, and plans to secure funding
       o Possess a minimum amount of RM50,000
       o Demonstrate no criminal record in country of origin

NETHERLANDS17
   Benefits:
       o Permission to stay and work as an entrepreneur for a maximum of one year. At the end of
           Year 1, entrepreneur can apply for a permit to work on a self-employed basis
   Requirements:
       o Work together with a reliable expert facilitator
       o Present a product or service that is innovative
       o Show a plan to advance the idea to a business
       o Be entered in the Commercial Register of the Chamber of Commerce
       o Possess sufficient money (resources) to reside and live in the Netherlands

NEW ZEALAND18
   Benefits:
       o Start-up stage: If the application is approved, entrepreneur will initially be given a 12-
           month work visa, offering permission to buy or establish one's business
       o Balance stage: Once entrepreneur has proven that they have taken steps to establish their
           business, they are granted the remaining 24 months of their visa
       o After either six months or two years, entrepreneur can then apply for residence under the
           Entrepreneur Residence Category
   Requirements:
       o Invest a minimum of NZ$100,000 (excluding working capital)
       o Achieve 120 points or more, with points awarded for factors about the likely success of
           the business and its value to New Zealand
       o Offer a business plan
       o Possess a clean recent history of bankruptcy, business failure and fraud
       o Meet health, character and English language requirements

NORWAY19
   Benefits:
       o A permit for one year at a time
       o After three years, entrepreneur can apply for a permanent residence permit
       o Entrepreneur's family members can apply for family immigration

16
   https://www.mtep.my/
17
   https://business.gov.nl/coming-to-the-netherlands/permits-and-visa/startup-visa/
18
   https://www.newzealandnow.govt.nz/investing-in-nz/visas/entrepreneur-visa
19
   https://www.udi.no/en/want-to-apply/work-immigration/skilled-workers/#link-831


                                                     5 of 8
                      Immigration Policy Levers for US Innovation and Startups
                                       DIGITAL APPENDIX
           Requirements:
              o Completion of a vocational training programme of at least three years at upper secondary
                  school level, for example as a carpenter or health worker; there must be a corresponding
                  vocational training programme in Norway, or
              o Completion of education or degree from a university/university college, for example a
                  bachelor's degree as an engineer or nurse, or
              o Special qualifications that entrepreneur has obtained through long work experience, if
                  relevant in combination with courses etc. (under exceptional circumstances)
              o Possess plans to engage in long-term business activities in Norway as a sole
                  proprietorship
              o Plans to engage in business that requires the entrepreneurs' qualifications as a skilled
                  worker
              o Likelihood that the business will generate a profit of at least NOK 246 246 per year pre-
                  tax per an assessment conducted by the county authority
              o Possession of a permit from public authorities, if applicable

PORTUGAL20
   Benefits:
       o A residence visas valid for 4 (four) months that can be extended, within national territory
           for a period of 90 (ninety) days and grants the right to apply for a residence permit
   Requirements:
       o Intention to develop a technology startup in Portugal or to expand a startup to Portugal
       o Startup shows potential to the creation of jobs beyond the founding team
       o Startup shows potential to generate a turnover of 325,000/ year and/or assets value over
           325,000/ year, within 5 years after the start of the contract with a chosen incubator
       o Have the capacity to establish a company, when applicable, during the undergoing of the
           program
       o Do not have regular residence in the Schengen area in a recent past
       o Do not have a criminal record
       o Are not under 18 years old
       o Have enough funds in one's bank account in a total amount of 5146.08 for 12 months
           (per person)

SINGAPORE21
    Benefits:
       o An "EntrePass" valid for 1 year with subsequent renewals lasting 2 years
       o Renewal to be determined based on proof of business at least 30% shareholding of the
            company, as well as minimum business spending and employment of full-time employees
            based on number of years elapsed
    Requirements:
       o Have a company that is less than 6 months old
       o Have raised at least $100,000 from a government investment vehicle, venture capitalist or
            business angel that is recognised by a Singapore Government agency
       o Be an incubatee at an incubator in Singapore that is recognised by the Government
       o Possess significant business experience or network and promising entrepreneurial track
            record of starting highly-scalable businesses and want to establish, develop and manage a
            new or existing business in Singapore


20
     https://startupportugal.com/startup-visa
21
     https://www.mom.gov.sg/passes-and-permits/entrepass/eligibility


                                                       6 of 8
                  Immigration Policy Levers for US Innovation and Startups
                                   DIGITAL APPENDIX
SPAIN22
    Benefits:
        o A residence visa valid for 1 year
    Requirements:
        o Be older than 18 years
        o Possess no criminal record in Spain or countries lived in during the last 5 years for
            offenses stipulated under Spanish Law
        o Have a public insurance or private health insurance with a Health Insurance Institution
            authorised to operate in Spain
        o Have sufficient financial resources for oneself and for the members of one's family
            during the period of residency in Spain (2.130 monthly for oneself and 532 for every
            family member that is in one's care)

SWEDEN23
   Benefits:
        o A residence permit for two years with ability to obtain a permanent residence permit if
           entrepreneur can earn a living from their company, comply with good accounting
           practice, and have the necessary permits for the business. Entrepreneur must also have
           stayed in Sweden for more than six months each year
   Requirements:
        o Show considerable experience in the industry and previous experience of running of
           one's own business
        o Show relevant knowledge in Swedish and/or English
        o Have executive responsibility and own at least 50% of the company
        o Have the company's services or goods be produced and/or sold in Sweden
        o Possess enough money of one's own to provide for oneself and any family members for
           the first two years (the equivalent of SEK 200,000 for oneself, SEK 100,000 for one's
           accompanying wife/husband and SEK 50,000 for each accompanying child)
        o Present plausible supporting documentation for one's budget
        o Show that one has created customer contacts and/or a network in Sweden
        o Show that after the trial period of two years, one's company's finances are in balance and
           that one can support oneself and any family members

TAIWAN24
    Benefits:
         o 1 year renewable residence with unlimited entry
    Requirements:
         o Receive venture capital or international fundraising of more than NT$2 million, or
         o Receive approval to reside at a recognized innovation park or incubator in Taiwan, or
         o Obtain patent rights or professional skills certificate, or
         o Be awarded in a leading startup or design competition, or has been involved in a
            foreigner entrepreneurship project in Taiwan, or
         o Be located in a startup accelerator recognized by the Taiwan government, or
         o Be nominated or awarded in a film festival, or
         o Receive innovation subsidy of at least NT$3 million from the central government or at
            least NT$1 million from the local government, or

22
   http://www.exteriores.gob.es/Consulados/CIUDADDELCABO/en/InformacionParaExtranjeros/Pages/Law-on-
Visas-for-Entrepreneurs.aspx
23
   https://www.migrationsverket.se/English/Private-individuals/Working-in-Sweden/Self-employment.html
24
   https://www.roc-taiwan.org/in_en/post/3065.html


                                                7 of 8
                       Immigration Policy Levers for US Innovation and Startups
                                        DIGITAL APPENDIX
                o   Possess innovation capability specified or recommended by the Taiwan government, or
                o   Has an established enterprise with innovation capability in Taiwan and acts as its legal
                    representative, manager or director with an investment of at least NT$1 million

THAILAND25
   Benefits:
       o 2-year renewable visa with permission for spouse and children to stay (and for spouse to
           work)
   Requirements:
       o Establish a startup company in Thailand, certified as being the ones in the targeted
           industries by relevant government agencies such as the National Innovation Agency
           (Public Organization) and Digital Economy Promotion Agency
       o Hold no less than 25% of the company's registered capital or a position of a director
       o Have a deposit of at least 600,000 Baht or equivalent in a bank account in Thailand or in
           the country of one's nationality or residence, which has been held for at least 3 months
       o Have a minimum deposit of 180,000 Baht per person in an account at least 3 months old
       o Have health insurance covering the entire period of stay in Thailand for the applicant as
           well as spouse and children

UNITED KINGDOM26
    Benefits:
        o Ability to remain in the UK for 3 years with ability to extend for another 3 years with no
            limits on the number of times visa may be extend
        o Ability to apply for settlement (known as `indefinite leave to remain') once entrepreneur
            has been in the UK for 3 years
    Requirements:
        o Desire to set up or run a business in the UK
        o Reside outside the European Economic Area (EEA) and Switzerland
        o Able to show that one's business idea is a new idea that is viable, with growth potential
        o Have at least £50,000 in investment funds
        o Have company be endorsed by an approved body




25
     https://smart-visa.boi.go.th/smart/pages/smart_s.html
26
     https://www.gov.uk/innovator-visa


                                                         8 of 8
