                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    DOES THE US TAX CODE FAVOR AUTOMATION?

                                       Daron Acemoglu
                                        Andrea Manera
                                       Pascual Restrepo

                                      Working Paper 27052
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27052


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2020




Prepared for the Brookings Institution Spring Conference of 2020. We are grateful to Jan Eberly,
Larry Katz, James Poterba, Ivan Werning, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick for excellent comments
and suggestions. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from Brookings Institution,
Google, the National Science Foundation, Schmidt Sciences, the Smith Richardson Foundation
and the Sloan Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Daron Acemoglu, Andrea Manera, and Pascual Restrepo. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does the US Tax Code Favor Automation?
Daron Acemoglu, Andrea Manera, and Pascual Restrepo
NBER Working Paper No. 27052
April 2020
JEL No. J23,J24

                                        ABSTRACT

We argue that the US tax system is biased against labor and in favor of capital and has become
more so in recent years. As a consequence, it has promoted inefficiently high levels of
automation. Moving from the US tax system in the 2010s to optimal taxation of capital and labor
would raise employment by 4.02% and the labor share by 0.78 percentage points, and restore the
optimal level of automation. If moving to optimal taxes is infeasible, more modest reforms can
still increase employment by 1.14­1.96%, but in this case efficiency can be increased by
imposing an additional automation tax to reduce the equilibrium level of automation. This is
because marginal automated tasks do not bring much productivity gains but displace workers,
reducing employment below its socially optimal level. We additionally show that reducing labor
taxes or combining lower capital taxes with automation taxes can increase employment much
more than the uniform reductions in capital taxes enacted between 2000 and 2018.

Daron Acemoglu                                 Pascual Restrepo
Department of Economics                        Department of Economics
MIT                                            Boston University
50 Memorial Drive                              270 Bay State Rd
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347                       Boston, MA 02215
and NBER                                       and Cowles Foundation, Yale
daron@mit.edu                                  pascual@bu.edu

Andrea Manera
MIT
manera@mit.edu




An appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27052
                                          1    Introduction

The last three decades have witnessed a declining share of labor in national income, stagnant
median real wages and lower real wages for low-skill workers in the US economy (Elsby,
Hobijn & Sahin, 2011; Acemoglu & Autor, 2011; Karabarbounis & Neiman, 2014). The labor
share in non-farm private businesses declined from 63% in 1980 to 56% in 2017, while median
real wages grew only by 16% (as compared to GDP per capita which doubled during the same
period) and the real wages of male workers with a high school diploma fell by 6% between
1980 and 2017. In the meantime, production processes have become increasingly automated,
as computerized numerical control machines, industrial robotics, specialized software and
lately artificial intelligence technologies have spread rapidly throughout the economy. For
instance, the US economy had a total of 2.5 industrial robots per thousand workers in
manufacturing in 1993 and this number rose to 20 by 2019 (Acemoglu & Restrepo, 2020a).
From a base of essentially zero in the mid-2000s, the share of vacancies posted for artificial
intelligence-related activities increased to 0.75% by 2018 (Acemoglu et al., 2020).
       A common perspective among economists is that even if automation is contributing to
the decline in the labor share and the stagnation of wages, the adoption of these technologies
is beneficial, and any adverse consequences should be dealt with redistributive policies and
investments in education and training. But could it be that the extent of automation is
excessive, meaning that businesses are adopting automation technologies beyond the socially
optimal level? If this were the case, the policy responses to this trend would need to be
rethought.
       In this paper, we show that the US tax system is biased against labor and as a result
generates excessive automation and suboptimally low levels of employment and labor share.
We first introduce a task-based model of automation, building on Acemoglu & Restrepo
(2018, 2019a,b) and Zeira (1998), to study the interplay between taxes and automation. Our
first theoretical result establishes that optimal capital and labor taxes depend on the inverse
supply elasticities of these factors and labor market frictions. Consistent with Diamond &
Mirrlees (1971), once capital and labor taxes are set optimally, there is no reason to distort
equilibrium automation decisions. Intuitively, optimal taxes undo any distortions and ensure
that market prices reflect the social values of capital and labor. Automation decisions based
on these prices are therefore optimal.1
   1
    We assume that the labor market friction is common across tasks. When labor market frictions affect
tasks differentially, there is an additional reason for excessive automation as shown in our companion paper,
Acemoglu, Manera & Restrepo (2020), and in that case, distorting automation may be beneficial even when
taxes are set optimally.



                                                     1
       Yet this result does not imply that equilibrium automation decisions are optimal at
arbitrary capital and labor taxes. Our second theoretical result shows that if a tax system
is biased against labor and in favor of capital--i.e., taxes on labor are too high and taxes
on capital are too low--then reducing automation at the margin improves welfare. We show
that this reduction can be achieved with an automation tax, which is an additional tax on
the use of capital in tasks where labor has a comparative advantage. An automation tax is
beneficial because reducing automation below its equilibrium level has second-order costs and
first-order benefits. The costs are second-order as the productivity gains from automating
marginal tasks are small (or, equivalently, the automation of marginal tasks corresponds to
"so-so automation" in the terminology of Acemoglu & Restrepo, 2019a,b). But, when the tax
system is biased against labor and thus the level of employment is below the social optimum,
limiting automation and avoiding the resulting displacement of labor has first-order benefits.
       A common intuition is that if taxes are distorted, then the best policy remedy is to
correct these distortions. Hence, if a tax system treats capital too favorably, we should
directly tackle this distortion and increase capital taxes. We demonstrate that this intuition
does not always apply in the presence of other constraints--for example, a lower bound
on labor taxes. Our third theoretical result shows that a tax system distorted in favor of
capital may call for reducing equilibrium automation even if raising capital taxes is possible.
In fact, when moving to the unconstrained optimum is not feasible, constrained optimal
policy may involve lower capital taxes in addition to a reduced level of automation because
this combination avoids the displacement of workers from marginal tasks while ensuring
that capital gets used intensively in tasks that are (and should be) automated. Both of
these margins contribute to raising employment and welfare. This result underscores the
importance of distinguishing between the choice of capital intensity in tasks where capital
has a comparative advantage and automation, which involves the substitution of capital
for labor in additional tasks. An automation tax is beneficial precisely because it does not
reduce capital intensity uniformly but discourages the automation of marginal tasks
       Armed with these theoretical results, we turn to measuring effective taxes on capital and
labor in the US and comparing them to their optimal counterparts. We find that labor
is much more heavily taxed than capital, and this difference has increased in recent years.
Effective labor taxes in the US are in the range of 25.5­33.5%. Effective capital taxes on
software and equipment, on the other hand, are much lower, 10% in the 2010s and 5% after
the 2017 tax reforms, though they used to be about 20% in 2000.2 About half of this decline
   2
    Acemoglu & Restrepo (2019b) document that technological changes in the four decades after World
War II involved less automation and more rapid advances in technologies that increased human productivity
(such as the creation of new tasks for workers) than recently. Though there are other reasons for why the


                                                   2
is due to the greater generosity of depreciation allowances.
   Using plausible ranges for the elasticities of the capital and labor supply and estimates of
labor market distortions, we find that the US tax system is biased against labor. In fact, our
baseline estimates suggest that optimal labor taxes are lower than capital taxes--a 18.22%
labor tax compared to a 26.65% capital tax. Optimal taxes are lower for labor than for
capital because empirically plausible ranges of supply elasticities for capital and labor are
similar, but employment is further distorted by labor market imperfections. Moving from
the current tax system to optimal taxes would reduce the range of automated tasks by 4.1%
and increase employment by 4.02% and the labor share by 0.78 percentage points.3
   Our quantitative results show that, as in our theory, reducing automation is socially
beneficial. Specifically, with no changes in capital and labor taxes, an automation tax of
10.15%--which implies that only tasks where the substitution of labor for capital reduces
unit costs by more than 10.15% are automated--maximizes welfare and raises employment by
1.14% and the labor share by 1.93 percentage points. If capital taxes can be reduced as well,
then a 12.9% automation tax combined with a reduction in capital taxes from 10% to 8.39%
would achieve even higher welfare gains and increase employment by 1.59% and the labor
share by 2.44 percentage points. We further show that tax reforms that involve lower labor
taxes or combine lower capital taxes with an automation tax would have increased welfare
and expanded employment much more than the uniform capital tax reductions enacted
between 2000 and 2018.
   We conclude with two extensions. First, we show that if human capital is endogenous, the
asymmetric treatment of labor becomes more costly as it distorts human capital investments
as well, leading to even lower optimal taxes on labor and more excessive automation under the
current system. Second, we consider endogenous development of automation technologies,
which come at the expense of other types of innovations that are more beneficial for labor.
In this case, there are reasons for not just preventing excessive adoption of automation
technologies but also redirecting technological change away from further automation (and
this is true even with optimal taxes on capital and labor).
   Our paper is related to several classic and recent literatures, though, to the best of our
knowledge, no other paper investigates whether the US tax system favors automation.
   First, there is an emerging literature on redistribution and taxation of automation tech-
nologies (Guerreiro, Rebelo & Teles, 2017; Thuemmel, 2018; Costinot & Werning, 2018).
direction of technology altered, the lower taxation of equipment and software capital may have also played
a role.
   3
     Despite these large changes in employment, the increase in welfare is given by a "Harberger triangle"
and is thus smaller--0.38% in consumption-equivalent terms.



                                                    3
This literature studies whether adverse distributional effects of automation call for taxes on
automation technologies. Our paper is complementary to this literature, as it focuses on
situations in which the tax system is biased against labor and the key policy objective is to
raise employment (not to redistribute income).
       Second, our paper is related to the literature on optimal capital taxation (e.g., Atkinson
& Stiglitz, 1972, Judd, 1985, Chamley 1986, and Straub & Werning, 2020). Our contri-
bution is to show that in both two-period and infinite-horizon settings, provided that the
government must run a balanced budget at each date, optimal taxes are given by the same
inverse-elasticity formulae (with an additional term adjusting for labor market frictions). In
contrast, this literature typically assumes that the government can freely accumulate assets
and concludes that zero capital taxation is optimal in the long run. Straub & Werning
(2020) show that if the supply of capital is not perfectly elastic (which means utility is not
time-additive), then the government accumulates sufficient assets so that both capital and
labor face zero taxes in the long run. We demonstrate in the Appendix that in the pres-
ence of labor market frictions, the same reasoning leads to a subsidy to labor. Thus, in the
empirically relevant case of a finite supply elasticity of capital, even without the balanced
budget assumption, the US tax system with low capital taxes and high labor taxes is far
from optimal.
       Third, our paper relates to the literature on the effects of tax reforms on investment
and labor market outcomes. A branch of this literature estimates the differential responses
of investment across firms facing different taxes (Goolsbee, 1998; Hasset & Hubbard, 2002;
Edgerton, 2010; Yagan, 2015).4 However, these estimates are informative about firms' de-
mand for capital, not about the (long-run) elasticity of the supply of capital, which is the
relevant object for optimal taxes. We discuss below estimates of this elasticity based on
the response of the supply of capital to wealth and capital income taxes (see Kleven &
Schultz, 2014; Zoutman, 2018; Br¨
                                ulhart et al., 2019; Jakobsen et al., 2019; Dur´
                                                                               an-Cabr´
                                                                                      e et
al., 2019). More closely connected to our work is a branch of this literature on the labor
market implications of tax reforms. Su´
                                      arez Serrato & Zidar (2016) exploit the incidence of
tax changes across US counties and estimate that a 1% increase in the keep rate of corporate
taxes raises employment by 3.5% and wages by 0.8%, and that workers bear 35% of the
incidence. Garret, Ohrn & Su´
                            arez Serrato (2020) compare counties at the 75th percentile
of exposure to bonus depreciation allowances to those at the 25th percentile and find a 2%
   4
    Modal results in this literature find investment elasticities with respect to the keep rate (one minus
tax rate) between 0.5 and 1. More recent work by House & Shapiro (2008) documents a larger investment
response and argue that this was due to the temporary nature of the bonus, while Zwick & Mahon (2017)
estimate investment elasticities with respect to the keep rate that are around 1.5 for most firms.



                                                    4
increase in employment, no changes in wages, and a 3.3% increase in investment in response
to the reform. These estimates point to a fairly elastic response of employment and a less
than perfectly elastic response of capital in local labor markets (a perfectly elastic response
of capital would cause workers to bear the full incidence).
      Finally, our modeling of automation builds on Zeira (1998), Autor, Levy & Murnane
(2003), Acemoglu & Autor (2011) and most closely, Acemoglu & Restrepo (2018, 2019a,b).
The task-based framework is useful in our setting because it shows how automation (sub-
stituting capital for labor in tasks previously performed by humans) creates a displacement
effect while automating marginal tasks generates limited productivity gains (because firms
are approximately indifferent between automating these tasks or producing with labor). This
combination of displacement effects and small productivity gains is at the root of our result
that the planner would like to reduce automation at the margin when the tax system is bi-
ased against labor. Our framework also clarifies how policy can affect the level of automation
and why taxing automation is not the same as taxing capital.
      The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces our conceptual frame-
work and derives our theoretical results. Section 3 provides a detailed discussion of the
US tax system and maps the complex US tax code into effective capital and labor income
taxes. Section 4 then explores whether these taxes are biased and how they compare against
optimal taxes. Section 5 discusses two extensions of our framework, while Section 6 con-
cludes. The Appendix contains proofs of the results stated in the text, various theoretical
generalizations, and further details for and robustness checks on our empirical work.


                                2   Conceptual Framework

This section presents our conceptual framework for evaluating the optimality of capital and
labor taxes and the extent of automation. To facilitate the exposition, we focus on a two-
period model and generalize our main results to an infinite-horizon setting in the Appendix.

2.1     Environment
There is a unique final good, produced at time t = 1 by combining a unit measure of tasks,
                                                                     
                                               1           -1        -1
                                    y=             y (x)        dx        .
                                           0




                                                     5
Tasks are allocated between capital and labor, and performed with the following task-level
production function:

(1)                             y (x) =  (x)  (x) +  k (x)  k (x),

where (x) is labor employed in task x, k (x) is capital used in the production of task x, and
 (x) and  k (x) denote, respectively, the productivities of labor and capital in task x. We
order tasks such that  (x)  k (x) is nondecreasing and simplify the exposition by assuming
that it is strictly increasing. We also suppose that when indifferent between producing a
task with capital or labor, firms produce with capital. Therefore, there exists a threshold
task  such that tasks in [0, ] are produced with capital and tasks in (, 1] are produced
with labor. For now, there is no distinction between the adoption and the development of
such technologies. We explore the implications of this distinction in Section 5.2.
      The household side is inhabited by a representative household who lives for two periods,
t = 0 and t = 1. There is no production in period 0, but the representative household
is endowed with y
                ¯ units of output. Out of this, it consumes c0 and saves the remaining
k=y
  ¯ - c0 units, which are allocated to producing capital. Capital is used during period 1,
is subject to depreciation at the rate  , and is rented to firms at the rental rate R, so that
households earn an after tax return of (R -  )  (1 -  k ). The period 1 budget constraint
facing the household is

                           c  (1 + (R -  )  (1 -  k ))  k + w  (1 -  )  ,

where R is the rental rate on capital paid by firms and w is the wage rate. Tax revenues are
used for financing a fixed level of government expenditure, denoted by g .
      The household chooses consumption, and the supply of capital and hours to maximize

                                        u(y
                                          ¯ - k ) + c -  ( ).

Here, u(y
        ¯ - k ) is a concave function representing the utility from consuming y
                                                                              ¯ - k units of
output in period 0; c denotes the utility from consumption in period 1; and  ( ) is a convex
function representing the disutility from working. Quasi-linearity in period 1 is imposed for
simplicity (see the Appendix for more general preferences).
      We allow for various types of frictions in the labor market, modeled as introducing a wedge
between the market wage and the representative household's marginal cost of supplying labor.




                                                 6
We denote this wedge by             0.5
                                                                          1                        1
       Market clearing for capital and labor requires k = 0 k (x)dx and = 0 (x)dx.
       To ensure uniqueness of optimal taxes below, we suppose that u (y
                                                                       ¯ - k )  k and   ( )  are
convex. In addition, we assume that the equilibrium involves a positive net rate of return
on investment. Finally, we denote by k (k ) and  ( ) the Hicksian elasticities of capital and
labor. These are given by the response of capital and labor supply to a permanent percent
change in the relevant keep rates (one minus the tax rates):

                          d ln k       u (y
                                          ¯ - k) - 1                                  d ln      ( )
           k (k ) =                = -  
                                                     0                 ( )=                  =       0.
                      d ln(1 -  )k     u (y¯ - k)  k                              d ln(1 -  )  ( ) 

As the equation for k (k ) makes clear, the concavity of period -1 utility, u(y
                                                                              ¯-k ), ensures that
the marginal rate of substitution between consumption today and tomorrow is increasing in
k and thus the supply of capital is not perfectly elastic (otherwise k (k ) would be infinite).6
       Note that our formulation assumes that  k is a tax on net--after depreciation--returns,
not gross returns, and our formula for k (k ) computes it as the elasticity of capital to a
percent change in one minus the net tax on capital.

2.2      Equilibrium
Given taxes { k ,  } and the labor wedge , a market equilibrium is defined by factor prices
{w, R}, a tuple of current output, consumption, capital and labor, {y, c, k, }, and an alloca-
tion of tasks to factors, such that this allocation minimizes the after-tax cost of producing
each task and the markets for capital, labor and the final good clear. The Appendix shows
that the equilibrium level of output can be represented as:
                                                                                                        
                                                         1                                    1
                                                                              1                    -1 
                                                                                                       -1

                                            k (x)-1 dx                             (x)-1 dx
                                                                 -1                           
(2)          y = f (k, ; ) =                                 k        +                                   ,
                                    0                                                                 

where the threshold task  satisfies

(3)                                      = m (k, )  arg max f (k, ; ).
                                                             [0,1]

   5
     As shown in Acemoglu, Manera & Restrepo (2020), this wedge can be derived from bargaining between
workers and firms or from efficiency wage considerations.
   6
     A complementary reason for finite k (k ) is that the technology for investment is convex (for example, the
production of k units of capital requires (k ) units of period 0 resources, where  is strictly convex). If the
profits from producing capital cannot be directly taxed, our optimal tax formulae apply regardless of whether
k (k ) reflects changes in the marginal rate of substitution between consumption today and tomorrow as a
function of k or a convex investment technology.



                                                             7
Moreover, factor prices are given by the usual marginal conditions fk = R and f = w.
Consequently, the market-clearing condition for capital is

(4)                            u (y
                                  ¯ - k ) = 1 + (fk -  )  (1 -  k ),

while the market-clearing condition for labor is

(5)                                 ( ) = f  (1 - )  (1 -  ),

so that the wedge     and the labor tax  distort the labor market in similar ways.
      Finally, the government budget constraint takes the form

(6)                              g   k  (fk -  )  k +   f  .

      A couple of points about this equilibrium are worth noting. As emphasized in Acemoglu
& Restrepo (2018, 2019b), though the output level in the economy can be represented by
a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) aggregate of capital and labor, the implications
of this setup are very different from models that assume a CES production function with
factor-augmenting technologies. First, there is a crucial distinction between capital intensity
of production given a fixed allocation of tasks to factors and automation, represented by an
increase in --which involves the substitution of capital for tasks previously performed by
labor. This can be seen from the fact that holding the task allocation constant, the elasticity
of substitution between capital and labor is , but when  adjusts, the elasticity is greater.
Second, further automation increases productivity but can easily reduce labor demand and
the equilibrium wage because of the displacement it creates (mathematically, this works by
changing the share parameters of the CES). In contrast, with a standard CES production
function labor demand necessarily increases when capital becomes more productive. Third,
and for the same reason, automation always reduces the labor share. Finally, our framework
also clarifies that marginal increases in automation have second-order effects on aggregate
output (because of (3)).

2.3     Optimal Policy

We now characterize optimal policy by considering the choices of a benevolent social planner
that sets capital and labor taxes  k and  , and directly controls the extent of automation,
represented by . We refer to the maximization problem of this planner as the Ramsey
problem. As usual, this problem can be transformed so that the planner chooses directly


                                                8
an allocation {c, , k, } that maximizes household utility subject to the resource constraint
of the economy and a single Implementability Condition, which combines the government
budget constraint in (6) and input market equilibrium conditions (4) and (5):

(7)      max      u(y
                    ¯ - k) + c -  ( )
         c, ,k,

subject to:       c + g = f (k, ; ) + (1 -  )  k                        (Resource constraint)
                                                                ( ) 
                  g  f (k, ; ) + (1 -  )  k - u (y
                                                 ¯ - k)  k -            (Implementability Condition)
                                                                1-

Because the planner is assumed to choose the level of automation , we do not impose
 = m (k, ) as an additional constraint. We discuss issues of how the planner's choice of
automation can be implemented below. Throughout, we use µ > 0 to denote the multiplier
on the Implementability Condition, which also gives the social value of public funds.

Proposition 1 (Optimal capital and labor taxes and automation) The unique so-
lution to the Ramsey problem in (7) satisfies

                     k,r       µ     1                    ,r       µ  1
(8)                        =                                    =        -    ,
                   1-  k,r   1 + µ  (k )
                                   k                    1-   ,r   1+µ ( ) 1+µ

and r = m (k, ).

      The proof of this proposition, like those of all other results in this paper, is provided in the
Appendix. The optimal tax formulae in equation (8) follow from the first-order conditions
for the maximization problem in (7). Uniqueness follows from the fact that the Ramsey
program is convex (the objective function is quasi-concave and the constraint set is convex).
      This proposition provides simple and intuitive formulae for the optimal taxes on capital
and labor related to the social value of public funds and the inverse of the elasticity of supply
of these factors. The formulae show that taxes should be lower for more elastic factors, and
in addition, the optimal labor tax is further lowered by the presence of labor market frictions.
This latter feature is intuitive: labor market frictions reduce employment beyond the socially
optimal level, and the planner corrects for this by reducing labor taxation.
      An immediate corollary of this proposition provides one set of sufficient conditions for
uniform (symmetric) taxation of capital and labor--k (k )   ( ) and               0.

Corollary 1 If k (k ) =  ( ) and           = 0, uniform taxation of capital and labor is optimal.

      In Section 4 we will see that realistic values of these parameters are not too far from
k (k )     ( ) > 0, but labor market imperfections imply           > 0, so that our framework yields
lower labor taxes than capital taxes in the optimum.

                                                    9
       Although the formulae in equation (8) apply in a two-period model, the Appendix shows
that, under the key assumption that the government must run a balanced budget, these
formulae extend to an infinite-horizon setting.7 The Appendix also derives similar formulae
for general preferences over consumption and leisure, and clarifies the relationship between
our result and Atkinson & Stiglitz's (1972) principles of optimal commodity taxation.
       In line with Diamond & Mirrlees (1971), Proposition 1 also shows that, once optimal taxes
are imposed on capital and labor, the planner has no reason to deviate from equilibrium
automation decisions, r = m (k, ). This is because any distortions in the labor market
are corrected by optimal taxes, and thus, factor prices accurately reflect the social values
of capital and labor. Consequently, profit-maximizing automation decisions are optimal as
well. We will see that this is no longer true when taxes are not optimal or are subject to
additional constraints.

2.4      Excessive Automation with Tax Distortions
Naturally, taxes in practice need not coincide with those characterized in Proposition 1 both
because of additional constraints and for political economy reasons (policy-makers have other
objectives and face political or other, unmodeled economic constraints). When that is the
case, either capital or labor taxes can be (relatively) too low. The interesting case for us,
both for conceptual and empirical reasons, is the one where capital taxes are too low and
labor taxes are too high, and the necessary and sufficient condition for this follows from
equation (8) in Proposition 1 and is presented in the next corollary.

Corollary 2 If the tax system { k ,  } is below the peak of the Laffer curve and satisfies

                                                               k
                                            
                                          1 -
                                               +              1- k
(9)                                                   >                    ,
                                              - 1-                - 1-
                                          1                 1         k
                                          ( )             k (k)        k


then  >        ,r   and  k,r >  k --that is, the labor tax is too high and the capital tax too low.

       Inequality (9) is sufficient for the tax system being biased against labor and in favor of
capital.8 An important implication of such a biased tax structure is that there is too little
   7
      Even if the government is allowed to incur debt or accumulate assets, the result that the optimal tax
system should not simultaneously impose significant taxes on labor and zero (or small) taxes on capital
extends to an infinite-horizon setting provided that the long-run elasticity of capital supply, k (k ), is not
infinite. Straub & Werning (2020) show that, in a representative household economy where preferences are
not time-additive separable and the tax system is not constrained by other consideration, optimal taxes on
both capital and labor should converge to zero. We prove in the Appendix that if in addition there are labor
market distortions, then optimal long-run taxes are lower on labor than capital.
    8
      The government budget constraint implies that both taxes cannot be too high or too low at the same


                                                      10
employment relative to the optimal allocation in Proposition 1, and thus marginal increases
in employment will have first-order positive effects on welfare. We exploit this insight in the
next proposition, where we take the tax system as given and consider a marginal change in
automation. To do this in the simplest way, we relax the government budget constraint, (6),
and value changes in revenue at the social value of public funds given by the multiplier µ.

Proposition 2 (When reducing automation improves welfare) Suppose that the
tax system { k ,  } satisfies inequality (9) (and is thus biased against labor and in favor of
capital). Welfare (inclusive of fiscal costs and benefits) increases following a small reduction
in  below m (k, ). A small reduction in  also increases net output provided that  ( ) >
k (k ) and government revenue provided that   (1 +  ( )) >  k  (1 + k (k )).

    This result shows that, in contrast with Proposition 1, when taxes are not optimal and
are biased against labor (in the sense that inequality (9) holds), it is welfare improving
to restrict automation below its equilibrium level. This result is intuitive in light of the
observation in Corollary 2 that employment is below the socially optimal level. Specifically,
a small reduction in automation will create a first-order welfare gain by shifting demand from
capital to labor. Distorting automation is costly, but starting from the equilibrium level of
automation, m (k, ), this cost is second-order (since f (k, ; m (k, )) = 0), and hence, a
small reduction in automation is welfare improving. This intuition relates Proposition 2 to
the notion of "so-so (automation) technologies" proposed in Acemoglu & Restrepo (2019a,b):
automation is not beneficial to labor when it only increases productivity by a small amount,
while still creating the usual displacement of workers as tasks are reallocated from them to
capital. The equilibrium condition f (k, ; m (k, )) = 0 implies that automation technologies
adopted at marginal tasks are, by definition, so-so. The planner is therefore happy to sacrifice
these so-so technologies in order to help labor.9
    As we will see in Section 4, the US tax system lies within the range that satisfies inequality
(9), so that there are prima facie reasons for suspecting that the level of automation may
be excessively high in the US economy, as in this proposition.
    One common intuition is that when confronted with a tax system with distortions,
{ k ,  }, the best policy is to redress these tax distortions directly. We next show that
this is not always the case. In particular, if for other reasons taxes on labor cannot be
time (provided that we are below the peak of the Laffer curve, meaning that tax revenues cannot be increased
by lowering both taxes). Thus, inequality (9) is sufficient for  >  ,r and  k,r >  k .
   9
     If automation decisions were constrained by available technology (i.e.,  had to be less than some  ¯< 1
                                                                         m               m         ¯
as in Acemoglu & Restrepo, 2018, 2019a), we could have that f (k, ;  (k, )) > 0 if  (k, ) = . In this
case, productivity gains from automating marginal tasks could be positive. If they were sufficiently large,
then automation would no longer be a so-so-technology and Proposition 2 would not apply.


                                                    11
reduced below a certain threshold (which we denote by ¯ ), then the tax system satisfies
inequality (9) and is biased against labor, but this does not necessarily imply that capital
taxes should be increased. Rather, constrained optimal policy calls for a reduction in the
equilibrium level of automation and may even involve a lower tax on capital. Before present-
ing this result, let us note that in this case we are imposing   ¯ , which can be expressed
as an additional constraint on the Ramsey problem (7) of the form

(10)                                     ( )  (1 - ¯ )  (1 - )  f ,

where the lower bound on labor taxes translates into an upper bound on the marginal
disutility from work. In the next proposition, we denote the multiplier on this constraint by
   0 (where the        simply normalizes the multiplier and makes it easier to interpret).

Proposition 3 (Excessive automation with tax distortions) Consider the constrained
Ramsey problem of maximizing (7) subject to the additional constraint   ¯ , and suppose
that in the solution to this problem (10) binds. Then the constrained optimal taxes and
allocations are given by

   · a labor tax of    ,c   =¯ and a tax/subsidy on capital that satisfies

                              k,c       µ     1                          fk
       (11)                         =            -       (1 - ¯ )  (1 - )     ,
                            1-  k,c   1 + µ  (k ) 1 + µ
                                            k                            u -1

   · a level of automation c < m (k, ).

   Before discussing the implications of this proposition, we explain the meaning of con-
straint (10). The fact that this constraint is binding means that the planner would have
chosen a tax rate on labor       ,r   below ¯ , but the constraint forces the planner to set a higher
tax on labor of ¯ , which results in a tax system biased against labor and in favor of capital
(or in other words, inequality (9) holds). This also implies that the level of employment is
below what the planner would have chosen in the unconstrained Ramsey problem.
   Given this biased tax system, the planner wants automation to be less than its equilibrium
level. The intuition is identical to that in Proposition 2: the reduction in automation creates a
second-order productivity cost but a first-order gain via its impact on increased employment.
Importantly, this holds even when capital taxes can be freely adjusted.
   Moreover, the optimal capital tax formula in (11) has an additional negative term on the
right-hand side relative to (8). This negative term can lead not just to lower capital taxes


                                                    12
than in the unconstrained Ramsey problem in Proposition 1, but even to capital subsidies.10
The combination of lower capital taxes and limiting the set of tasks that are automated
ensures that capital gets used intensively in tasks that are (and should be) automated, while
avoiding the displacement of workers from marginal tasks. Both of these margins contribute
to raising employment, which increases welfare when the tax system is biased against labor.
This is related to the discussion of deepening of automation in Acemoglu & Restrepo (2019a):
deepening of automation, which means an increase in the use or productivity of capital
in tasks that are already automated, is always beneficial for labor. What is potentially
damaging to labor is the extensive margin of automation--because this displaces workers
from tasks they were previously performing. Proposition 3 builds on this logic: the planner
would like to reduce the range of tasks that are automated by reallocating marginal tasks
back to labor and may also want to reduce capital taxes or even subsidize capital at the
same time, so that automated tasks can use capital more intensively.
       Proposition 3 focused on the case with a lower bound on labor taxes. An equally plausible
case is one where, because of political influence of capital owners or because of concerns about
capital flight, there is an upper bound on capital taxes.11 Proposition A.2 in the Appendix
establishes that in this case too the planner would like to reduce automation below its market
level, even if taxes on labor can be adjusted. The intuition is similar: the upper bound on
capital taxation leads to a tax system biased in favor of capital and against labor, and this
makes the displacement of labor by capital in marginal tasks socially costly.

2.5      Implementation
To ease exposition, we have so far assumed that the planner can directly control . We
now discuss how the desired level of  can be implemented via taxes. Recall that k (x) is
the capital used in task x, and so far we have assumed that all types of capital are taxed
at the same uniform rate,  k . In practice, taxes vary by type of capital (e.g., equipment,
software, structures) and industry (because of differential depreciation allowances). In the
context of our model, this can be viewed as a task-specific capital tax rate of  k (x). The
next proposition establishes when such task-specific capital tax rates are useful and in the
process further clarifies the nature of optimal policy interventions.

  10
     This might at first appear surprising, especially because the program in Proposition 1 is convex, so
moving in the direction of the unconstrained optimum should be beneficial. However, convexity is in the
space of allocations and does not imply convexity in the space of taxes. Therefore, increasing the tax rate
on capital towards  k,r is not necessarily welfare-improving.
  11
     A similar constraint on capital taxation is used in the optimal taxation literature (Chamley, 1987; Judd
1999; Straub & Werning, 2020).



                                                     13
Proposition 4 (Automation tax) Suppose the planner can set task-specific capital taxes
and cannot directly control automation decisions. Then:

  1. Under the conditions of Proposition 1, the planner sets a uniform capital tax rate, i.e.,
         k (x) =  k .

  2. Under the conditions of Proposition 3, the planner prefers to depart from uniform
        capital taxation. In particular, she can implement the level of automation c < m (k, )
        with the following tax scheme:

                                                
                                                  k   for x  c
                                        ( x) = 
                                        k
                                               
                                                 +
                                                    A for x >  c
                                                k



        where  A > 0 is a task-specific automation tax.

      The reason (unconstrained) optimal policy has no use for task-specific taxes is intuitive:
in the unconstrained Ramsey problem, there is no need to distort equilibrium automation
decisions. However, in the presence of additional constraints, the planner would like to
reduce automation to c < m (k, ), and she can achieve this by imposing an incremental
tax to capital used in tasks above c . By design, these incremental taxes encourage the
use of capital in tasks where capital has a comparative advantage (which helps labor via
complementarities across tasks) and discourages the automation of marginal tasks (which also
benefits labor by preventing its displacement). In what follows, we refer to the incremental
tax on capital  A as an automation tax.


                                   3        The US Tax System

In this section, we first introduce the notion of effective taxes on capital and labor. Effective
taxes summarize the average distortion that the US tax system introduces in the use of
capital and labor. We then provide formulae for effective taxes that take into account the
various elements of the US tax code and their interaction with the type of financing and
ownership structure of the firm making investment decisions.

3.1     Defining Effective Taxes on Capital
In our framework,  k is the effective tax on (the use of) capital. It is defined as the wedge
that the tax system introduces between the internal rate of return for a firm investing in
capital and the after-tax rate of return paid to investors. The US tax system includes several


                                                  14
taxes, not just a single effective tax on the use of capital. We have personal income taxes on
capital income, corporate income taxes, depreciation allowances and many other instruments
that contribute to taxes on different types of capital. Moreover, these taxes vary by form of
organization (C-corporation vs. passthrough) and type of financing (equity vs. debt).12
       We start by providing formulae for effective taxes on the use of capital by type of asset,
j , form of organization and type of financing. To simplify the exposition, we assume the
economy is in steady state--the capital-labor ratio remains constant, the tax system is not
expected to change, the price of capital goods changes at a constant rate  j = qt
                                                                                j j
                                                                                  qt-1 and
the capital stock of type j depreciates at a constant rate  j > 0.
       The internal rate of return of investing one dollar in equipment j at time t - 1 is given by

                                             rf,j = mpkj - ~j ,


where mpkj is the marginal product of investing one dollar in asset j and ~j = 1 -  j  (1 -  )
denotes the total depreciation of the asset (inclusive of investment price changes). Let us
denote the after-tax steady-state rate of return to investors by r. The effective tax rate on
capital of type j ,  k,j , can then be defined as

                                          1       rf,j mpkj - ~j
(12)                                            =     =          .
                                       1 -  k,j    r      r

This formula aligns closely with the effective capital taxes in our conceptual framework in
the previous section. In particular, in equation (4), 1-1 k is equal to the wedge (ratio) between
the return to the firm from using capital (mpkj -   ~j here and given by fk -  in equation (4))
and the return demanded by investors (r here and u (y
                                                    ¯ - k ) - 1 in equation (4)).13
       The computation of effective tax rates requires measuring the marginal product of capital.
We follow Hall and Jorgenson (1967) and back out the marginal product of capital using a
representative firm's first-order condition for investment. We need to distinguish between
C-corporations and passthrough businesses as well as the source of financing, since each
of these combinations implies a different first-order condition for investment as well as a
different set of taxes on the income generated from capital.
  12
     Passthrough organizations include both S-corporations and other passthroughs, such as sole proprietor
businesses and partnerships, and are subject to different tax rules as we explain below.
                                                                                                j
  13
     An alternative is to use a formula for effective taxes based on gross returns: 1-1
                                                                                      k,j = mpk
                                                                                            r +~j . All of our
                                                                                      gross
results can be expressed in terms of gross returns, but this would require adjusting the empirical estimates
of capital supply elasticities, which are in terms of net returns.




                                                     15
   For C-corporations that finance their investment with equity, the first-order condition is

                                               1 - j   c       ~j ,
(13)                               mpkj =                 re + 
                                                 1 - c

where  c is the corporate income tax rate and j  [0, 1] are discounts from depreciation
allowances, which reduce taxable income and are discussed in the next subsection. In the
absence of corporate income taxes, this expression is identical to the standard user cost
formula. In addition, re is the pre-tax return to equity holders. This implies that r =
re  (1 -  e,c ), where  e,c is the tax rate on income resulting from ownership of public equity.
   Combining the formula for effective taxes in (12) with the first-order condition for in-
vestment in equation (13), the effective tax rate for an equity financed C-corporation is

                             1                   1      re + ~j 1 - j   c  ~j
(14)                                      =                              -    .
                      1 - c-corp
                          k,j
                                ,equity
                                              1 -  e,c    re      1 - c    re

The formula shows that the effective tax on capital depends on the taxation of capital income
of equity owners, corporate income tax rates and depreciation allowances. It reiterates
that depreciation allowances can significantly offset corporate taxes. For example, with full
(immediate) expensing, which corresponds to j = 1, we would have c-corp
                                                                 k,j
                                                                       ,equity =  .
                                                                                 e,c

   The main difference for passthrough businesses is that these organizations do not pay
the corporate income tax and are only subject to personal income taxation. Depreciation
allowances in this case lower personal income tax obligations for business-owners. The for-
mula for the effective tax on the use of capital for a passthrough business that is financing
its investment with (private) equity is

                                  1                  re + ~j 1 - j   o,p  ~j
(15)                                             =                      -    ,
                       1 - passthrough
                           k,j
                                      ,equity
                                                       re      1 -  o,p   re

where  o,p denotes the individual tax rate on the income of owners of passthrough businesses.
Note again that with immediate expensing (j = 1), we have passthrough
                                                          k,j
                                                                     ,equity = 0.
   We next turn to debt-financed investments, which allow a further tax discount by sub-
tracting interest payments from taxable income. The presence of these additional tax dis-
counts modifies the first-order condition for investment to

                                          1 - j   c                  ~j ,
(16)                         mpkj =                  rb  (1 -  c ) + 
                                            1 - c

where rb is the return offered to bond-holders and rb  (1 -  c ) incorporates the lower tax


                                                     16
liabilities (which is multiplied by the corporate income tax rate  c faced by C-corporations).
Note that the after-tax return to households that own bonds is r = rb  (1 -  b,c ), where  b,c
is the personal income tax rate for capital income from C-corporation bonds.
      Combining the formula for effective taxes in equation (12) with the first-order condition
for investment in equation (16), the effective tax rate for a debt-financed C-corporation is

                          1                 1      rb  (1 -  c ) + ~j 1 - j   c  ~j
(17)                                 =                                         -    .
                   1 - c-corp
                       k,j
                             ,debt
                                         1 -  b,c         rb            1 - c    rb

The effective tax on capital again depends on the personal income tax rate of bond-holders,
corporate income tax rates, interest rate deductions and depreciation allowances. The addi-
tional tax discounts can easily lead to a net subsidy to the use of capital. In particular, with
full expensing (j = 1), we have c-corp
                                k,j
                                      ,debt  
                                              b,c -  c , which is negative if bond-holders face

lower individual tax rates than corporations.
      Owners of passthrough businesses can also subtract their interest payments on debt from
their taxable income. However, if they issue bonds, payments to bond-holders are subject
to personal income taxation. The formula for the effective tax on the use of capital for
a passthrough business that is financing its investment with debt is similar to that of a
C-corporation and given by

                         1                      1      rb  (1 -  o,p ) + ~j 1 - j   o,p  ~j
(18)                                     =                                             -    ,
                1 - passthrough
                    k,j
                               ,debt
                                             1 -  b,p          rb             1 -  o,p   rb

where  b,p denotes the individual income tax rate applying to holders of passthroughs' bonds.
As before, with full expensing (j = 1), we would have passthrough
                                                      k,j
                                                                 ,debt  
                                                                         b,p -  o,p , which is

negative if bond-holders face lower income taxes than owners of passthrough businesses.

3.2     Computing Effective Taxes on Capital
We compute effective taxes for equipment, software and structures separately. For each type
of capital good, we calculate effective taxes by form of organization and type of financing,
and aggregate these taxes into a single effective tax rate for the relevant type of capital
using investment shares as weights. The Appendix details the sources and numbers used in
our calculations. Here we outline the computations of the key objects in our formulae for
effective taxes on capital: depreciation allowances, j ; corporate income taxes and taxes on
owners of equity and passthroughs; and interest rates, economic depreciation and investment
prices.



                                                        17
Depreciation allowances: The tax discount term, j , is equal to the present discounted
value of depreciation allowances associated with one unit of capital purchased at time t,
which can be computed as

                                                                  s
                                                                     1 - dj
                                                                          
(19)                                       0+
                                      j = dj             s +1 
                                                        dj                  ,
                                                 s= 0             =0 1 + r

where dj
       s denotes the fraction of the investment that a firm is allowed to subtract from its

tax liabilities s years after the purchase.
       One useful benchmark is when firms can subtract the economic depreciation of their cap-
                                                          0 = 0 and a constant depreciation
ital goods each period. In the above formula, this means dj
rate of  j from there on, which adds up to an allowance of ~ j =  j ( j + r) < 1.
       The IRS and the US tax code handle depreciation allowances quite differently from this
benchmark, however. The way in which depreciation allowances are determined is specified
in IRS Publication 946. The current system places each type of capital under a specific class
life --the number of years that a new unit of capital lasts for tax purposes--based on its
characteristics and sector. The first reason why tax discounts j differ from the one given
by constant economic depreciation, ~ j , is that the depreciation rate implied by a class life is
different from the economic depreciation rate.
       A second source of an additional tax discount is that the tax code requires taxpayers
to follow specific depreciation schedules and enables front-loading of allowances. When
computing their tax discount, firms may use a combination of straight-line and declining-
balance methods that yields the highest possible discount. The straight-line method allows
firms to expense a constant fraction of their initial investment (or undepreciated investment
in the initial year in which the method is applied) for each year of remaining tax life. The
declining-balance method can be used for assets with a class life below 20 years, and allows
firms to front-load their depreciation allowances by expensing a decreasing fraction of their
initial investment each year. Assets in a class life of 10 years or less can be depreciated using
a 200% declining-balance rule, which allows firms to expense their undepreciated investment
at two times the rate prescribed by the straight-line method (2×10% for an asset in a class
life of 10 years). Firms can then switch to the straight-line method near the end of the asset
life to maximize their allowances.14 Assets with a class life between 10 and 20 years, on the
  14
    As an example, consider the allowances generated by the purchase of a machine with a class life of
10 years. Suppose the purchase takes place in the middle of the year. The straight-line method allows a
deduction of 5% of the cost in the first year, 10% for the following nine years, and 5% on the eleventh year.
The 200% declining balance method gives an allowance of 10% in the first year (two times the straight-line
rate of 5%), 18% in the second year (two times the straight-line rate of 10% times the undepreciated stock,
90%), 14.4% in the third year (two times the straight-line rate of 10% times the undepreciated stock, 72%).


                                                        18
other hand, can be depreciated using a 150% declining-balance rule, while assets with a class
life of more than 20 years adhere to the straigh-line method.
    The third and final source of large discounts from depreciation allowances is recent
changes in legislation, passed as part of economic stimulus plans, which introduced bonus
depreciation.15 Under current bonus depreciation provisions, most capital with a class life
below 20 years enjoys a 100% bonus depreciation, meaning that investors can immediately
expense their capital purchases as current costs. This full expensing yields the maximum
discount of j = 1.16
               j
    We compute t for 1980­2018 for each type of capital taking into account changes in
the treatment of depreciation allowances and bonus depreciation programs (excluding the
further reductions in effective capital taxes generated by the 2017 tax reforms, since these
                                                                              j
did not affect the automation decisions throughout the 2010s). When computing t , we
assume that firms anticipate no future changes in the tax code, so that they expect current
rates to apply in the future.17
    Figure A.1 in the Appendix plots ~ j and j for software, equipment, and non-residential
structures. The figure show that j typically exceeds ~ j for software and equipment, and
that recent bonus depreciation provisions generated an increase in allowances bringing j
close to 1 for software and equipment in the 2010s.

Tax rates on corporations and capital owners: Effective taxes on capital also de-
pend on taxes on corporations and the households who own capital. We approximate the
average marginal corporate income tax rate tc for each year as the average tax paid by
This continues up to year 7, where the method prescribes an allowance of 5.89%, which is below the straight-
line method allowance of 6.55% computed on the undepreciated stock of capital and 4.5 years of useful life
left. Therefore, the schedule for 10-year property follows the 200% declining-balance method until year 7
and switches to a constant allowance of 6.55% of the undepreciated cost for the remaining 4.5 years. For
further discussion and examples, see the Appendix in House and Shapiro (2008).
   15
      In particular, the "Job Creation and Worker Assistance Act of 2002" (JCWAA) introduced a 30% bonus
depreciation for 2002-2003; the "Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003" (JGTRRA) raised
the bonus to 50% for 2004; the "Economic Stimulus Act of 2008" introduced a 50% bonus, extended until
2017 by successive bills; the "Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act
of 2010" temporarily raised the bonus to 100% (full expensing) between September 2010 and the end of
2011. Finally, the "Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017" raised bonus depreciation to 100% for 2018-2022.
   16
      A 100% bonus depreciation corresponds to d0 = 1 and ds = 0 for all s > 0 in equation (19). As stated
above, capital allowances are generally set by the schedules in Publication 946, which give a specific dj             s for
                        Tj    j
all s, j , such that s=     d
                           0 s   = 1, for each  investment   type j , and where  Tj is the class life for the capital type
j . When bonus depreciation is  < 1, the taxpayer obtains a first-year bonus allowance equal to  and then
follows the schedules for depreciation allowances for the undepreciated capital stock. Therefore, the bonus
allowance series, d ~j , has d  ~j = (1 -  )dj , for all s  1, and d~j =  + (1 -  )dj in the initial period.
                     s           s           s                        s             0
   17
      Anticipated tax reforms create a "reevaluation" effect for capital that is already installed.




                                                           19
C-corporations:
                                         corporate tax revenue
                          tc =                                           .
                                 net operating surplus of C-corporations
The corporate tax revenues are obtained from NIPA Tables. The computation of the tax base
is presented in the Appendix. We start with operating surplus from corporations and subtract
depreciation allowances. We then allocate a fraction of these profits to C-corporations using
data from the IRS on profits by type of corporation. The remaining share is accounted for
by S-corporations which do not pay corporate income taxes, and this share is not included
as part of the tax base in the above calculation. The share of corporate profits generated
by C-corporations has fallen over time from 93% in 1980 to 61% in 2018, in line with the
findings Smith et al. (2019). Our calculations show that once we account for this changing
share, the average tax rate on C-corporations increased from 25% in 1981 to 35% in 2000,
and then declined to 17.5% in 2018.
       Note that we are computing corporate income taxes as an average of the taxes paid,
rather than by using the statutory rate (46% in 1981, 35% in the intervening years, and 21%
in 2018). This is because many corporations pay less corporate income tax than implied by
the statutory rate. Throughout, we interpret average taxes as averages of marginal tax rates
faced by different types of firms.
       Besides taxes paid by corporations, taxes paid by households on their capital income from
equity and lending also contribute to the effective tax on the use of capital (the terms  e,c ,
 b,c and  b,p in equations (14), (17) and (18)). We compute  e,c as the average tax rate paid
by owners of equity on their dividends and capital gains. We start by computing the share
of corporate equity that is directly held by US households and is thus subject to taxation.
Using data from the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, we approximate
this as the share of corporate equity owned by US households and nonprofit organizations
serving these households, which has fallen from 58% in 1981 to 37% in 2018. We follow CBO
(2014) and assume that the remaining share is owned by funds or kept in accounts that are
not subject to additional taxation.
       Taxes paid by households depend on how corporate profits are realized. Qualified divi-
dends or capital gains are taxed at a maximum capital gain tax rate specified by the IRS.18
These include dividends on stocks held by more than 61 days, or capital gains on stocks
owned for over a year. Ordinary (non-qualified) dividends or capital gains apply to stock
owned over shorter periods and are taxed at the same rate as individual income. The re-
  18
    The maximum capital gain tax rate is specified in IRS publication 550. In 2018, taxpayers facing a
marginal tax rate below 15% had a maximum capital gain rate of 0%. Taxpayers facing a marginal tax rate
between 22% and 35% had a maximum capital gain tax rate of 15%. Finally, taxpayers facing a marginal
tax rate of 35% faced a maximum capital gain tax rate of 20%.


                                                  20
maining profits are for stocks held until death, whose capital gains are never realized and
thus face no taxation. We compute the share of profits realized through ordinary dividends
and short-term capital gains by using data from the IRS Individual Complete Report (Pub-
lication 1304, Table A) for the period 1990-2017 and the IRS SOI Tax Stats (Sales of Capital
Assets Reported on Individual Tax Returns) for the period 1990-2012. Publication 1304 re-
ports households' ordinary dividend income from corporate stocks, while the SOI Tax Stats
reports the short-term capital gains on corporate stocks. Short-term dividends and ordinary
capital gains account for the bulk of realized profits from C-corporations (about 60% in re-
cent years). The remaining share of profits is accounted for by long-term qualified gains and
dividends, or by stocks held until death whose capital gains are never realized. We assume
that each of these two forms makes up an equal share of profits, which aligns with what the
CBO reports for 2011.
   The average tax rate on profits derived from C-corporation profits (after paying corporate
taxes) is thus given by

            share directly    share short-           share long-          share held     
   te,c =                                     to +                  tq +               0% .
               ownedt         term ordinaryt       term qualifiedt       until deatht    

Here, to is the average tax rate on short-term ordinary capital gains and dividends, and
tq is the average tax rate on long-term qualified capital gains and dividends. Both average
taxes are computed using data from the Office for Tax Analysis for 1980­2014. In recent
years, the average tax rate on ordinary short-term gains and dividends was to = 24% and
the average tax rate on long-term qualified capital gains and dividends was tq = 18%. Our
estimates show that te,c has hovered around a historical average of 15% and experienced a
temporary reduction to 12.5% during the 2000s.
   Turning to taxation of rental income for bond-holders, the CBO estimates that 52.3%
of C-corporation bonds are held directly by households, 14.9% generate income that is tem-
porarily deferred for tax purposes, and the rest is held by funds or kept in accounts that
are not subject to additional taxation. For passthrough entities, the share owned by house-
holds is larger, 76.3%, and the share deferred is 10.1%. Moreover, the CBO reports that
the rental income owned by households is subject to personal income taxes at the average
rate 27.4% in 2014. Supposing that temporarily deferred income is subsequently taxed at
the same rate as the rest of rental income, we estimate the average tax paid by bond-holders
on their rental income from C-corporations and passthroughs, respectively, as  b,c = 16.84%
and  b,p = 23.25%, and assume that these rates have remained constant over time.
   The final item required for our calculations is the tax rate paid by owners of passthroughs,

                                                 21
which we separate into S-corporations and other passthroughs (sole proprietor businesses
and partnerships). Profits from S-corporations are taxed at the individual income rate of
the owners. We assume that the average tax rate paid by owners of S-corporations is the
same as the average tax paid by individuals earning ordinary short-term dividends and
capital gains, to .19 In economic terms, this requires owners of S-corporations to have a
similar income profile as investors in public equity. In addition, part of the profits generated
by S-corporations accrue only when the company is sold, and these profits are taxed at
the maximum qualified rate, tq . Thus, we measure the average tax paid by owners of S-
corporations on their profits as

                               o,s = to - share capital gains  (to - tq ).

Using data on sales of passthrough businesses reported by the IRS for 1990­2000, we estimate
the average share of capital gains in S-corporation profits as 25%, and assume it has remained
at this level over time. Our estimates imply that to,s has been roughly constant as well, at
about 27%, reaching 28% in 2018. Since self-proprietors' and partnerships income is reported
as personal income, we have no data on the tax rate faced by owners on profits, and so we
assume that they face the average tax rate on income (obtained from the IRS, SOI Tax
Stats), which has been approximately 14.6% in recent years.
       Overall, our estimates imply that in 2011 the average corporate income tax was 26.4%
(with equity holders paying an additional 11.8% on top of this), the average tax rate paid by
S-corporation owners was 23%, and the average tax rate paid by owners of other passthroughs
was 14.6%. These numbers align closely with those by the CBO and Cooper et al. (2016).20

Interest rates, depreciation and investment prices: We assume a constant interest
rate, a constant growth rate for investment prices and a constant rate of economic deprecia-
tion for each asset that match historical averages from 1981 to 2017. We use a constant value
of rb = 4.21% per annum for bond-holders, given by the average of the Moody's Seasoned
AAA Corporate Bond Yield minus realized inflation between 1981 and 2017. Likewise, we
use a constant value of re = 4.36% per annum for equity-holders, which is the historical aver-
age of the real rate of return on the S&P 500 over 1957­2018. The constant growth rate for
  19
     Profits from S-corporations are also taxed as corporate income by some states. To account for these
taxes, we add the average state and local tax rate on businesses, which we compute by dividing state and
local revenues from business taxes by the net operating surplus of corporations. State and local taxes on
businesses are small in practice, with an average value near 3% in recent years.
  20
     Using IRS data, Cooper et al. estimate that in 2016 C-corporations paid an average tax rate 23% (plus
8.25% on the household side), S-corporations paid an average tax rate of 25% and other passthroughs paid
an average tax rate of about 14.7%.


                                                   22
investment prices is estimated from the average change of investment price indices by type
of capital from the BEA Fixed Asset Tables (FAT) between 1981 and 2017. These imply an
annual average growth rate of prices equal to -1.6% for software, -1% for equipment, and 2%
                                                                     j
for non-residential structures. The economic depreciation rates, the t 's, are taken directly
from the BEA FAT as the averages for 1981-2017 (the average economic depreciation rate per
annum is 23.4% for software, 13.9% for equipment, and 2.6% for non-residential structures).

3.3     Effective Taxes on Labor
In our model,  is the effective tax on (the use of) labor. However, as with capital, there
is no single tax on labor in the US tax code. Instead, labor income is subject to a number
of different taxes both at the federal and local level. Means-tested public programs may
generate additional implicit taxes on labor. The effective tax on labor is given by the wedge
that the tax system introduces between the marginal product of labor and the before-tax
wage, mplf . The representative firm will demand labor until the marginal product of labor,
mplf , equals the cost of one unit of labor given by total compensation. That is,

                             mplf = compensation = salary + benefits.

Wage income is subject to personal income tax at a rate  h , and payroll taxes at a rate
 p . Benefits are not taxed, but might be imperfectly valued by workers, which we cap-
ture by converting them to an income-equivalent amount by multiplying it with   [0, 1].
Consequently, the after-tax return to work for the household is given by

                              w = salary  (1 -  h -  p ) + benefits  .

      The effective tax rate on labor is defined, analogously to the effective tax on capital, as

                     1   mplf    salary  ( h +  p ) + benefits  (1 - )
                       =       =                                       .
                    1-    w                 compensation

We measure the terms in this expression as follows. From national accounts we obtain data on
salaries and total compensation for the corporate sector. We treat employers' contributions
to pensions and health insurance as part of the benefits since these are not taxed. We
assume that workers outside the corporate sector receive a similar split between benefits and
salaries and are therefore subject to the same effective taxes. We use a payroll tax rate of
15.3%, which is the statutory rate that applies to all earners with an income below $132,900
dollars in 2018 (a level that roughly matches the 95th percentile of income). Since the vast


                                                23
majority of jobs at-risk of automation are performed by workers in the middle of the income
distribution, the payroll tax of 15.3% is relevant for automation decisions and is incorporated
in our effective tax rate on labor. We measure the personal income tax rate  h , consistently
with our treatment of payroll taxes, as the average income tax paid by earners below the
95th percentile. This is computed from publicly available data from the IRS for 1986­2017.
The estimate for  h has been stable in recent years at a level close to 10%.21 Finally, we use
a value of  = 0.65 building on estimates from Gruber and Krueger (1991), Goldman et al.
(2005) and Lennon (2019), which suggest that one dollar of spending on benefits is valued
on average at 65 cents by households. This increases our estimates for  by 3%.
       Besides our baseline estimate for  described above, in the Appendix we present results
using an estimate for the effective tax on labor which incorporates the implications of means-
tested welfare programs. In particular, there is a range of programs, including cash transfers
and credits, that are phased out as individual income increases, and various social programs
(such as disability insurance and unemployment insurance) in which individuals participate
less when labor demand is high (see for instance the evidence in Autor & Duggan, 2003;
Autor, Dorn & Hanson, 2013; and Acemoglu & Restrepo, 2020a). As a consequence, transfers
decline as labor demand rises, and this acts as an additional implicit tax on labor,  d . Austin,
Glaeser and Summers (2018) estimate that the public expenditures resulting from a person
going into non-employment was of $4,900 per year between 2010­2016 ($6,300 for those
in long-term non-employment and $2,300 for the short-term unemployed). This is roughly
8% of the average yearly worker compensation during this period, suggesting that social
expenditure and disability insurance add an extra 8% tax to labor.

3.4      Effective Tax Rates in the US
Figure A.2 in the Appendix depicts the evolution of the average personal income tax and
average capital tax rates for C-corporations (including both corporate income taxes and
personal income taxation) and for S-corporations (whose owners only pay personal income
taxes and some state-level taxes). Taxes on C-corporations' profits decline significantly from
2000 onwards, reflecting declines in the statutory corporate income tax rate over time. Taxes
on passthrough profits have remained stable around 25% and the average individual income
tax has remained close to 15%.
       Figure 1 presents our estimates for the effective tax rates on labor and different types
of capital (in turn computed from effective tax rates on capital and depreciation allowances
for C-corporations, S-corporations and other passthrough businesses, and the differential
  21
    If we were to use the average payroll tax (about 10% in recent years) and the average income tax (about
14.6% in recent years), we would end up with a very similar effective tax rate on labor.


                                                    24
taxation of capital financed with debt and equity). The solid lines show the effective taxes
on software, equipment, non-residential structures and labor.




Figure 1: Effective tax rates on labor, software capital, equipment, and
non-residential structures.
Notes: The solid lines depict the observed effective taxes. The dashed lines present the effective taxes that
would result if the treatment of allowances had remained as in the year 2000. See the text for details.


       Several points about these effective tax rates are worth noting. First, effective taxes on
equipment and software are low compared to the effective taxes on labor. Our benchmark
effective tax on labor (which does not include the implicit taxes implied by means-tested
programs) hovers around 25.5%.22 In contrast, effective taxes on both equipment capital
and software in the 2010s (and before the tax reform of 2017) are around 10%.23 Second,
effective taxes on equipment and software were higher in the 1990s and early 2000s, and
declined significantly thereafter. This decline is mostly because of the reforms summarized
in footnote 15, which have increased depreciation allowances. The dashed lines illustrate the
contribution of these reforms by plotting the (counterfactual) effective taxes on different types
  22
      Our estimates imply that the net tax revenue collected by the government with these instruments
is roughly 18.6% of GDP (25.5% × labor income in GDP +10% × net capital income in GDP). This figure
matches closely the average share of personal income taxes, corporate taxes and social security contribution
in GDP for the period considered in our study (18.7% for 1981­2018 in NIPA Table 3.1).
   23
      These effective tax rates are lower than those reported in CBO (2014). Two factors explain the differ-
ences. First, and most importantly, the CBO does not incorporate bonus depreciation allowances (based on
the argument that these may not be extended in the future). Second, the CBO uses the statutory rate of
corporate income tax. As noted above, we do not believe this gives an accurate estimate of the effective tax
on capital, since most corporations pay less than the statutory rate.


                                                     25
of capital that would have applied had the treatment of depreciation allowances remained as
it was in 2000. They show that about half of the decline in the effective taxes on software and
equipment capital is due to the more generous depreciation allowances introduced since 2002.
Third, effective taxes on equipment and software decreased further, to about 5%, following
the 2017 tax reform, which introduced full expensing of these capital expenditures. Finally,
because depreciation allowances for structures are lower, the effective tax on non-residential
structures is higher today than tax rates on equipment and software, but in the past the
ordering was reversed.
      For our purposes, effective tax rates on equipment and software are more relevant, since
these are the types of capital that are involved in automation. In what follows, we will
summarize the US tax system as an effective tax on labor of  = 25.5% and an effective
tax on capital of  k = 10% (the level before the 2017 tax reforms). We will also separately
discuss the implications of the reforms in the 2000s and the 2017 tax reform.


                    4   Does the US Tax Code Favor Automation?

In this section, we investigate whether the US tax system is biased against labor and favors
excessive automation. We then explore the implications of different tax reforms.

4.1     Parameter Choices
We first review the estimates of the main parameters in our model.
      The parameter  corresponds to the short-run elasticity of substitution between capital
and labor. This is the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor holding the
amount of automation (and more generally the state of technology) constant, and without
any compositional changes (for example, between firms with different technologies or between
industries). Under the assumption that in the short run the allocation of tasks to factors is
fixed, this elasticity can be approximated by the short-run elasticity of substitution within
establishments, which is estimated to be  = 0.5 in Oberfield and Raval (2014).
      The other important building block of the production side of our economy is given by
the comparative advantage schedules for labor and capital,  (x) and  k (x). We reduce the
dimensions of these functions by assuming that they take iso-elastic forms:

                         (x)
                               =A  x                       (x) =A  x ,
                         k (x)

where   0 controls how the comparative advantage of labor changes across tasks, and 
controls the relationship between the comparative and absolute advantage of labor. We take


                                               26
 = 1 as our baseline, which implies that labor is more productive at higher-index tasks
(where it has a comparative advantage), while capital has a constant productivity across
tasks (as in "balanced growth" specification in Acemoglu & Restrepo, 2018). The Appendix
explores the opposite case in which  = 0 and labor is less productive in tasks where it has
comparative advantage.
       The parameter of comparative advantage  (together with ) shapes the long-run sub-
stitution possibilities between capital and labor. In the long run, changes in factor prices
will lead to endogenous development and adoption of automation technologies, and as the
allocation of tasks to factors changes, there will be greater substitution between capital and
labor than implied by . The extent of this greater substitution is shaped by the compara-
tive advantage of labor across tasks. In particular, since  = 0.5, a lower user cost of capital
will increase the labor share of national income in the short run (because capital and labor
are gross complements given ), but as automation adjusts, the labor share could end up
lower than it was before the change. Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) estimate that a 10%
reduction in the user cost of capital lowers the labor share by 0.83-1.67 percentage points in
the long run. The midpoint of this range implies  = 2.12 in the context of our model.24
       Turning to labor market imperfections, recall that the wedge               captures the difference
between the wage earned by workers and their opportunity cost. This motivates measuring
as the (average) permanent earning loss from job separation. The majority of the estimates
of these earning losses in the labor literature are within the range 5%-25% with a midpoint
of 15%.25 Motivated by this evidence, we choose a baseline value of                 = 0.15.26
       The remaining key parameters of our framework are the Hicksian elasticities of labor
and capital supply (Hicksian elasticities are the relevant ones in our context because we are
focusing on permanent tax reforms). We adopt the following functional forms for utility:
  ¯ - k ) = -B  k 1+1  (1 + 1 k ) - k and  ( ) =
u(y                                                        1+1    (1 + 1  ), so that the two Hicksian
                         k



elasticities, k  0 and   0, are constant. The parameters A and B are calibrated to match
  24
      More specifically, these authors use a constant elasticity of substitution aggregate production function
without automation or reallocation of tasks, and show that their estimates correspond to a long-run elasticity
of substitution in the 1.2 - 1.5 range.
   25
      Couch and Placzek (2010) survey this literature and present their own estimates, suggesting long-run
earning declines from separations of 5%. Jacobson, Lalonde, and Sullivan (1993) find long-run earning
declines of about 25%. Davis and von Wachter (2011) report long-run earning losses of 10% in normal times
and 20% in recessions.
   26
      Some of the earning losses may be due to loss of firm-specific human capital. If productivity gains from
firm-specific human capital are shared equally between firms and workers, these would also create a wedge
identical in reduced-form to our .
   We also note that there are other factors that would act like a wedge, generating additional incentives to
raise employment. These include negative spillovers from non-employment on family, friends and communi-
ties and on political behavior (see Austin, Glaeser and Summers, 2019). Because quantifying these effects is
more difficult, we are ignoring them in the current paper.


                                                     27
an aggregate labor share of 56% and a net capital share of 26%, with the depreciation rate
fixed at 5.5% per year.
       Because our model does not distinguish between the intensive (hours conditional on
employment) and extensive margin (employment), we use the combined elasticity for total
hours of work. Chetty et al. (2011) report micro elasticity estimates, obtained from differ-
ences in tax rates and wages across regions and demographic groups within a country, in
the range 0.46­0.76 (of which 0.33 comes from the intensive margin and 0.13­0.45 comes
from the extensive margin). These numbers are close to macro elasticity estimates obtained
from tax differences across countries, which are also around 0.7. Because there might be
non-linearities in supply elasticities (see, for example, Mui and Schoefer, 2019), and there is
uncertainty about the exact supply elasticities, we explore the implications of labor supply
elasticities between 0.46 and 1 in our robustness checks.27
       The parameter k corresponds to the long-run elasticity with which the supply of cap-
ital responds to changes in net returns d ln k d ln r or the keep rate from net capital taxes
d ln k d ln(1 -  k ) (and is thus different from the "demand-side" elasticities that are infor-
mative about how much investment or capital at the firm level will respond to the user cost
of capital). Although there is much uncertainty about this elasticity and many theoretical
analyses assume it to be infinite (for example by imposing time-additive, discounted utility),
a number of recent papers estimate it to be much smaller. These studies exploit reforms
that change taxes on wealth for different groups of households and find medium-run elas-
ticities that range from 0.2 to 0.65 over 4­8 year periods (see Zoutman; 2018, Duran-Cabr´
                                                                                         e
et al., 2019; Jakobsen et al., 2020).28 Using a calibrated life-cycle model and assuming a
net after-tax return of r = 5%, Jakobsen et al. show that their medium-run estimates are
consistent with long-run elasticities ranging from 0.58 for the wealthy to 1.15 for the very
wealthy. With a lower-tax net return of 4% (in line with the numbers used in our compu-
tation of net effective taxes), long-run capital supply elasticities would be even lower, and
conversely, with an after-tax rate of return of 7%, these elasticities would range between 1
for wealthy households, and 1.9 for the very wealthy (see Table III in Jakobsen et al., 2020).
We set our baseline capital supply elasticity to 0.65, which is the average elasticity for the
wealthy in Jakobsen et al.'s preferred scenario with r = 5% and lies at the upper end of the
  27
     In the presence of some types of labor market frictions, the extensive margin changes in employment
may take place off the labor supply curve, while intensive margin changes are on the labor supply curve. In
Table A.1 in the Appendix we show that our main conclusions are robust if we reduce to 0.075, so that
labor market frictions apply only to the extensive margin changes in employment (which make up about half
of the variation given the elasticities reported in the text).
  28
     These estimates are from small and fairly open economies, such as Denmark, the Netherlands and
Catalunya, and thus presumably include the response due to the international mobility of capital.



                                                    28
medium-run elasticities reported above.29 We explore the robustness of our results to using
a higher elasticity of capital supply in the Appendix.

4.2      Is the US Tax System Biased against Labor?

We first verify that the US tax system (with  = 25.5% and  k = 10%) is biased against
labor. The estimated US taxes comfortably satisfy inequality (9) when we use the elasticity
estimates in the previous subsection,  = 0.7 and k = 0.65.
       Inequality (9) implies that current US taxes on labor are too high and US taxes on capital
too low relative to the optimum. In fact, the formulae in Proposition 1 for our baseline choice
of parameters, imply that optimal taxes should be  k,r = 26.65% and                        ,r   = 18.22%, which
contrast with the observed taxes of  k = 10% and  = 25.5%. The optimal tax on labor is
lower than on capital because the supply elasticities for the two factors are similar, while
there is an additional wedge for labor ( = 0.15), which the optimal tax system corrects for.




                       Panel A                                                   Panel B
Figure 2: Contour plots of taxes and elasticities that verify inequality (9).
Notes: Panel A shows contour plots for estimates of the current US tax system and Panel B depicts contour
plots for labor and capital supply elasticities to verify the robustness of the claim that the US tax system
is biased against labor. Green boxes represent the range of estimates we consider in our robustness checks
and in each case we separately mark our baseline estimates. Inequality (9) is satisfied for = 0 in the light
gray area and for = 0.15 in both the light and the dark gray areas. See the text for details.
  29
    We view our choice as conservative given other estimates in the literature. Br¨        ulhart et al. (2019)
estimate the elasticity of capital to after-tax returns using variation across Swiss Cantons. They find an
elasticity of 1.05 but also show that about a quarter of the effects are driven by migration across cantons and
do not involve a change in savings--which is the relevant margin for optimal taxation. In their concluding
remarks, they argue that once this response is accounted for, their numbers are comparable to the medium-
run estimates of Jakobsen et al., (2020). Kleven and Schultz (2014) estimate an elasticity of capital supply
with respect to one minus the tax rate on capital income of 0.3, which would imply an even more inelastic
response of capital, reinforcing our results. Finally, a related literature finds small elasticities of savings to
one minus the estate tax rate, typically about 0.09­0.16 (see Joulfaian, 2006 and Kopczuck and Slemrod,
2001), which also imply less elastic responses of the supply of capital.



                                                       29
       The conclusion that the US tax system is biased against labor is robust to variations
in our measurement of effective taxes and our estimates of the elasticities of the supply of
capital and labor. Panel A of Figure 2 documents that variations in how we compute effective
taxes on capital and labor do not change this conclusion. It depicts two contour plots for
 and  k that satisfy inequality (9) for the baseline values of the remaining parameters
( = 0.7; k = 0.65) and for        = 0.15 (the solid line) and    = 0 (the dotted line). All of our
tax estimates lie within these sets and thus comfortably satisfy inequality (9) regardless of
the value of .
       Panel B of Figure 2 documents that the US tax system remains biased against labor
when we vary the elasticities for the supply of capital and labor. The figure presents contour
plots for combinations of elasticities  and k that satisfy inequality (9) for our baseline
estimates of the US tax system ( = 25.5%;  k = 10%), and again separately for            = 0.15 and
  = 0. We find that even if the capital supply had a unitary elasticity, the US tax system
would satisfy inequality (9) and would continue to be biased against labor.

4.3      Implications of the US Tax System for Automation and Employment
As discussed in our theory section, the bias against labor in the US tax system will generate
excessive automation and lead to lower employment than socially optimal. We now return
to our baseline parameters and investigate the implications of the pro-capital bias of the US
tax system for automation, employment, the labor share and welfare.
       As a first step, we compare the implied equilibrium level of automation under the tax
system in the 2010s (before the 2017 tax reform),  = 25.5% and  k = 10%, to the equilibrium
with optimal taxes,      ,r   = 18.22% and  k,r = 26.65%. Columns 1 and 2 of Table 1 present
this comparison. Because the optimal tax system encourages the use of labor in production
(relative to the US system in the 2010s), it leads to a lower level of automationthan currently.
Under the optimal tax system,  declines by 4.1% from its equilibrium value in the 2010s.30
This lower level of automation would also increase the labor share by 0.78 percentage points,
and together with the lower labor tax, increase employment by 4.02%. Finally, welfare
would be higher by 0.38% in consumption-equivalent terms (meaning that the welfare gains
are equivalent to increasing consumption in period 1 by 0.38%). Although this increase
in welfare appears small (relative to the change in employment), this is due to the usual
intuition related to "Harberger triangles": because changes in welfare are second-order near
the optimum, they tend to be smaller than changes in quantities unless we are very far away
  30
    Though the magnitude of a change in  is not directly interpretable, we can compute the share of
employment that would be displaced with the higher level of . Given our parametrization of ,  (x) and
 k (x), reducing  from 0.276 to 0.265 results in 3.3% fewer workers displaced by automation.


                                                 30
from this optimum.

 Table 1: Equilibrium under the current tax system and under other potential scenarios.

                                                                             Distorting       Distorting 
                             Current          Ramsey
                                                             Distorting          and              and
                             System           Solution
                                                                             changing  k      changing 
                                (1)              (2)              (3)            (4)              (5)
  Tax system:
  k                           10.00%          26.65%           10.00%            8.39%           10.00%
                              25.50%          18.22%           25.50%           25.50%           24.89%
                               0.276           0.265            0.267            0.265            0.264
  A                           0.00%            0.00%           10.15%           12.90%           13.07%

  Aggregates:
  Employment                     .            +4.02%           +1.14%           +1.59%           +1.96%
  Labor Share                 56.00%          56.78%           57.93%           58.44%           58.54%
  Net Output                     .            +0.44%           -0.10%           +0.16%           +0.20%
  C.E. welfare change            .             0.38%            0.09%            0.14%            0.18%
  Revenue                        .             0.00%           +1.41%           0.00%             0.00%
Notes: This table shows the effective capital and labor taxes, the level of automation and the automation
tax under different scenarios. It also presents the implied changes in employment, output, welfare, and
government revenue, and the level of labor share in national income. The first column is for the current
US tax system. The second column shows the unconstrained Ramsey solution. Column 3 considers the
implications of changing the level of automation,  via automation taxes (and no other change in policy).
Column 4 additionally allows a change in the effective tax on capital, and column 5 considers a change in
the effective tax on labor. Change in welfare is in terms of consumption equivalent. See the text for details.


    In Table 1, we used an effective tax rate on labor of  = 25.5%, which does not include
the additional implicit tax on labor implied by means-tested programs. Table A.2 in the
Appendix shows that when we incorporate this additional implicit tax on labor supply and
set  = 33.5%, the employment and welfare gains from changing the current system are
amplified. Moving to optimal taxes now increases employment by 6.07%, the labor share by
1.09 percentage points and welfare by 0.81%.
    The conclusion that the we can achieve higher welfare through tax reforms that raise em-
ployment and reduce automation is robust to variations in parameters and the measurement
of taxes. Figure 3 considers the same range of taxes and parameters as in the two panels of
Figure 2. The contours in this figure correspond to combinations of current tax rates (Panel
A) and elasticities (Panel B) that give the same employment response when we switch from
the current tax system to optimal taxes. For a wide range of parameters, optimal taxes
induce levels of employment that are 2-10% larger than in the current system.

                                                       31
                      Panel A                                                Panel B
Figure 3: Contour plots for the percent change in employment resulting
from a move from the current tax system to the optimal tax system.
Notes: Panel A is for different measurements of current US taxes, and Panel B is for different combinations
of estimates of labor and capital supply elasticities. See the text for definitions and details.


    Recall from Proposition 2 that, when the tax system is biased against labor, the level of
automation is not only greater than in the Ramsey solution, but it is also excessively high
compared to what would be socially optimal given the tax system. Column 3 quantifies this
inefficiency by computing the level of automation that would maximize welfare taking the
current capital and labor taxes as given.31 The level of automation that maximizes welfare is
 = 0.267, which is 3.3% lower than equilibrium automation. In line with Proposition 4, this
lower level of automation can be implemented with an automation tax of 10.15%, so that
a task will be automated only if replacing labor with capital reduces the cost of producing
that task by more than 10.15%. The automation tax raises employment by 1.14%--partially
correcting for some of the inefficiencies in the current system and raising welfare--and the
labor share by 1.93 percentage points. Even though equilibrium automation decisions are
being distorted, aggregate net output remains essentially unchanged (it declines by 0.10%).
As already noted, this is because marginal tasks automated under a biased tax system do
not increase productivity much (or the automation technology being used in these tasks is
"so-so").
    Column 3 allows the planner to change , but without modifying the effective tax on
capital,  k . We next verify that, as implied by Proposition 3, if the planner could also
modify  k (but could not reduce labor taxes), she would complement any reform with an
  31
     The alternative is to follow Proposition 2 and maximize the sum of the representative household's
utility plus the change in revenue valued at µ (which is the social value of government funds). Here,
we simply maximize welfare--given by the representative household's utility--to make the results in this
column comparable to the rest of the table. Valuing additional revenues with the multiplier µ leads to higher
automation taxes, since reductions in  have the additional benefit of generating higher labor tax revenue.



                                                     32
automation tax to reduce automation below its market level. This is illustrated in column 4,
which shows that in this case the planner achieves higher welfare through a combination of
lower capital taxes ( k decreases to 8.39%) and an automation tax of 12.9%, which further
reduces  to 0.265. This alternative tax system would lead to a 2.44 percentage points higher
labor share and 1.59% more employment.32
       Finally, column 5 turns to a setting where the planner can reduce taxes on labor and
distort , but cannot increase taxes on capital (as mentioned, this scenario may be relevant
due to political constraints or fear of capital flight). In this case, the planner would combine
a lower labor tax with an automation tax of 13.07%, reducing automation again to  = 0.264,
and increasing employment by 1.96% and the labor share by 2.54 percentage points.33
       In summary, our quantitative results show that the current tax system inefficiently favors
automation and leads to an employment level that is below the social optimum. The best
policy would be to set taxes at their optimal levels, which does not require any further
distortions to automation. But if optimal taxes were infeasible, then reducing automation,
with or without accompanying changes in other taxes, could reverse some of the inefficiencies
in the current tax system and increase employment by 1.14­1.96% and the labor share in
national income by 1.93­2.54 percentage points.

4.4      Recent Reforms and Effective Stimulus
As described in footnote 15, a series of reforms enacted between 2000 and the mid 2010s
significantly reduced effective taxes on equipment and software (from about 20% in the
year 2000 to about 10%). The tax reform of 2017, which came into effect in 2018, further
reduced effective taxes on equipment and software to about 5%. These reforms aimed to raise
employment by stimulating investment and overall economic activity. In this subsection, we
use our calibrated model to study the effectiveness of these reforms and their implications
for automation.
       Our main finding is that, although all of these reforms increased employment (because
they reduced effective taxes), their effects were limited and did so at a large fiscal costs per
  32
     As mentioned above, reducing capital taxes may be optimal because the use of capital in tasks in which it
has a comparative advantage benefits labor due to complementarity between tasks. In practice, capital might
also complement labor in labor-intensive tasks. To capture this possibility, the task production function could
be changed to
                                                       ~(x)1- +  k (x)  k (x),
                                y ( x) =  ( x)  ( x)   k
where k ~(x) is the capital used to complement labor within tasks. Table A.3 in the Appendix shows that
allowing for direct complementarities in this way (with  = 0.75) does not change our main findings.
   33
      Importantly, this can be implemented without raising any capital taxes. In particular, a tax on automa-
tion can also be implemented via a subsidy to labor of  A = 13.07% combined with a tax of  A on the output
of tasks above c = 0.264. This alternative implementation is discussed in Proposition A.1 in the Appendix.



                                                      33
job created, in large part because they encouraged additional automation. In contrast, we
show that alternative reforms reducing labor taxes or combining lower capital taxes with an
automation tax could have increased employment by more and at a much lower cost per job.
       Column 1 of Table 2 reports the market equilibrium for the capital and labor taxes in
2000-- = 25.5% and  k = 20%. Column 2 then documents the impact of the tax cuts on
capital enacted between 2000 and the mid 2010s, which reduced the effective tax on software
and equipment to 10% and reduced government revenue by 10.49%. Our model implies that
these tax cuts raised employment by a modest 1.01%, and did so at a substantial fiscal
cost of $162,851 per job. As our theoretical analysis highlights, the lackluster employment
response was in part because the lower taxes on capital encouraged greater automation, as
shown by the increase in . Column 3 turns to the most recent (2017) tax cuts on capital.
These are predicted to reduce government revenue by an additional 5.51% (or 16% relative
to the revenue collected in 2000) and encourage further automation, with  rising to 0.278.
The resulting employment gain is again small, 1.47% relative to 2000 (or 0.46% relative to
the mid-2010s), and comes at a fiscal cost per additional job of $169,857.
       Columns 4-6 turn to alternative tax reforms that would have cost the same revenue as
the capital tax cuts implemented between 2000 and the mid-2010s (10.49% of the year 2000
revenue). In column 4, we consider the implications of reducing labor taxes (for example,
with a payroll tax cut) to  = 21.09% and keeping  k = 20% as in 2000. This alternative
reform would have increased employment by 3.56%, and would achieve this at 1/4th of
the cost of one additional job in column 2. Part of the reason why reducing payroll taxes
is much more effective in stimulating employment than cutting capital taxes is that lower
payroll taxes reduce automation ( falls to 0.269) whereas lower capital taxes further increase
automation ( increases from 0.272 to 0.276 between columns 1 and 2).
       Column 5 considers another reform, this time combining lower capital taxes with an
automation tax (again chosen to cost the same revenue as the tax cuts enacted between
2000 and the mid 2010s). This reform would have also raised employment by more than the
reforms of the 2010s, increasing it by 2.43%, and would have cost $67,316 per job, which
is less than half the cost per job in column 2. Notably, this policy combination involves
an even larger tax cut for capital--from 20% to 8.58%. But crucially, the automation tax
simultaneously rolls back any automation that the capital tax cut would have otherwise
induced.34
  34
    A policy of reducing taxes on capital and at the same time taxing automation is equivalent to lowering
the tax on capital by 11.42%, but only at tasks below  = 0.266. This exceeds the 10% tax cut from 2000 to
the 2010s. These targeted tax cuts for capital at tasks in which it has a strong comparative advantage allow
policy makers to give even larger subsidies to capital accumulation without triggering excessive automation.



                                                    34
   Table 2: Comparison of observed tax reforms and reforms costing the same revenue.

                                           Observed reforms                    Alternative reforms
                                       System in                                  Capital tax
                         System in                   System in                                   Capital and
                                         2010s:                    Labor tax      reform with
                         2000 with                  2018: reform                                  labor tax
                                       reform to                    reform        automation
                          k = 20%                    to  k = 5%                                     reform
                                        k = 10%                                     taxation
                            (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)              (5)             (6)
 Tax system:
 k                        20.00%        10.00%         5.00%        20.00%            8.58%          26.65%
                          25.50%        25.50%        25.50%        21.09%           25.50%          18.22%
                           0.271         0.276         0.278         0.269            0.266           0.265
 A                        0.00%          0.00%         0.00%         0.00%           11.42%           0.00%

 Aggregates:
 Employment                  .           +1.01%       +1.47%        +3.56%          +2.43%           +5.06%
 Capital                     .           +5.64%       +8.34%        +1.14%          +3.07%           -2.19%
 Labor Share              56.30%         56.00%       55.86%        56.46%          58.15%           56.77%
 Net Output                  .           +2.38%       +3.49%        +2.83%          +2.55%           +2.83%
 Cost/Revenue per job        .          $162, 851    $169, 857      $45, 954        $67, 316         $32, 378
 Revenue                     .          -10.49%      -16.00%        -10.49%         -10.49%          -10.49%

Notes: This table shows the effective capital and labor taxes and the level of automation for different tax
reforms. Column 1 presents the equilibrium under the tax system of the year 2000. Columns 2 and 3 present
the resulting changes from the capital tax cuts enacted up to the mid 2010s and then the subsequent capital
tax cuts enacted in 2017. Columns 4­6 then show the effects of three alternative reforms that would have
cost the same as the capital tax cuts enacted between 2000 and the mid 2010s. Column 4 considers cutting
the effective labor tax. Column 5 considers a combination of capital tax cuts and a tax to automation.
Column 6 considers a combination of lower labor taxes and higher capital taxes.


    Finally, column 6 considers a reform that changes both capital and labor taxes in a welfare
maximizing way and costs the same revenue as the reform in column 2. By definition, this
reform coincides with the Ramsey solution in column 2 of Table 1 and would have raised
the effective capital tax rates to 26.65%, and reduce the labor tax to 18.22% (eliminating
the payroll tax almost entirely). We include it in this table to show that, in addition to the
5.06% additional increase in employment, such a reform would have had a much smaller cost
per job--only $32,378, or about 1/5th of the cost per job generated by the capital tax cuts
since 2000.
    Overall, this discussion shows that, because automation responds to the cost of capi-
tal, reducing capital taxes uniformly (via generous depreciation allowances or reductions in
corporate taxes) is not an effective way of stimulating employment. Reforms over the last
two decades that reduced capital taxes achieved only a modest increase in employment and
instead encouraged further automation. Moving forward, reducing payroll taxes or accompa-
nying tax cuts for capital with a tax on automation can more powerfully stimulate economic


                                                    35
activity and achieve greater increases in employment at lower fiscal costs.

4.5     Capital Distortions

Our analysis so far incorporates labor market imperfections via the wedge , but ignores
capital distortions. This is motivated by two considerations. First, our starting point is
that, because of labor market imperfections such as bargaining, search or efficiency wages,
even without any taxes, the level of employment would be too low; the wedge used in our
model introduces this property in a simple way. Second, while earning losses from worker
displacement provide a natural way of identifying the labor market wedge, there is no simple
method for ascertaining whether there are capital wedges and how large they may be.35
Nevertheless, we have carried out a number of exercises to verify that our conclusions are
not unduly affected by this asymmetry in the treatment of capital and labor.
      First, if equity finance is not subject to an additional distortion, then the deductions of
interest rate payments from taxes in the case of debt finance more than undo any capital
market distortions. This is because the interest rate on corporate loans is an upper bound on
the capital wedge and is deducted from taxes. Therefore, we can conservatively use effective
tax rates on equipment and software that would apply with full equity financing (without
any of the reductions in effective capital taxes that come with debt finance). Table A.4 in
the Appendix provides analogous results to Table 1 in this case. The effective capital taxes
are now  k = 12% but this has minimal effects on our results. Second, Table A.5 in the
Appendix repeats our main exercise but now assuming a capital wedge of                         k   = 0.15--the
same as the labor wedge. The employment and welfare gains from moving to optimal taxes
are still non-trivial even if about half as large as our baseline estimates. We conclude that our
results are not driven by the assumption that there are no capital wedges or the asymmetric
treatment of capital and labor.


                                             5    Extensions

In this section, we discuss two extensions that generalize our model and reinforce our main
conclusion that the US tax code favors capital and promotes excessive automation.
  35
     For example, large corporations that have significant cash at hand should not be using a different external
rate of return than their internal rate of return, and their behavior should not be affected by a capital wedge,
even if they use external funds. Smaller corporations may face a higher rate of return when borrowing funds,
but if investment in these and larger corporations are highly substitutable, this may not correspond to an
aggregate capital wedge.




                                                      36
5.1     Human Capital Investments
The asymmetric treatment of capital and labor may further distort investments in human
capital, which may interact with automation decisions. To incorporate this possibility, sup-
pose that the efficiency units of labor services provided by a worker is augmented by his or
her human capital. Assume also that all workers have the same amount of human capital h,
so that the efficiency units of labor are now      h   = h  .36 The cost of investing in human capital
                               h1+1  in terms of the final good of the economy, and h > 0. This
                                    h
h for    workers is   1+1 h
parameter will be the elasticity of investment in human capital with respect to changes in
wages. Likewise, we take the iso-elastic specification of  ( ) used in our quantitative section,
so that  is the constant Hicksian elasticity of labor supply.
      Incorporating human capital into the labor market-clearing condition, we obtain

                                                                1 ( +h + h )
                                 f h  (1 -  )  (1 - ) =     h                  .

The relevant elasticity for the supply of efficiency units of labor has now been replaced by
 + h +   h , which incorporates the elastic response of human capital and is thus always
greater than  . Intuitively, efficiency units of labor can be increased not just by supplying
labor, but by investing in human capital as well.
      The next proposition characterizes optimal taxes in the presence of human capital and
shows that labor taxes need to be adjusted to take into account the greater elasticity with
which labor services respond to taxation. This pushes in the direction of (relatively) lower
labor taxes, and conversely, higher capital taxes.

Proposition 5 (Optimal taxes with endogenous human capital) The solution to
the Ramsey problem in an environment with human capital satisfies r = m (k, ) and

                 k,r     µ     1                      ,r     µ       1
                      =                                   =                -      .
              1 -  k,r 1 + µ k (k )                1 -  ,r 1 + µ  + h +   h 1 + µ

      Moreover, if an economy has too low a tax on capital and excessive automation without
human capital (in the sense of Proposition 2), it will a fortiori have too low a tax on capital
and excessive automation when there is an elastic response of human capital.
      We next provide a back of the envelope quantification of the effect of human capital
investments on optimal policy. To do this, we augment our analysis in the previous section
  36
     This formulation ignores the fact that high-human capital workers may be employed in tasks that are not
automated or are complementary to automation technologies. The impact of automation on the employment
and wages of different types of workers is explored in Autor, Levy & Murnane (2003) and Acemoglu &
Restrepo (2020b).


                                                    37
with an estimate for the elasticity of human capital, h . We set the elasticity of human capital
supply, h , to 0.092. This value is in the mid-range of estimates from the literature on high-
school completion (Jensen, 2010; Kuka et al., 2018) and college major choice (Wiswall &
Zafar, 2015; Beffy et al., 2012).37 This increases the supply elasticity of efficiency units
of labor to 0.86, and as a result, the optimal labor tax is now lower,  = 16.90%, and
the optimal capital tax is modestly higher,  k = 29.21% (see Table A.7 in the Appendix).
Replacing the current system with optimal taxes leads to more pronounced changes: 1.06
percentage point higher labor share, 5.73% increase in employment, and 0.59% increase in
welfare in consumption-equivalent terms.

5.2      Endogenous Technology
In our baseline model, increases in  represent both the development and the adoption of
automation technologies. In principle, these two decisions are distinct, even if related. Unless
automation technologies are developed, they cannot be adopted. If they are expected to be
adopted, then there are greater incentives to develop them. Moreover, as emphasized in
Acemoglu & Restrepo (2018), new automation technologies may come at the expense of
other technological changes with different implications for capital and labor. For instance,
more resources devoted to automation typically imply less effort towards the introduction
of new tasks that tend to increase the labor share and demand for labor. If so, a tax
structure that favors capital may distort the direction of technological change in a way that
disadvantages labor. In this subsection, we provide a simple model to highlight these ideas
and show that, with endogenous technology, optimal policy may also need to redirect the
direction of technological change, and this is the case even when capital and labor taxes are
set optimally.
       For brevity, we borrow from the formulation of endogenous technology in Acemoglu
(2007, 2010), whereby a (competitive) production sector decides how much capital and labor
to use and which technology, from a menu of available technologies, to utilize, while a
monopolistically competitive (or simply monopolistic) technology sector decides which menu
of technologies to develop and offer to firms.
       We consider a menu of technologies consisting of both automation techniques and tech-
nologies that increase the productivity and the set of tasks performed by labor (such as
  37
    Jensen's (2010) experimental results imply a 0.097 high-school completion elasticity in response to per-
ceived returns. Kuka et al. (2018) estimate a high-school completion elasticity of 0.019-0.086 in response to
actual returns, and 0.014-0.17 in response to perceived returns. Wiswall & Zafar (2015) estimate elasticities
in the range of 0.036-0.062 from the response of college major choice to changes in relative wage premium.
Previous estimates in Beffy et al. (2012) put the same elasticity in the range 0.09­0.12. Taken together,
these studies imply values for h in the range 0.014­0.17.


                                                     38
the introduction of new tasks considered in Acemoglu & Restrepo, 2018). We summarize
this menu by  with the convention that a higher  means a menu that is more biased to-
wards automation technologies. Given menu , firms choose their level of automation  and
their utilization of other technologies  subject to the feasibility constraint G(,  ; )  0.
Therefore, the index of technologies  determines what combinations of automation and
other technologies are feasible for final good producers. We denote the production function
given  and  by f (k, ; ,  ), and assume that fk f is increasing in  as in our baseline
model and decreasing in  . We further assume that when  increases, the set G(,  ; )  0
includes higher values of  and lower values of  , so that a higher  enables more adoption
of automation technologies and less adoption of other technologies.
   The profit-maximizing adoption decision solves the following problem:

                       {m (k, ; ),  m (k, ; )} = arg max f (k, ; ,  ).
                                                   G(, ;)0


The assumptions on G(,  ; ) imply that  m (k, ; ) is decreasing in  and m (k, ; )
is increasing in --so that a higher  means a menu of technologies that is more biased
towards automation. Hence, as the menu of available technologies becomes more biased
towards automation, it crowds out the adoption of non-automation technologies (such as
new tasks or others that increase human productivity).
   Finally, we assume that the technology sector charges markups for the use of technologies
by final good producers and via this, captures a constant fraction   (0, 1) of the output of
these producers (this could be micro-founded as in Acemoglu (2007, 2010), by assuming that
the technology sector sells machines embedding the new technology with a constant markup).
We denote the cost of choosing a menu of technologies  by (). Thus, the maximization
problem of the technology sector that determines the equilibrium bias of technology is

(20)                    max   f (k, ; m (k, ; ),  m (k, ; )) - ().
                          


   We make the following assumptions on ():

   · () has a minimum at     ¯  (0, 1). This assumption means that there exists a baseline
                        ¯ such that deviations from this baseline involve increasing costs.
     bias of technology ,
       More specifically, deviations from ¯ can come in the direction of further automation or
       further effort devoted to creating new tasks (and thus less automation). Both of these
       will be more costly than continuing with . ¯ In the dynamic framework of Acemoglu
       & Restrepo (2018), ¯ corresponds to the state of technology inherited from the past.


                                              39
   · () is convex, which captures diminishing returns in research directed at changing
                                                         ¯
     the bias of technology away from the baseline level .

   In addition to capital and labor taxes, we allow for subsidies to the use of automation
and other technologies in the final good sector to undo the effects of the markup  and for
taxes on the profits of the technology monopolist. Our results do not depend on whether
such additional taxes and subsidies exist, but their presence simplifies the expressions and
makes them much more closely connected to those in our baseline model in Section 2.
   A market equilibrium satisfies the same market-clearing conditions as in our benchmark
economy, but is augmented to include the fact that technology adoption decisions of final
good producers are given by m (k, , ) and  m (k, ; ), and the equilibrium bias of tech-
nology  maximizes (20). We assume that a market equilibrium exists and is unique, and
that the solution to (20) always involves some interior   (0, 1).
   We next characterize the solution to the Ramsey problem as in Proposition 1. As in our
baseline model, we assume that the planner directly controls the development and adoption
of technologies (these choices can be implemented with additional taxes as in Section 2.5).

Proposition 6 (Optimal taxes and automation with endogenous technology)
The solution to the Ramsey problem with endogenous technology involves capital and la-
bor taxes given as in (8) and undistorted adoption decisions (conditional on ) given by
r (k, ; ) = m (k, ; ) and  r (k, ; ) =  m (k, ; ). However, if r      ¯ , the optimal bias
of technology satisfies r  m (i.e., the optimal and market bias of technology are the same
if and only if r =   ¯ ).

   The most important implication of this proposition is that, even with optimal taxes
on capital and labor, the planner might wish to discourage the development of automation
technology. This will be the case when the baseline level of technology is more geared towards
automation than what the planner would like to achieve. Put differently, if the economy in
question has already gone in the direction of excessively developing automation technologies
(which may be a consequence of past distortions or other factors influencing the direction of
past technological change), then the planner should intervene by distorting the direction of
innovation. The reason for this is that the technology sector does not fully internalize the
social surplus created by its technology choices (because of the presence of the term  < 1
in (20)), and thus will not develop the right type of technologies. This result has a close
connection to one of the key insights in Acemoglu et al. (2012), which established, in the
context of optimal climate change policy, that if the economy starts with relatively advanced
carbon-emitting, dirty technologies and relatively backward low-carbon, clean technologies,

                                             40
then it is not sufficient to impose Pigouvian taxes; rather, optimal policy additionally calls
for direct subsidies to the development of clean technologies.38
       This result is important in our context because, if as our results in Section 4 suggest,
past US tax policy has favored capital and automation, then it is not sufficient to redress
the distortions in the current tax system. Because these policies have likely led to excessive
development of automation technologies, optimal policy may need to intervene to redirect
technological change by subsidizing the creation of new tasks and temporarily discourage
further effort towards automation innovations at the margin. We leave a quantitative explo-
ration of the implications of endogenous technology development to future work.


                                   6   Concluding Remarks

Automation is transforming labor markets and the structure of work in many economies
around the world, not least in the United States. The number of robots in industrial appli-
cations, the use of specialized software, artificial intelligence and several other automation
technologies have increased rapidly in the US economy over the last few decades. There has
been a concomitant decline in the labor share of national income, wages have stagnated and
low-skill workers have seen their real wages decline. Many experts believe that these labor
market trends are, at least in part, related to automation.
       The general intuition among economists (and many policy-makers) is that even if automa-
tion may have some adverse distributional and employment consequences, policy should not
slow down (and certainly not prevent) the adoption of automation technologies, because
these technologies are contributing to productivity. According to this perspective, policy
should instead focus on fiscal redistribution, education and training to ensure more equally-
distributed gains and more opportunities for social mobility. But what if automation is
excessive from a social point of view?
       This paper has argued that the US tax system is likely to be encouraging excessive
automation and if so, reducing the extent of automation (or more plausibly, slowing down
the development and adoption of new automation technologies) may be welfare-improving.
We have developed this argument in three steps.
       First, we revisited the theory of optimal capital and labor taxation in a task-based frame-
work where there is an explicit decision of firms to automate tasks. We also introduced, albeit
in a reduced-form manner, labor market imperfections. Consistent with the classical theory
of public finance, if capital and labor taxes are set optimally, automation decisions are opti-
  38
    Note in addition that, once the planner can influence the direction of automation technology and set
optimal taxes on capital and labor, there is no need to distort the adoption of automation technologies.


                                                  41
mal in equilibrium. However, away from optimal capital and labor taxes or in the presence
of additional constraints on tax decisions, this is no longer the case. Exploiting the structure
of our task-based framework, we establish that when the tax system is already biased against
labor, it is generally optimal to distort equilibrium automation. The economics of this re-
sult is simple but informative: marginal tasks that are automated bring little productivity
gains (or in the terminology of Acemoglu & Restrepo, 2019a,b, they are "so-so automation
technologies"), and as a result, the cost of reducing automation at the margin is second-
order. When the tax system is biased against labor, the gain from reducing automation and
preventing the displacement of labor is first-order because it increases employment. In fact,
it may even be optimal to reduce automation while at the same time cutting capital taxes
(even though the tax system is biased against labor and in favor of capital), because, in
contrast to automation, the use of capital in tasks in which capital has a strong comparative
advantage is complementary to workers employed in labor-intensive tasks.
   Second, we delved into a detailed evaluation of the US tax system in order to map the
complex tax code into effective capital and labor taxes. Our numbers suggest that the US
system taxes labor heavily and favors capital significantly. While labor is taxed at an effective
rate between 25.5% and 33.5%, capital faces an effective tax rate of about 5% (down from
10% in the 2010s and 20% in the 1990s and early 2000s).
   Third, we compared the US tax system to the optimal taxes implied by our theoretical
analysis. This exercise confirmed that the US tax system is biased against labor and in favor
of capital. As a result, we found that moving from the current US tax system and level of
automation to optimal taxation of factors and the optimal level of automation would raise
employment by 4.02%, the labor share by 0.78 percentage point and overall welfare by 0.38%
in consumption-equivalent terms. If optimal taxes can be implemented, there is no need for
distorting or taxing automation. If, on the other hand, optimal taxes are infeasible, more
modest reforms involving a tax on automation can undo some of the inefficiencies in the
current system and increase employment by 1.14­1.96% and the labor share by 1.93­2.54
percentage points. In this case, the constrained optimal policy always involves an automation
tax in order to discourage the automation of marginal tasks which bring little productivity
benefits but significant displacement of labor.
   We also showed that a range of realistic generalizations (absent from our baseline frame-
work) reinforce our conclusions and call for even more extensive changes in automation and
capital taxation, and under some conditions, it may be optimal to redirect new innovations
away from automation.
   To simplify the analysis, we focused on an economy with a single type of labor. As noted


                                               42
in the Introduction, automation is also associated with increases in inequality (Autor, Levy
& Murnane, 2003; Acemoglu & Autor, 2011; Acemoglu & Restrepo, 2020a,b). Consequently,
slowing down automation may generate additional distributional benefits. These issues are
discussed in Guerreiro, Rebelo & Teles (2017), Thuemmel (2018) and Costinot & Werning
(2018). A natural next step is to augment these analyses with the possibility that certain
aspects of the tax system may be encouraging excessive automation.
   In practice, there are many potential sources of excessive automation. Our objective in
this paper has been narrow: to focus on tax reasons for excessive automation. Our com-
panion paper Acemoglu, Manera & Restrepo (2020) shows that, even absent tax-related
distortions, the market economy tends to generate excessive automation because bargaining
power and efficiency wage considerations vary across tasks and this tends to create incen-
tives for firms to automate beyond what is socially beneficial in order to improve their share
of rents. Furthermore, as we have already noted, automation-driven job loss may generate
negative spillovers on communities and political and social behavior. There may additionally
be social factors and corporate strategies concerning the direction of innovation and research
(the best minds in many fields being attracted to automation technologies and the most
influential companies favoring automation) that further contribute to excessive automation.
Quantifying the extent of these other factors is an important area for future research, espe-
cially because they have major implications for policy.
   Finally, we should briefly comment on how our results relate to two popular policy pro-
posals: wealth taxes and "robot taxes". Although our framework suggests that it may be
beneficial to increase taxes on capital, wealth taxes on high wealth individuals may not
be the most direct way of achieving this, because they would not necessarily increase the
effective tax on the use of capital. Increasing corporate income taxes and eliminating or
lowering depreciation allowances may be more straightforward ways of implementing higher
effective taxes on capital (provided that there are no other distributional or political benefits
from wealth taxes). Moreover, our framework highlights that it is not always beneficial to
increase taxes on capital: when it is not feasible to implement optimal taxes, reducing au-
tomation becomes a central objective (and may even need to be combined with lower taxes
on capital). Our automation tax is also different from taxes on robots for the same reasons:
it is not a uniform tax on all automation technologies; rather, it is applied to technologies
automating tasks above a certain threshold (which are tasks in which humans still have a
significant comparative advantage). In fact, our results clarify that, instead of taxing all
automation technologies, optimal policy often involves subsidizing capital in tasks in which
machines have a strong comparative advantage. Lastly, our analysis also clarifies that if the


                                               43
tax system is reformed so that it is no longer biased against labor and in favor of capital,
then employment and welfare can be increased without an automation tax.


                                         References

Acemoglu, Daron. 2007. "Equilibrium Bias of Technology." Econometrica 75 (5): 1371­
   1409.
------. 2010. "When Does Labor Scarcity Encourage Innovation?" Journal of Political
   Economy 118 (6): 1037­78.
Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, Leonardo Bursztyn, and David Hemous. 2012. "The
   Environment and Directed Technical Change." American Economic Review 102 (1):
   131­66.
Acemoglu, Daron & David Autor. 2011. "Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for
   Employment and Earnings." In Handbook of Labor Economics, 4:1043­1171. Elsevier.
Acemoglu, Daron & Pascual Restrepo. 2018. "The Race between Man and Machine: Im-
   plications of Technology for Growth, Factor Shares, and Employment." American Eco-
   nomic Review 108 (6): 1488­1542.
------. 2019a. "Artificial Intelligence, Automation, and Work." Chapter in The Economics
   of Artificial Intelligence: An Agenda, edited by Agrawal, Gans and Goldfarb.
------. 2019b. "Automation and New Tasks: How Technology Displaces and Reinstates
   Labor." Journal of Economic Perspectives 33 (2): 3­30.
------. 2020a. "Robots and Jobs: Evidence from US Labor Markets." Journal of Political
   Economy
------. 2020b. "The Labor Share, Displacement and Wage Inequality." Mimeo. Mas-
   sachusetts Institute of Technology.
Acemoglu, Daron, David Autor, Joe Hazell & Pascual Restrepo 2020. "AI and Jobs: Evi-
   dence from Online Vacancies." Mimeo. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Acemoglu, Daron, Andrea Manera & Pascual Restrepo. 2020. "Automation in Imperfect
   Labor Markets." Mimeo. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Atkinson, A. B. & J. E. Stiglitz. 1972. "The Structure of Indirect Taxation and Economic
   Efficiency." Journal of Public Economics 1 (1): 97­119.
Austin, Benjamin, Edward Glaeser & Lawrence Summers. 2018. "Jobs for the Heartland:
   Place-Based Policies in 21st-Century America." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
   151­232.
Autor, David H., David Dorn & Gordon H. Hanson. 2013. "The China Syndrome: Local
   Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States." American Economic

                                             44
   Review 103 (6): 2121­68.
Autor, David H. & Mark G. Duggan. 2003. "The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline
   in Unemployment." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (1): 157­206.
Autor, David H., Frank Levy & Richard J. Murnane. 2003. "The Skill Content of Recent
   Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration." The Quarterly Journal of Economics
   118 (4): 1279­1333.
Becker, Robert A. and John H. Boyd III. 1993. "Recursive Utility: Discrete Time Theory."
   Hitotsubashi Journal of Economics 34 (Special Issue): 49­98 .
Beffy, Magali, Denis Foug`
                         ere & Arnaud Maurel. 2012. "Choosing the Field of Study in Post-
   secondary Education Do Expected Earnings Matter?" Review of Economics & Statistics
   94 (1): 334­47.
Br¨
  ulhart, Marius, Jonathan Gruber, Matthias Krapf, and Kurt Schmidheiny. 2016. "Taxing
   Wealth: Evidence from Switzerland." w22376. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
   Economic Research.
Chamley, Christophe. 1986. "Optimal Taxation of Capital Income in General Equilibrium
   with Infinite Lives." Econometrica 54 (3): 607­22.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Guren, Day Manoli & Andrea Weber. 2011. "Are Micro and Macro Labor
   Supply Elasticities Consistent? A Review of Evidence on the Intensive and Extensive
   Margins." American Economic Review 101 (3): 471­75.
Congressional Budget Office. 2006. "Computing Effective Tax Rates on Capital Income."
   Publication 2624.
------. 2014. "Taxing Capital Income: Effective Marginal Tax Rates Under 2014 Law and
   Selected Policy Options." Publication 49817.
------. 2019. "Marginal Federal Tax Rates on Labor Income: 1962 to 2028." Publication
   54911.
Cooper, Michael, John McClelland, James Pearce, Richard Prisinzano, Joseph Sullivan,
   Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick. 2016. "Chapter 3: Business in the United
   States: Who Owns It, and How Much Tax Do They Pay?" In NBER/Tax Policy &
   the Economy (University of Chicago Press), 30:91­128. National Bureau of Economic
   Research (NBER).
Costinot, Arnaud & Iv´
                     an Werning. 2018. "Robots, Trade, and Luddism: A Sufficient
   Statistic Approach to Optimal Technology Regulation." Working Paper 25103. National
   Bureau of Economic Research.
Couch, Kenneth A & Dana W Placzek. 2010. "Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers
   Revisited." American Economic Review 100 (1): 572­89.


                                           45
Davis, Steven J., Till Von Wachter, Robert E. Hall & Richard Rogerson. 2011. "Recessions
   and the Costs of Job Loss." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1­72.
Diamond, Peter A. and James E. Mirrlees. 1971. "Optimal Taxation and Public Production
   I: Production Efficiency" American Economic Review 61 (1): 8­27.
Dur´
   an-Cabr´
          e, Jos´
                e M., Alejandro Esteller-Mor´
                                            e and Mariona Mas-Montserrat. 2019. "Be-
   havioural Responses to the (Re)Introduction of Wealth Taxes. Evidence From Spain".
   IEB Working Paper 2019/4. Institut d'Economia de Barcelona.
Edgerton, Jesse. 2010. "Investment Incentives and Corporate Tax Asymmetries" Journal of
   Public Economics 94 (11­12): 936­952.
Elsby, Michael W. L., Bart Hobijn & Ayseg¨
                                         ul S
                                            ¸ ahin. 2013. "The Decline of the U.S.Labor
   Share." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2013 (2): 1­63.
Garrett, Daniel G., Eric Ohrn & Juan Carlos Suarez Serrato. Forthcoming. "Tax Policy
   and Local Labor Market Behavior." American Economic Review: Insights.
Goldman, Dana, Neeraj Sood & Arleen Leibowitz. 2005. "Wage and Benefit Changes in
   Response to Rising Health Insurance Costs." Working Paper 11063. National Bureau of
   Economic Research.
Goolsbee, Austan. 1998. "Investment Tax Incentives, Prices, and the Supply of Capital
   Goods." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (1): 121­48.
Gruber, Jonathan & Alan B. Krueger. 1991. "The Incidence of Mandated Employer-
   Provided Insurance: Lessons from Workers' Compensation Insurance." In Tax Policy
   and the Economy, edited by David Bradford, 5:111­44. The MIT Press.
Guerreiro, Joao, Sergio Rebelo & Pedro Teles. 2017. "Should Robots Be Taxed?" Working
   Paper 23806. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hall, Robert E., and Dale W. Jorgenson. 1967. "Tax Policy and Investment Behavior." The
   American Economic Review 57 (3): 391­414.
Hassett, Kevin A. & R. Glenn Hubbard. 2002. "Chapter 20 - Tax Policy and Business
   Investment." In Handbook of Public Economics, edited by Alan J. Auerbach and Martin
   Feldstein, 3:1293­1343. Elsevier.
House, Christopher L & Matthew D Shapiro. 2008. "Temporary Investment Tax Incentives:
   Theory with Evidence from Bonus Depreciation." American Economic Review 98 (3):
   737­68.
Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J. LaLonde & Daniel G. Sullivan. 1993. "Earnings Losses of
   Displaced Workers." The American Economic Review 83 (4): 685­709.
Jakobsen, Katrine, Kristian Jakobsen, Henrik Kleven, and Gabriel Zucman. 2020. "Wealth
   Taxation and Wealth Accumulation: Theory and Evidence From Denmark." The Quar-


                                           46
   terly Journal of Economics 135 (1): 329­88.
Jensen, Robert. 2010. "The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for School-
   ing." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (2): 515­48.
Joulfaian, David. 2006. "The Behavioral Response of Wealth Accumulation to Estate Tax-
   ation: Time Series Evidence." National Tax Journal 59 (2): 253­68.
Judd, Kenneth L. 1985. "Redistributive Taxation in a Simple Perfect Foresight Model."
   Journal of Public Economics 28 (1): 59­83.
------. 1999. "Optimal Taxation and Spending in General Competitive Growth Models."
   Journal of Public Economics 71 (1): 1­26.
Karabarbounis, Loukas & Brent Neiman. 2014. "The Global Decline of the Labor Share."
   The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (1): 61­103.
Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen & Esben Anton Schultz. 2014. "Estimating Taxable Income Re-
   sponses Using Danish Tax Reforms." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6
   (4): 271­301.
Kopczuk, Wojciech & Joel Slemrod. 2000. "The Impact of the Estate Tax on the Wealth
   Accumulation and Avoidance Behavior of Donors." Working Paper 7960. National
   Bureau of Economic Research.
Kuka, Elira, Na'ama Shenhav & Kevin Shih. 2018. "Do Human Capital Decisions Respond
   to the Returns to Education? Evidence from DACA." Working Paper 24315. Cambridge,
   MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Lennon, Conor. 2019. "Are the Costs of Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance Passed on
   to Workers at the Individual Level?" Working Paper.
Mui, Preston and Benjamin Schoefer. 2019. "The Labor Supply Curve at the Extensive
   Margin: A Reservation Wedge Approach" Working Paper.
Oberfield, Ezra & Devesh Raval. 2014. "Micro Data and Macro Technology." Working Paper
   20452. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Smith, Matthew, Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar & Eric Zwick. 2019. "Capitalists in the Twenty-
   First Century." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (4): 1675­1745
Straub, Ludwig & Iv´
                   an Werning. 2020. "Positive Long-Run Capital Taxation: Chamley-
   Judd Revisited." American Economic Review 110 (1): 86­119.
Su´
  arez Serrato, Juan Carlos & Owen Zidar. 2016. "Who Benefits from State Corporate
   Tax Cuts? A Local Labor Markets Approach with Heterogeneous Firms." American
   Economic Review 106 (9): 2582­2624.
The U. S. Bureau of Economic. 2018. NIPA Handbook: Concepts and Methods of the U.S.
   National Income and Product Accounts.


                                           47
Thuemmel, Uwe. 2018. "Optimal Taxation of Robots." 7317. CESifo Working Paper Series.
   CESifo Group Munich.
Wiswall, M. & B. Zafar. 2015. "Determinants of College Major Choice: Identification Using
   an Information Experiment." The Review of Economic Studies 82 (2): 791­824.
Yagan, Danny. 2015. "Capital Tax Reform and the Real Economy: The Effects of the 2003
   Dividend Tax Cut." American Economic Review 105 (12): 3531­63.
Zeira, Joseph. 1998. "Workers, Machines, and Economic Growth." The Quarterly Journal
   of Economics 113 (4): 1091­1117.
Zoutman, Floris T. 2018. "The Elasticity of Taxable Wealth: Evidence from the Nether-
   lands." Working Paper.
Zwick, Eric & James Mahon. 2017. "Tax Policy and Heterogeneous Investment Behavior."
   American Economic Review 107 (1): 217­48.




                                           48
                                      Appendix:
        Does the US Tax Code Favor Automation?
              Acemoglu, Manera, Restrepo

  A.1    Robustness Checks and Additional Figures Discussed in the Main
                                               Text

This part of the Appendix presents the following additional results and robustness checks
discussed in the main text:

   · Figure A.1 provides the time-series of the total value of depreciation allowances by type
     of capital, j , and compares this to the allowance that would result from economic
     depreciation. Each figure presents a single average across the types of assets included
     in each category (software, equipment and non-residential structures).

   · Figure A.2 provides the time-series of the tax rates on capital income, corporate income
     and personal income, 1981-2018.

   · Figure A.3 presents the evolution of effective taxes on capital when all investment is
     financed with equity. For comparison, we also show the effective tax on labor.

   · In Table A.1 we assume that the wedge        only distorts the extensive margin of labor
     supply. This reduces employment and welfare gains, but they remain positive.

   · In Table A.2 we additionally include the implicit tax on labor implied by means-
     tested programs. With this higher effective tax on labor (equal to 33.5%), there are
     greater employment and welfare gains from moving towards optimal taxes and lower
     estimation.

   · Table A.3 considers the possibility that capital directly complements labor at labor-
     intensive tasks (see footnote 32). In particular, we assume that capital represents 20%
     of the value added in labor-intensive tasks that are not yet automated.

   · Table A.4 is the analogue of Table 1 when the effective tax on capital is based on full
     equity financing. This leads to somewhat lower employment and welfare gains from
     moving to optimal taxes.

   · Table A.5 presents a version of Table 1 when there is a 15% wedge for capital. This
     leads to employment and welfare gains that are approximately half as large as those
     in Table 1.

                                            A.1
· In Table A.6 we set  = 0, so that labor has an absolute disadvantage in tasks where it
  has a comparative advantage. In this case, employment and welfare gains are signifi-
  cantly larger.

· Table A.7 follows our extension in Section 5.1 by adding the endogenous response
  of human capital to the elasticity of labor supply. This leads to significantly larger
  employment and welfare gains from moving towards optimal taxes.

· In Table A.8 sets k = 1. This leads to employment and welfare gains that are about
  half as large as in our baseline in Table 1.




                                          A.2
Figure A.1: Estimated depreciation allowances over time for equipment,
software and non-residential structures.
Notes: See the text for definitions.



                                       A.3
Figure A.2: Average tax rates on capital income, corporate income and per-
sonal income, 1981-2018.
Notes: See the text for the definitions and sources.




Figure A.3: Effective tax rates on labor, software capital, equipment, and
non-residential structures with equity financing.
Notes: The alternative series for the effective tax rate on labor includes the phase out of means tested
programs. See the text for definitions and sources.




                                                       A.4
        Table A.1: Robustness: distortions at the extensive margin of labor supply

                                                                             Distorting       Distorting 
                             Current          Ramsey
                                                             Distorting          and              and
                             System           Solution
                                                                             changing  k      changing 
                                (1)              (2)              (3)            (4)              (5)
  Tax system:
  k                           10.00%          24.27%           10.00%            8.63%           10.00%
                              25.50%          19.24%           25.50%           25.50%           24.97%
                               0.276           0.266            0.268            0.267            0.266
  A                           0.00%            0.00%            8.37%           10.98%           11.18%

  Aggregates:
  Employment                     .            +3.50%           +0.95%           +1.35%           +1.69%
  Labor Share                 56.00%          56.66%           57.58%           58.06%           58.15%
  Net Output                     .            +0.47%           -0.06%           +0.17%           +0.22%
  C.E. welfare change            .             0.27%            0.06%            0.10%            0.12%
  Revenue                        .             0.00%           +1.17%           0.00%             0.00%
Notes: This table shows the effective capital and labor taxes, the level of automation and the automation
tax under different scenarios. It also presents the implied changes in employment, output, welfare, and
government revenue, and the level of labor share in national income. The first column is for the current
US tax system. The second column shows the unconstrained Ramsey solution. Column 3 considers the
implications of changing the level of automation,  via automation taxes (and no other change in policy).
Column 4 additionally allows a change in the effective tax on capital, and column 5 considers a change in
the effective tax on labor. Change in welfare is in terms of consumption equivalent. See the text for details.




                                                       A.5
Table A.2: Robustness: including the implicit tax on labor from means-tested and disability
programs.

                                                                             Distorting       Distorting 
                             Current          Ramsey
                                                             Distorting          and              and
                             System           Solution
                                                                             changing  k      changing 
                                (1)              (2)              (3)            (4)              (5)
  Tax system:
  k                           10.00%          31.20%           10.00%            6.44%           10.00%
                              33.50%          23.98%           33.50%           33.50%           32.15%
                               0.281           0.265            0.270            0.266            0.264
  A                           0.00%            0.00%           12.13%           17.01%           17.32%

  Aggregates:
  Employment                     .            +6.07%           +1.37%           +2.23%           +3.18%
  Labor Share                 56.00%          57.09%           58.36%           59.29%           59.51%
  Net Output                     .            +1.13%           -0.17%           +0.38%           +0.57%
  C.E. welfare change            .             0.81%            0.15%            0.28%            0.41%
  Revenue                        .             0.00%           +2.03%           0.00%             0.00%
Notes: This table shows the effective capital and labor taxes, the level of automation and the automation
tax under different scenarios. It also presents the implied changes in employment, output, welfare, and
government revenue, and the level of labor share in national income. The first column is for the current
US tax system. The second column shows the unconstrained Ramsey solution. Column 3 considers the
implications of changing the level of automation,  via automation taxes (and no other change in policy).
Column 4 additionally allows a change in the effective tax on capital, and column 5 considers a change in
the effective tax on labor. Change in welfare is in terms of consumption equivalent. See the text for details.




                                                       A.6
Table A.3: Robustness: allowing for within-task complementarities between capital and
labor.

                                                                             Distorting       Distorting 
                             Current          Ramsey
                                                             Distorting          and              and
                             System           Solution
                                                                             changing  k      changing 
                                (1)              (2)              (3)            (4)              (5)
  Tax system:
  k                           10.00%          26.65%           10.00%            9.28%           10.00%
                              25.50%          18.22%           25.50%           25.50%           25.27%
                               0.159           0.150            0.151            0.152            0.151
  A                           0.00%            0.00%            6.53%            6.35%            6.58%

  Aggregates:
  Employment                     .            +3.96%           +0.62%           +0.64%           +0.82%
  Labor Share                 55.98%          56.68%           57.01%           56.96%           57.02%
  Net Output                     .            +0.43%           -0.05%           +0.09%           +0.12%
  C.E. welfare change            .             0.41%            0.05%            0.07%            0.10%
  Revenue                        .             0.00%           +12.63%           0.00%            0.00%
Notes: This table shows the effective capital and labor taxes, the level of automation and the automation
tax under different scenarios. It also presents the implied changes in employment, output, welfare, and
government revenue, and the level of labor share in national income. The first column is for the current
US tax system. The second column shows the unconstrained Ramsey solution. Column 3 considers the
implications of changing the level of automation,  via automation taxes (and no other change in policy).
Column 4 additionally allows a change in the effective tax on capital, and column 5 considers a change in
the effective tax on labor. Change in welfare is in terms of consumption equivalent. See the text for details.




                                                       A.7
          Table A.4: Robustness: effective tax on capital for equity financing only

                                                                             Distorting       Distorting 
                             Current          Ramsey
                                                             Distorting          and              and
                             System           Solution
                                                                             changing  k      changing 
                                (1)              (2)              (3)            (4)              (5)
  Tax system:
  k                           12.00%          27.17%           12.00%           10.71%           12.00%
                              25.50%          18.88%           25.50%           25.50%           25.00%
                               0.276           0.266            0.268            0.266            0.265
  A                           0.00%            0.00%            9.48%           11.96%           12.07%

  Aggregates:
  Employment                     .            +3.64%           +1.07%           +1.46%           +1.76%
  Labor Share                 56.00%          56.71%           57.80%           58.26%           58.33%
  Net Output                     .            +0.35%           -0.08%           +0.13%           +0.16%
  C.E. welfare change            .             0.33%            0.08%            0.12%            0.15%
  Revenue                        .             0.00%           +1.10%           0.00%             0.00%
Notes: This table shows the effective capital and labor taxes, the level of automation and the automation
tax under different scenarios. It also presents the implied changes in employment, output, welfare, and
government revenue, and the level of labor share in national income. The first column is for the current
US tax system. The second column shows the unconstrained Ramsey solution. Column 3 considers the
implications of changing the level of automation,  via automation taxes (and no other change in policy).
Column 4 additionally allows a change in the effective tax on capital, and column 5 considers a change in
the effective tax on labor. Change in welfare is in terms of consumption equivalent. See the text for details.




                                                       A.8
                          Table A.5: Robustness: capital wedge of 15%

                                                                             Distorting       Distorting 
                             Current          Ramsey
                                                             Distorting          and              and
                             System           Solution
                                                                             changing  k      changing 
                                (1)              (2)              (3)            (4)              (5)
  Tax system:
  k                           10.00%          21.98%           10.00%            8.85%           10.00%
                              25.50%          20.23%           25.50%           25.50%           25.04%
                               0.272           0.264            0.267            0.265            0.264
  A                           0.00%            0.00%            5.59%            9.17%            9.36%

  Aggregates:
  Employment                     .            +2.98%           +0.63%           +1.12%           +1.42%
  Labor Share                 56.00%          56.53%           57.03%           57.69%           57.77%
  Net Output                     .            +0.47%           -0.01%           +0.17%           +0.22%
  C.E. welfare change            .             0.20%            0.03%            0.07%            0.09%
  Revenue                        .             0.00%           +0.79%            0.00%            0.00%
Notes: This table shows the effective capital and labor taxes, the level of automation and the automation
tax under different scenarios. It also presents the implied changes in employment, output, welfare, and
government revenue, and the level of labor share in national income. The first column is for the current
US tax system. The second column shows the unconstrained Ramsey solution. Column 3 considers the
implications of changing the level of automation,  via automation taxes (and no other change in policy).
Column 4 additionally allows a change in the effective tax on capital, and column 5 considers a change in
the effective tax on labor. Change in welfare is in terms of consumption equivalent. See the text for details.




                                                       A.9
   Table A.6: Robustness: labor has an absolute disadvantage at higher-indexed tasks

                                                                             Distorting       Distorting 
                             Current          Ramsey
                                                             Distorting          and              and
                             System           Solution
                                                                             changing  k      changing 
                                (1)              (2)              (3)            (4)              (5)
  Tax system:
  k                           10.00%          24.12%           10.00%            8.32%           10.00%
                              25.50%          14.98%           25.50%           25.50%           24.34%
                               0.637           0.618            0.622            0.619            0.617
  A                           0.00%            0.00%           12.72%           15.70%           15.89%

  Aggregates:
  Employment                     .            +7.30%           +2.23%           +2.89%           +3.76%
  Labor Share                 56.00%          57.96%           59.21%           59.91%           60.17%
  Net Output                     .            +0.62%           -0.17%           +0.23%           +0.31%
  C.E. welfare change            .             0.85%            0.22%            0.32%            0.43%
  Revenue                        .             0.00%           +2.50%           0.00%             0.00%
Notes: This table shows the effective capital and labor taxes, the level of automation and the automation
tax under different scenarios. It also presents the implied changes in employment, output, welfare, and
government revenue, and the level of labor share in national income. The first column is for the current
US tax system. The second column shows the unconstrained Ramsey solution. Column 3 considers the
implications of changing the level of automation,  via automation taxes (and no other change in policy).
Column 4 additionally allows a change in the effective tax on capital, and column 5 considers a change in
the effective tax on labor. Change in welfare is in terms of consumption equivalent. See the text for details.




                                                    A.10
                Table A.7: Robustness: accounting for human capital responses

                                                                             Distorting       Distorting 
                             Current          Ramsey
                                                             Distorting          and              and
                             System           Solution
                                                                             changing  k      changing 
                                (1)              (2)              (3)            (4)              (5)
  Tax system:
  k                           10.00%          29.21%           10.00%            7.72%           10.00%
                              25.50%          16.90%           25.50%           25.50%           24.63%
                               0.290           0.275            0.278            0.275            0.274
  A                           0.00%            0.00%           12.53%           15.39%           15.43%

  Aggregates:
  Employment                     .            +5.73%           +1.73%           +2.35%           +2.97%
  Labor Share                 56.00%          57.06%           58.52%           59.07%           59.18%
  Net Output                     .            +1.23%           +0.03%           +0.48%           +0.62%
  C.E. welfare change            .             0.59%            0.14%            0.23%            0.30%
  Revenue                        .             0.00%           +1.98%           0.00%             0.00%
Notes: This table shows the effective capital and labor taxes, the level of automation and the automation
tax under different scenarios. It also presents the implied changes in employment, output, welfare, and
government revenue, and the level of labor share in national income. The first column is for the current
US tax system. The second column shows the unconstrained Ramsey solution. Column 3 considers the
implications of changing the level of automation,  via automation taxes (and no other change in policy).
Column 4 additionally allows a change in the effective tax on capital, and column 5 considers a change in
the effective tax on labor. Change in welfare is in terms of consumption equivalent. See the text for details.




                                                    A.11
                               Table A.8: Robustness: setting           k   =1

                                                                             Distorting       Distorting 
                             Current          Ramsey
                                                             Distorting          and              and
                             System           Solution
                                                                             changing  k      changing 
                                (1)              (2)              (3)            (4)              (5)
  Tax system:
  k                           10.00%          20.83%           10.00%             9.16%          10.00%
                              25.50%          20.97%           25.50%            25.50%          25.19%
                               0.256           0.248            0.250             0.248           0.248
  A                           0.00%            0.00%            6.76%             9.09%           9.09%

  Aggregates:
  Employment                     .            +2.18%           +0.62%            +0.92%          +1.08%
  Labor Share                 56.00%          56.48%           57.23%            57.64%          57.68%
  Net Output                     .            -0.38%           -0.27%            -0.17%          -0.19%
  C.E. welfare change            .             0.18%            0.04%             0.07%           0.09%
  Revenue                        .             0.00%           +0.66%             0.00%           0.00%
Notes: This table shows the effective capital and labor taxes, the level of automation and the automation
tax under different scenarios. It also presents the implied changes in employment, output, welfare, and
government revenue, and the level of labor share in national income. The first column is for the current
US tax system. The second column shows the unconstrained Ramsey solution. Column 3 considers the
implications of changing the level of automation,  via automation taxes (and no other change in policy).
Column 4 additionally allows a change in the effective tax on capital, and column 5 considers a change in
the effective tax on labor. Change in welfare is in terms of consumption equivalent. See the text for details.




                                                    A.12
                 A.2     Derivations and Proofs for the Static Model

This part of the Appendix presents the proofs of the results stated in the text and some
additional results briefly mentioned in the text.

Characterization of the Equilibrium and the Ramsey Problem

The next lemma provides the characterization of the competitive equilibrium presented in
the text and is the basis of all subsequent proofs.

Lemma A.1 (Equilibrium characterization) Given a tax system ( k ,  ) and a labor
wedge , a market equilibrium is given by an allocation {k, } and a threshold task  such
that:

   · output y is given by f (k, ; ) in (2);

   ·  = m (k, ) maximizes f (k, ; );

   · the capital and labor market-clearing conditions, (4) and (5), are satisfied;

   · tax revenues are given by (6).

Proof of Lemma A.1. The unit cost of producing task x with labor is

                                                                       w
                                                p ( x) =                    ,
                                                                       ( x)

whereas the unit cost of producing task x with capital is

                                                                        R
                                                p k ( x) =                      .
                                                                       k ( x)

   Because the allocation of tasks to factors is cost-minimizing and because  (x)  k (x) is
(strictly) increasing, there exists a threshold  such that all tasks below the threshold are
produced with capital and those above it will be produced with labor.
   The demand for capital in the economy therefore comes from tasks x   and satisfies

                                       y (x)                   y  pk (x)-                             
        k=          k (x)dx =                 dx =                        dx = y  R-                      k (x)-1 dx,
             0                  0       k (x)           0         k (x)                           0


which can be rearranged as
                                                1                                         1
                                          y                        
                                                                                -1
                                                                                          
(A.1)                                  R=                              (x)
                                                                       k
                                                                                     dx       .
                                          k                    0


                                                            A.13
Moreover, this equation also implies
                                                            R = fk ,

where f (k, ; ) is given in (2). Next note that the supply of capital by households is given
by the Euler equation,
                                       u (y
                                          ¯ - k ) = 1 + (R -  )  (1 -  k ),

which, combined with R = fk , gives the capital market-clearing condition in (4).
   Similarly, the demand for labor comes from tasks x >  and is given by

                  1                1   y ( x)                  1   y  p (x)-                           1
           =          (x)dx =                 dx =                           dx = y  w-                     (x)-1 dx,
                                        ( x)                          ( x)                          


which can be rearranged as
                                                     1                                      1
                                                 y                 1
                                                                                -1
                                                                                            
(A.2)                                  w=                               (x)          dx         .
                                                               


This equation implies that
                                                            w=f .

where f (k, ; ) is given in (2). Moreover, the supply of labor by households is given by the
optimality condition for labor supply,

                                                    ( ) = w  (1 -  ),

which, combined with w = f , gives the labor market-clearing condition (5).
   We next prove that output is given by f (k, ; ). Since the final good is the numeraire,
the ideal price condition is

                                                                            1
                                1=               pk (x)1- dx +                  p (x)1- dx.
                                          0                              


Substituting task prices in terms of factor prices before taxes, this condition yields

                                                                                        1
                         1 = R1-                  k (x)-1 dx + w1-                           (x)-1 dx.
                                         0                                           


Replacing the expressions for R and w from equations (A.1) and (A.2), we obtain the ideal
price condition in terms of output, capital, labor, the level of automation and the production




                                                               A.14
parameters:
                        1-                                1             1-                                          1
                  y                                                y                       1
                                               -1                                                        -1
                                                                                                                    
               1=                        (x)
                                         k
                                                    dx        +                                 ( x)          dx        .
                  k              0                                                      


Solving for y in this equation gives y = f (k, ; ) as in (2).
   We now turn to the determination of . Because task allocations are cost-minimizing,
the thresholds task  satisfies

                                      w     R  w  ( )
                                         = k    = k   .
                                      (x)  (x) R  ( )

Since R = fk and w = f , we can rewrite this as

                                                f   ( )
(A.3)                                             = k   .
                                                fk  ()

This equation has a unique solution m (k, ). Uniqueness is a consequence of the fact that
the right-hand side is continuous and increasing in  (by assumption). The left-hand side,
on the other hand, can be written as
                                                                                 1

                                        f  k   (x)-1 dx 
                                                     1     

                                          =                 ,
                                        fk     k (x)-1 dx 
                                             0


and is thus decreasing in . This implies that a solution m (k, ) always exists in view of the
fact that the left-hand side goes from  (at  = 0) to 0 (at  = 1).
   We now show that m (k, ) maximizes f (k, ; ). An infinitesimal change in  leads to a
change in output of

                                                                   1-                           1-
                                     y  f                                 fk                         
(A.4)                  f (k, ; ) =                                      -                             .
                                   1 -    ( )                              ()
                                                                          k
                                                                                                     

This expression follows by totally differentiating (2), which yields
                                                                                                          1-
                             1                                               1
                                ()-1  y                                                        -1
                                        1                     -1                                           
                f (k, ; ) =                                                       (x)               dx
                            1-                                           
                                                                                                               1-
                                   1                                                 
                                      k ()-1  y   k                                                 -1
                                                1  -1                                                           
                                -                                                        ( x)
                                                                                           k
                                                                                                         dx         .
                                  1-                                             0




                                                         A.15
Regrouping terms yields
                                                             1-                                            1-
             y        y               1                                       y                                 
                ()-1                               -1                   -1                       -1
                                                                                                            
f (k, ; ) =                                (x)          dx        -  ()
                                                                    k
                                                                                           (x)
                                                                                           k
                                                                                                      dx         .
            1-                                                                k    0                            

Equation (A.4) follows after substituting in the formulae for fk and f in place of the terms
in the inner parentheses.
   Equation (A.4) further implies f  0 to the left of m (k, ), since in this region we have

                                           f   ( )
                                             > k   .
                                           fk  ()

Moreover, f < 0 the right of m (k, ), since in this region we have

                                           f   ( )
                                             < k   .
                                           fk  ()

Thus, f (k, , ) is single-peaked with a unique maximum at m (k, ).
   Finally, we compute equilibrium tax revenues. Capital taxes, which raise revenue from
tasks below , generate total revenue:

                                               
             Revenue from capital =                k  (R -  )  k (x)dx =  k  (fk -  )  k,
                                           0


where we used the fact that R = fk (from equation (A.1)). Likewise, labor taxes raise revenue
from tasks above  and thus:
                                                        
                     Revenue from labor =                    w  (x)dx =   f  ,
                                                    0


where we used the fact that w = f (from equation (A.2)).
   The next lemma is straightforward but will be used repeatedly in our proofs.

Lemma A.2 The production function f (k, ; m (k, )) exhibits constant returns to scale and
is concave in k and .

Proof. We first show that f (k, ; m (k, )) exhibits constant returns to scale. Because
f (k, ; ) exhibits constant returns to scale in k and              (which is immediate from (2)), it is
sufficient to prove that m (k, ) is homogeneous of degree zero. Equation (A.3) implies that




                                                   A.16
m (k, ) is the unique solution to
                                                                          1

                                      k   (x)-1 dx    ()
                                            1
                                                     = k   ,
                                      0  k (x)-1 dx    ( )

which establishes that m (k, ) only depends on k                              and is thus homogeneous of degree zero.
   Since f (k, ; m (k, )) exhibits constant returns to scale in k and , it is concave if and only
if it is quasi-concave in k and . Note that h(k, ) = f (k, ; m (k, )) solves the optimization
problem:
                                                                              
                                                    1           -1            -1
(A.5)      f (k, ;  (k, )) =
                  m
                                 max                    y (x)        dx            ,
                               k(x), (x)0       0
                                                                                            1                          1
                subject to: y (x) =  k (x)k (x) +  (x) (x),                                     k (x)dx = k,               (x)dx = .
                                                                                        0                          0


   Suppose that h(k1 , 1 )  b and h(k2 , 2 )  b, and denote by {k1 (x), 1 (x), y1 (x)} and
{k2 (x), 2 (x), y2 (x)} the solution to (A.5) for {k1 , 1 } and {k2 , 2 }, respectively. Consider
the problem in (A.5) for {k1 + (1 - )k2 ,  1 + (1 - ) 2 } for some   [0, 1]. The allocation
{k1 (x) + (1 - )k2 (x),  1 (x) + (1 - ) 2 (x), y1 (x) + (1 - )y2 (x)} satisfies the constraints
in (A.5). Therefore,
                                                                                                                             
                                                                     1                                           -1          -1
        h(k1 + (1 - )k2 ,        1   + (1 -  ) 2 )                       (y1 (x) + (1 - )y2 (x))                       dx         .
                                                                 0


Using the concavity of the constant elasticity of substitution function on the right-hand side
of the above equation, we get
                                                                                                                                      
                                                        1            -1            -1                        1              -1        -1
h(k1 + (1 - )k2 ,  1 + (1 - ) 2 )                           y1 (x)            dx        + (1 -  )                y2 (x)          dx         b.
                                                    0                                                    0


It follows that h(k, ) = f (k, ; m (k, )) is quasi-concave in k and                                    and hence concave in k
and , completing the proof.

Main Proofs

In this section of the Appendix, we provide the proofs of the main results stated in the
text. Before presenting the proofs of the results in the text, we provide a derivation of the
Implementability Condition (IC) in (7). Exploiting the fact that f has constant returns to




                                                            A.17
scale, we can rewrite the government budget constraint as follows

             g  k  ( f k -  )  k +   f 
              =f (k, ; ) + (1 -  )  k - (1 + (1 -  k )  (fk -  ))  k - (1 -  )  f  .

Using the capital and labor market-clearing condition in equations (4) and (5), we can
substitute out the terms 1 + (1 -  k )  (fk -  ) and (1 -  )  f , which gives

                                                                      ( ) 
                        g  f (k, ; ) + (1 -  )  k - u (y
                                                       ¯ - k)  k -         ,
                                                                      1-

which is the Implementability Condition used in the main text.
   We next present the proofs of our main results.
Proof of Proposition 1.           We start by solving for the optimal allocation. The utility of
the representative household is given by

            utility = u(c0 ) + c -  ( ) = f (k, ; ) + (1 -  )  k + u(y
                                                                     ¯ - k ) -  ( ) - g.

The Ramsey problem can therefore be written as

                                maxf (k, ; ) + (1 -  )  k + u(y
                                                              ¯ - k) -  ( )
                                k, ,
                                                                           ( ) 
                 subject to: g f (k, ; ) + (1 -  )  k - u (y
                                                           ¯ - k)  k -          .
                                                                           1-

   Both the objective function and the right-hand side of the constraint are increasing in .
Thus, the optimal choice of  maximizes f (k, ; ), and this implies that  = m (k, ), where
f (k, ; m (k, )) = 0, as claimed in the proposition.
   With this choice, the problem becomes

                         maxf (k, ; m (k, )) + (1 -  )  k + u(y
                                                              ¯ - k) -  ( )
                           k,
                                                                                ( ) 
             subject to: g f (k, ; m (k, )) + (1 -  )  k - u (y
                                                              ¯ - k)  k -            .
                                                                                1-

   We next prove that the objective function is concave and the constraint set is convex.
   The concavity of the objective function follows from Lemma A.2 and the fact that u(y
                                                                                      ¯- k )
and  ( ) are convex in k and , respectively. The constraint defines a convex set since Lemma
A.2 implies that f (k, ; m (k, )) is concave and we assumed that u (y
                                                                    ¯ - k )  k and   ( ) 
are convex functions.


                                                 A.18
                    Figure A.4: Illustration of optimal policy problem.


   Thus, the Ramsey problem is equivalent to the maximization of a concave function over
a convex set. This implies that for any g > 0, the optimum is unique and yields some utility
W . Figure A.4 illustrates this optimum. The figure plots the set of points that satisfies
the IC constraint--the points within the iso-revenue curve for g --and further identifies the
set of points that yield higher utility than the optimal allocation, which are those inside
this contour set of W . The optimal allocation is given by the tangency point between the
iso-revenue curve and the contour sets of W .
   At this point, the marginal utility per unit of revenue loss from an increase in k (denoted
by U k (k, )) equals the marginal utility per unit of revenue loss from a increase in (denoted
by U (k, )), and both are equal to the multiplier µ, which denotes the marginal utility per
unit of additional revenue. These marginal utilities can be computed as

                           utility    revenue         fk -  - u (y ¯ - k) + 1
          U k (k, ) = -                       =                                        ,
                            k           k      -u (y
                                                   ¯ - k )  k + u (y
                                                                   ¯ - k ) - 1 - fk + 
                           utility    revenue      f -  ( )
           U (k, ) = -                        =                .
                                                ( )     ( )
                                                     +      -f
                                                1-      1-

   The optimum allocation is given by the unique set of points along the iso-revenue curve



                                                A.19
for g for which
                                      U k (k, ) = U (k, ) = µ.

   We next prove that this unique optimal allocation can be implemented using the taxes
in (8). Starting from U k (k, ) = µ, we obtain

                                          fk -  - u (y  ¯ - k) + 1
                    U k (k, ) =                     
                                                                             = µ.
                                  -u (y
                                      ¯ - k )  k + u (y
                                                      ¯ - k ) - (fk + 1 -  )

Dividing the numerator and denominator on the left-hand side by u (y
                                                                   ¯ - k ) - 1 (which is
positive by assumption) and using (4) to substitute out for fk -  , yields

                                     k          1       k
                                                     -       = µ,
                                   1 - k      k ( k ) 1 -  k

which can be rearranged to obtain the formula for  k (1 -  k ) in (8).
   Likewise, starting from U (k, ) = µ, we obtain

                                                f -  ( )
                             U (k, ) =                      = µ.
                                             ( )     ( )
                                                  +      -f
                                           1-        1-

Dividing the numerator and denominator on the left-hand side by   ( ) (1 - ) and using
(5) to substitute out for f , we obtain

                                                   1    
                                     +                -           = µ,
                                  1-               ( ) 1-

which gives the formula for  (1 -  ) in (8).
Proof of Corollary 1. Obtained by substituting k (k ) =  ( ) and                = 0 in (8).
Proof of Corollary 2.         First, note that the function U k (k, ) is decreasing in k and
increasing in . This follows from our assumptions that u (y
                                                          ¯ - k )  k is convex (which implies
that -u (y
         ¯ - k )  k + u (y
                         ¯ - k ) is increasing in k ) and u is a concave function (which implies
that u (y
        ¯ - k ) is increasing in k ), and the fact that Lemma A.2 implies that fk is decreasing
in k and increasing in .
   Likewise, the function U (k, ) is increasing in k and decreasing in . This follows from
our assumptions that   ( )  is convex (which implies that   ( ) +   ( )  is increasing in
 ) and  is a convex function (which implies that   ( ) is increasing in ), and the fact that
Lemma A.2 implies that f is decreasing in          and increasing in k .


                                                A.20
   Consider a suboptimal tax system { k ,  } implementing an allocation along the iso-
revenue curve for g in Figure A.4. There are three possibilities for this allocation. This
allocation is either in the segment between the optimum and the peak of the Laffer curve
for  (point A in Figure A.4); or between the optimum and the peak of the Laffer curve for
 k (point B in Figure A.4); or it is beyond the peak of the Laffer curve (meaning that k and
 are both too low, and both taxes are too high and they can both be decreased to increase
revenue). The corollary assumes that the tax system is not beyond the peak of the Laffer
curve.
   At point A, capital is above the optimum and employment is below the optimum. There-
fore,
                                   U (k, ) > µ > U k (k, ),

where µ is the Lagrange multiplier at the optimum allocation. The inequality U (k, ) >
U k (k, ) implies

                    f -  ( )              fk + 1 -  - u (y ¯ - k)
                          
                                >                   
                                                                             .
                 ( )    ( )       -u (y
                                      ¯ - k )  k + u (y
                                                      ¯ - k ) - (fk + 1 -  )
                      +      -f
                1-       1-

Dividing the numerator and the denominator on the left-hand side by   ( ) (1 - ), and
the numerator and the denominator on the right-hand side by u (y
                                                               ¯ - k ) - 1, and using the
definition of  ( ) and k (k ) yields (9).
   Finally, we prove that  k and  satisfy  >          ,r   and  k,r >  k . In particular, observe that
the market-clearing condition for capital is

                                               u (y
                                                  ¯ - k) - 1
                                    1 - k =                  .
                                                  fk - 

The numerator on the right-hand side increases with k , and the denominator decreases in
k and increases in    (this is due to the concavity of f by Lemma A.2 and the fact that f
exhibits constant returns to scale). Thus, the right-hand side of this equation increases as we
move from the optimal allocation to the current allocation, which implies  k,r >  k . Likewise,

                                                    ( )
                                      1- =                .
                                                (1 - )  f

The numerator on the right-hand side increases with , and the denominator decreases in
  and increases in k (this is due to the concavity of f by Lemma A.2 and the fact that f
exhibits constant returns to scale). Therefore, the right-hand side of this equation decreases


                                               A.21
as we move from the optimal allocation to the current one, which implies                                      ,r   < .
   Conversely, the same argument implies that at point B the opposite of (9) holds and
thus in this region        ,r   >  and  k,r <  k . Hence, this region is ruled out by (9).
   Therefore, (9) is a necessary and sufficient condition for the tax system to be biased
against labor and in favor of capital (and to lead to an equilibrium with employment below
the optimum and the capital stock above the optimum).
Proof of Proposition 2. We can write the equilibrium quantities of capital and labor as
k () and (), which are implicitly determined by (4) and (5).
   Differentiating (4) and (5), we obtain that after an infinitesimal change in , the change
in employment and capital are given by the solution to the system of equations:

                       u (y
                          ¯ - k)                                           ( )
     -fk         + -             - fkk  k =fk                                       -f                     - f k  k =f  ,
                        1 - k                                       (1 - )  (1 -  )

which has a unique solution given by

                                                f   - u 1( ¯-k)
                                                            
                                                          y
                                                         - k
                                                                - fkk + fk  f k
                                   =           ( )
                                                                - u 1( ¯-k)
                                
                                                       -f             y
                                                                            - fkk - fk  f k
                                                                      

                                          (1- )(1- )                 - k
                                                            ( )
                                               fk      (1- )(1- )
                                                                      -f    + f   fk
                               k =             ( )
                                                       -f       - u 1(y¯-k)
                                                                            - fkk - fk  f k
                                                                      

                                          (1- )(1- )                 - k


   Note that f (k, ; ) has constant returns to scale in k and . Moreover, at  = m (k, ),
we have f = 0. The Euler theorem implies that kfk + f = 0. Then fk > 0 > f . A
second application of Euler's theorem yields kfkk + fk = 0; and a third application gives
kf k + f = 0. It follows that, at  = m (k, ), the following identities hold

              f   fkk =fk  f k                         fk  f =f   fk                     f  fkk =fk  f k .

   Using these identities, we can simplify the formulae for                            and k above as

                                                                                         ( )
                            -f  u 1( ¯-k)
                                                                                        
                                                                                 fk (1- )(
                                    y  

                                   - k                                                     1-   )
                          =               <0                               k =                         > 0,
                                                                                       
                ( )        u (y
                              ¯-k)            ( )
                                                     + f u 1( ¯-k)
                                                           y
where  = - (1- )(1 -       )1- k
                                   - fkk (1- )(1 - )        - k
                                                                   > 0. This establishes                      that reducing 
on the margin below        m (k, ) will always result in an increase in employment                            and a reduction
in capital.
   To complete the proof of the proposition, note that welfare (inclusive of the value of


                                                               A.22
public funds) is given by

                  W =f (k, ; ) + (1 -  )k + u(y
                                              ¯ - k) -  ( )
                                                                           ( ) 
                      + µ  f (k, ; ) + (1 -  )k - u (y
                                                     ¯ - k)  k -                  ,
                                                                           1-

where µ denotes the Lagrange multiplier at the optimum allocation. Therefore, following
an infinitesimal change in , welfare changes by

                            dW
                               =W           + Wk  k + (1 + µ )  f ,
                             d

where W and Wk denote the changes in welfare arising from improvements in allocative
efficiency and (1 + µ )  f accounts for changes in productive efficiency.
   Suppose that the current tax system satisfies (9). Corollary 2 implies that U (k, ) > µ >
U k (k, )--that is, employment is too low and capital too high. It follows that

                         ( )     ( )
 W =f -   ( ) + µ             +      -f        > 0  U (k, ) > µ
                       1-       1-
 Wk =fk -  - u (y
                ¯ - k ) + 1 + µ  (-u (y
                                      ¯ - k )  k + u (y
                                                      ¯ - k ) - 1 - fk +  ) < 0  U (k, ) < µ ,

so that welfare increases as employment increases and capital is reduced.
   Moreover, starting from  = m (k, ), we have f = 0,              > 0 and k > 0. Therefore,

                                            dW
                                               < 0,
                                             d

and welfare (inclusive of the value of public funds) increases following an infinitesimal re-
duction in .
   We now turn to the implications of a reduction in  for output and for revenue. The
change in net output at m (k, ) is

                             d net output
                                          =f            + (fk -  )  k ,
                                  d

which can be written as

               d net output    f  (fk -  )  fk  u (y¯ - k )  k   ( ) 
                            =-                 -              -                       .
                    d                           u (y
                                                   ¯ - k) - 1   ( )

Thus, an infinitesimal reduction in  will also expand net output provided that  ( ) > k (k ),
as claimed in the proposition.

                                              A.23
   Finally, the change in revenue near m (k, ) is

      d revenue         ( )   ( ) 
                = f -      -                                 + (fk -  - u (y
                                                                           ¯ - k ) + 1 + u (y
                                                                                            ¯ - k )  k )  k ,
          d           1-     1-

which can be written as

               d revenue   ( )  (u (y
                                    ¯ - k ) - 1)  fk  k  (1 + k ) -   (1 +  )
                        =                            k                        .
                   d              (1 - )                 (1 -  k )  (1 -  )

Thus, an infinitesimal reduction in  will also expand revenue if   (1 +  ( )) >  k  (1 + k (k )),
as claimed (recall that u (y
                           ¯ - k ) > 1 by assumption).
Proof of Proposition 3. The constrained Ramsey problem can be written as

                          maxf (k, ; ) + (1 -  )  k + u(y
                                                        ¯ - k) -  ( )
                             k, ,
                                                                                         ( ) 
                  subject to: g  f (k, ; ) + (1 -  )  k - u (y
                                                             ¯ - k)  k -
                                                                                         1-
                                      ( )   (1 - ¯ )  (1 - )  f  .

   Let µ > 0 and   0 denote the multipliers on the IC constraint and the constraint on
labor taxes, respectively. We assume throughout that the constraint on labor taxes binds,
so that  > 0.
   The first-order condition with respect to capital is given by

fk -  - u (y
           ¯ - k ) + 1 - µ  (-u (y
                                 ¯ - k )  k + u (y
                                                 ¯ - k ) - 1 - fk +  ) +   (1 - ¯ )  (1 - )  f k  = 0.

Dividing by u (y
               ¯ - k ) - 1, using the capital market-clearing condition (4) to substitute for
fk -  , and rearranging yields (11).
   Note next that the choice of c maximizes the Lagrangean of the constrained Ramsey
problem. Thus, we have

               c = arg max(1 + µ)  f (k, ; ) +   (1 - ¯ )  (1 - )  f (k, ; )  .
                     [0,1]


Denote by g () the right-hand of this equation. We now show that g () is strictly decreasing
for   m (k, ). To prove this, note that

                                     1
                                       -1         1
                                                                       1                 1
                                                                                           -1         1
                                                                                                                        1
            1         1 y                                    -1             1       y
                                                                           -  ()-1                            -1
                                                                                                                        
f  (k, ; ) = f (k, ; )                                 ( x)       dx                                       ( x)    dx       ,
                                                                                                   




                                                             A.24
which is negative for   m (k, ). Moreover, f (k, ; ) is zero at m (k, ) and negative for
all  > m (k, ). Therefore, g () is strictly decreasing for   m (k, ) (note that if we did
not have  > 0, g () could not be strictly decreasing at m (k, )).
   Finally, because g () is strictly decreasing for   m (k, ), we must have c < m (k, ) as
claimed.
Proof of Proposition 4. See next section.

Additional Results

The next proposition provides four alternative ways of implementing the desired level of au-
tomation via taxes and subsidies, and the first of these is the scheme presented in Proposition
4 in the text.

Proposition A.1 (Implementation of a reduction in  via task-specific taxes
and subsidies) Consider any allocation {kp , p , p } that satisfies the implementability con-
dition, and where p  m (kp , p ). Let  k and  be given by

                             u (y
                                ¯ - k) - 1                                   ( )
                   1 - k =                                     1- =                .
                                fk -                                     (1 - )  f

Moreover, define
                                                      fk  (p )
                                     A,gross = 1 -               0,
                                                      f  k (p )
and define  A  0 implicitly as

                                      1               r     1 - k
                                                =                  + .
                                 1 -  A,gross       r +  1 - k - A

   The allocation {k, , } can be implemented in any of the following ways:

  1. A uniform tax  on labor and the following tax schedule ("automation tax") on capital:

                                                
                                                    k   for x  p
                                      k ( x) = 
                                                 k +  A for x > p
                                               

  2. A uniform tax  on labor, a uniform tax  k on net capital income, and a gross au-
      tomation tax  A,gross on the use of capital at tasks x > p .

  3. A uniform tax  on labor, a uniform net tax  k +  A on capital, and a subsidy of  A,gross
      to tasks below p .

                                                    A.25
                               1-
  4. A uniform tax/subsidy     1- A
                                      on labor, a uniform tax  k on capital, and a tax  A,gross
      on the output of tasks above p .

Proof. Consider the first implementation. We show that these taxes generate a competitive
equilibrium with factor prices R = fk (kp , p ; p ) and w = f (kp , p ; p ), and where all tasks
below p are produced by capital.
   Take the factor prices R = fk (kp , p ; p ) and w = f (kp , p ; p ) as given. The unit cost of
producing task x with labor is
                                                       w
                                         p ( x) =           ,
                                                       ( x)
whereas the unit cost of producing task x with capital is

                                                      R ( x)
                                         p k ( x) =           ,
                                                       k ( x)

where R(x) is the pre-tax rental rate paid for the use of capital in task x. Because after-tax
net returns must be equal across tasks, we have

                          (R(x) -  )(1 -  k (x)) = (R -  )  (1 -  k )

for all x. The definitions of  k (x) and  A then imply

                                                R             if x  p
                                     
                              R(x) = 
                                              R
                                                              if x > p ,
                                          1 -  A,gross

and the unit cost of producing task x with capital becomes

                                             R
                                                                    if x  p
                                           (x)
                                            k
                                    
                         p k ( x) = 
                                    
                                             R
                                                                   if x > p .
                                      (x)  (1 - 
                                     k           A,gross )



   Because p < m (kp , p ), we have that for all all tasks x  [0, p ]:

                                       (x)  (m ) f
                                            <       = ,
                                       k (x)  k (m ) fk




                                                A.26
which implies

                                                     fk           f
                                        pk (x) =              <        = p (x),
                                                      (x)
                                                     k             (x)

and all these tasks are produced by capital.
   On the other hand, for all tasks x  (p , 1], we have

                                                          f   (p )  (x)
                                       (1 -  A,gross )      = k   <       ,
                                                          fk  (p )  k (x)

which implies
                                            f           fk
                                 p ( x) =       < k                    = pk (x),
                                             (x)  (x)  (1 -  A,gross )
and all these tasks are produced by labor.
   We now compute the market-clearing conditions and show that markets clear at the
stipulated factor prices. The market-clearing condition for capital is

                             p                      p   pk (x)-                         p
                k=               k (x)dx = y                    dx = y  R-                   k (x)-1 dx,
                         0                      0         (x)
                                                           k                        0


which holds with equality when R = fk .
   Likewise, the market-clearing condition for labor is

                             1                      1   p (x)-                      1
                     =            (x)dx = y                      dx = y  w-              (x)-1 dx,
                             p                   p        k ( x)                    p


which holds with equality when w = f .
   Finally, note that revenue remains as in equation (6) since capital is not used in tasks
where it is subject to the higher automation tax.
   The argument for the second implementation strategy is essentially identical, but with
the difference that the gross tax on the use of capital directly implies that

                                                            R          if x  p
                                              
                                       R(x) = 
                                                            R
                                                                       if x > p ,
                                                        1 -  A,gross

   We now turn to the third implementation strategy. The definition of  A implies that the




                                                            A.27
pre-tax gross return required by households is given by

                                                     u (y
                                                        ¯-kp )-1
                                                        1- k
                                                                 +
                                                R=                 ;
                                                      1 -  A,gross

whereas the pre-tax wage required by households is given by

                                                         ( p)
                                              w=                   .
                                                   (1 - )  (1 -  )

The definition of  k implies
                                                          fk
                                                 R=                ;
                                                      1 -  A,gross
and the definition of  implies w = f .
   We next show that at these factor prices, all tasks below p are produced by capital and
all tasks above p are produced by labor. For x  p we have

                                    (x)  (p ) f  (1 -  A,gross )
                                                  =              ,
                                    k (x)  k (p )    fk

which implies
                                                  fk             f
                            p k ( x) =                                = p (x),
                                          k (x)  (1 -  A,gross )  (x)
and all these tasks are produced by capital.
   On the other hand, for all tasks x  (p , 1], we have

                                    (x)  (p ) f  (1 -  A,gross )
                                         >        =              ,
                                    k (x)  k (p )    fk

which implies

                                         f           fk
                            p ( x) =         < k                    = pk (x),
                                          (x)  (x)  (1 -  A,gross )

and all these tasks are produced by labor.
   We now show that markets clear for R =                      fk
                                                            1- A,gross
                                                                         and w = f . The market-clearing
condition for capital is

                p                      p   ((1 -  A,gross )  pk (x))-          -
                                                                                        p
       k=           k (x)dx = y                                       dx = y  fk             k (x)-1 dx,
            0                      0                 k (x)                          0


which holds with equality. Note that here we used the fact that all tasks below p receive a



                                                       A.28
subsidy of  A,gross . Likewise, the market-clearing condition for labor is

                         1                   1   p (x)-                   1
                   =         (x)dx = y                  dx = y  f -            k (x)-1 dx,
                       p                   p       (x)                    p


which holds with equality.
   Finally, note that revenue remains as in equation (6) since the tax  A on capital raises
revenue  A,gross fk  k , but this coincides with the cost of subsidizing all tasks below p at a
rate  A,gross , since the total value of these tasks is fk  k .
   We conclude with the fourth implementation strategy. The pre-tax gross return required
by households is given by
                                                 u (y
                                                    ¯ - kp ) - 1
                                          R=                     + ;
                                                     1 - k
whereas the pre-tax wage required by households is given by

                                               ( p )  (1 -  A,gross )
                                        w=                            .
                                               (1 - )  (1 -  )

The definition of  k yields R = fk , and from the definition of  we have

                                          w = f  (1 -  A,gross ).

   We now show that at these factor prices, all tasks below p are produced by capital and
all tasks above p are produced by labor. For x  p we have

                                  (x)  (p ) f  (1 -  A,gross )
                                                =              ,
                                  k (x)  k (p )    fk

which implies

                                         fk     f  (1 -  A,gross )
                             pk (x) =                              = p (x),
                                         k (x)       (x)

and all these tasks are produced by capital.
   For all tasks x  (p , 1], we have

                                  (x)  (p ) f  (1 -  A,gross )
                                       >        =              ,
                                  k (x)  k (p )    fk

which implies
                                        f  (1 -  A,gross )   fk
                             p ( x) =                      < k   = pk (x),
                                             (x)             (x)


                                                     A.29
and all these tasks are produced by labor.
    We now show that markets clear for R = fk and w = f  (1 -  ). The market-clearing
condition for capital is

                             p                      p   pk (x)-          -
                                                                                   p
                 k=              k (x)dx = y                    dx = y  fk              k (x)-1 dx,
                         0                      0         k (x)                0


which holds with equality. Likewise, the market-clearing condition for labor is

                 1                      1   (p (x) (1 -  A,gross ))-                       1
            =        (x)dx = y                                       dx = y  f -                k (x)-1 dx,
                p                      p             (x)                                  p


which holds with equality. Note that here we used the fact that all tasks above p are taxed
at the rate  A,gross .
    Finally, note that revenue remains as in equation (6) since the subsidy  A,gross on labor
costs  A,gross f  , but this coincides with the taxes raised on the production of all tasks above
p (since the total value of these tasks is f  ).
    The next proposition presents the analogue to Proposition 3, where there is an upper
bound on capital taxes (rather than a lower bound on labor taxes).
Proposition A.2 (Excessive automation when capital taxes are constrained)
Consider the constrained Ramsey problem of maximizing (7) subject to the additional con-
straint  k  ¯k , which is equivalent to

(A.6)                                   u (y
                                           ¯ - k ) - 1  (1 - ¯k )  (fk -  ),

and suppose that in the solution to this problem (A.6) binds and has multiplier  k  k > 0.
Suppose also that this multiplier satisfies

                                                1 + µ >  k  (1 - ¯k ),

so that an increase in capital income holding labor income constant is socially beneficial (see
the proof ).
    Then the constrained optimal taxes and allocation are given by
    · a capital tax of  k,c = ¯k and a tax/subsidy on labor               ,c   that satisfies

                        ,c       µ  1        k                     fk  k
        (A.7)                 =        -   +     (1 - ¯k )  (1 - )       ,
                      1-   ,c   1+µ ( ) 1+µ 1+µ                    ( )

    · a level of automation c < m (k, ).

                                                           A.30
   Moreover, the level of automation c can be implemented through an extra subsidy to labor
and a tax of the same magnitude on the output of tasks above c (so that capital taxes still
remain no greater than ¯k ).

Proof. The constrained Ramsey problem can be written as

                           maxf (k, ; ) + (1 -  )  k + u(y
                                                         ¯ - k) -  ( )
                            k, ,
                                                                                   ( ) 
                   subject to: g  f (k, ; ) + (1 -  )  k - u (y
                                                              ¯ - k)  k -
                                                                                   1-
                                   (1 + (1 - ¯k )  (fk -  ))  k  u (y
                                                                    ¯ - k )  k.

   Let µ > 0 and  k  0 denote the multipliers on the IC constraint and the constraint on
labor taxes, respectively. We assume throughout that the constraint on capital taxes binds,
so that  k > 0.
   The first-order condition with respect to labor is given by

                                       ( )     ( )
                  f -  ( ) - µ              +      -f        -  k  (1 - ¯k )  fk  k = 0.
                                      1-      1-

Dividing by   ( ) (1 - ), using the labor market-clearing condition (5) to substitute for f ,
and rearranging yields (A.7).
   Note next that the choice of c maximizes the Lagrangean of the constrained Ramsey
problem. Therefore,

                    c = arg max(1 + µ)  f (k, ; ) -  k  (1 - ¯k )  fk (k, ; )  k.
                           [0,1]


   Using the fact that f has constant returns to scale, we can rewrite this maximization
problem as

           c = arg max 1 + µ -  k  (1 - ¯k )  f (k, ; ) +  k  (1 - ¯k )  f (k, ; )  .
                   [0,1]


   Since, by assumption, 1 + µ -  k  (1 - ¯k ) > 0, the argument outlined in the proof of
Proposition 3 can be applied to prove that the objective is strictly decreasing in  for  
m (k, ), so that c < m (k, ). (Note that the inequality 1 + µ -  k  (1 - ¯k )  0 implies that
welfare would decline if capital income increased and labor income remained constant--i.e.,
an increase in f leaving f  constant. Alternatively, our assumption implies that distortions
are not too large, so that increases in income always raise welfare.)


                                                    A.31
   The fact that this allocation can be implemented via a subsidy to labor and a tax on the
production of tasks above c follows from Proposition A.1.

Proofs of Extension Propositions in Section 5

Proof of Proposition 5. Define

                                        1 +1 
                                             h1+1 
                                                         h

                    h ( h ) = min        +         subject to: h                  h
                               ,h 1 + 1    1 + 1 h

as the disutility of supplying    h   efficiency units of labor.
   The solution to this minimization problem satisfies

                                        1        1             1+1 ( +h + h )
                         h ( h ) =         +                                  .
                                      1+1    1 + 1 h           h



   The Ramsey problem is analogous to the one studied in Proposition 1 but with h ( h ) in
place of  ( ) and   h   in place of . Thus, the same formulae in equation (8) apply, but with
 + h +   h in place of  ( ).
Proof of Proposition 6.          The planner can undo the effects of the aggregate markup, ,
introduced by the technology sector by using a production subsidy to the final good sector,
at the cost of   f . With this subsidy in place, the market equilibrium is an allocation {k, },
a level of automation adoption , and a state of automation technology  such that:

   · the capital and labor market clear

                 (1 -  k )  (fk -  ) =u (y
                                         ¯ - k)                (1 - )  (1 -  )  f =  ( );


   · adoption decisions maximize output and are given by m (k, , ) and  m (k, , ), where

                           {m (k, , ),  m (k, , )} = arg max f (k, ; ,  );
                                                             G(, ;)0



   · automation technology  maximizes monopolists' profits in (20).

   Define
               ~ (k, , ) = arg max   f (k, ; m (k, , ),  m (k, , )) - (),
               
                                 

which determines the optimal choice of technology given k, and some profit rate . Also,
let k () and () denote the level of capital and labor resulting in the market equilibrium


                                                  A.32
when the bias of technology is . The market equilibrium is characterized by a bias of
technology m such that
                                   m = ~ (k (m ), (m ); ),

which, by assumption, exists and is uniquely defined for every   (0, 1). Moreover, because
we assumed that the equilibrium is unique and that   ~ > 0, we have that in this equilibrium
the curve ~ (k (), (); ) cuts the 45 degree line m from above.
   We now turn to the Ramsey problem. To derive an IC constraint, we start from the
government budget constraint, which in this context is given by

              g +   f (k, ; ,  )   k  (fk -  )  k +   f  +   f (k, ; ) - ().

Here, the term   f (k, ; ,  ) on the left-hand side accounts for the subsidy on production
required to undo markups. The term   f (k, ; ,  ) - () accounts for profits the taxation
of profits in the technology sector, which we have assumed the government can (and will)
fully tax.
   Using the market-clearing conditions for capital and labor and the fact that f has constant
returns to scale, we can rewrite the IC in terms of the allocation as

                                                                  ( ) 
                   g  f (k, ; ,  ) + (1 -  )k - u (y
                                                   ¯ - k)  k -         - ().
                                                                  1-

   Thus, the Ramsey problem can be expressed as

                   max    f (k, ; ,  ) + (1 -  )  k + u(y
                                                        ¯ - k ) -  ( ) - ()
                 k, ,,,
                                                                          ( ) 
             subject to: g  f (k, ; ,  ) + (1 -  )  k - u (y
                                                           ¯ - k)  k -         - ()
                                                                          1-
               G(,  ; )  0.

   It follows that the optimal choice of k and        is identical to the one in Proposition 1,
and therefore optimal taxes on capital and labor are given by equation (8). Likewise, opti-
mal adoption decisions maximize output subject to G(,  ; ), and are therefore given by
m (k, , ) and  m (k, , ).
   Turning to the optimal bias of technology, it is straightforward to see that, given an
allocation for capital and employment, the optimal bias of technology maximizes

                          max f (k, ; m (k, , ),  m (k, , )) - ().
                            




                                              A.33
It follows that the Ramsey solution involves a bias of technology given by r , which is the
(unique) solution to
                                 r = ~ (k (r ), (r ); 1).

     The claim in the proposition is equivalent to r < m if r < --that
                                                                ¯      is, the state of
automation technology is too high relative to the Ramsey solution when the status quo is
above the Ramsey solution. On the other hand, r > m if r > --that¯       is, the state of
automation technology is too low relative to the Ramsey solution when the status quo is
below the Ramsey solution. (And r = m if r = ).  ¯
    To establish this result, denote the resulting output when technology is  by F (k, ; ) =
f (k, ; m (k, , ),  m (k, , )) and suppose that r < .   ¯ Because for  < , ¯ () is decreas-
ing, we have that the maximization problem defining ~ (k (r ), (r ); ) can be rewritten
as
                                                    ()
                                  max F (k, ; ) -      ,
                                                     
which has decreasing differences in  and . Thus, as we move from the optimal allocation
(which obtains when  = 1) to the market equilibrium with  < 1, we get

                       ~ (k (r ), (r ); ) > 
                                            ~ (k (r ), (r ); 1) = r .


This implies that the unique competitive equilibrium lies to the right of r as claimed in
the proposition (recall that in this equilibrium, the curve ~ (k (), (); ) must cut the 45
degree line at a unique point m from above).
   Suppose next that r > .  ¯ Because for  > , ¯ () is increasing, we now have that the
maximization problem defining  ~ (k (r ), (r ); ) can be rewritten as

                                                    ()
                                  max F (k, ; ) -      ,
                                                     

which has increasing differences in  and . Thus, as we move from the optimal allocation
(which obtains when  = 1) to the market equilibrium with  < 1, we get

                       ~ (k (r ), (r ); ) < 
                                            ~ (k (r ), (r ); 1) = r .


This implies that the unique competitive equilibrium lies to the left of r as claimed in
the proposition (recall that in this equilibrium, the curve ~ (k (), (); ) must cut the 45
degree line at a unique point m from above). Finally, these two arguments together imply
that r = m if r = ,   ¯ completing the proof of the proposition.


                                           A.34
                                    A.3     Infinite-Horizon Model

This section presents an infinite-horizon version of our model and derives two results. The
first one shows that, in the presence of a labor market wedge, if long-run capital taxes
converge to zero, labor should be subsidized in order to (completely) undo this wedge. The
second one shows that if there is an upper bound to the government budget (for example,
for political economy reasons), which implies that the government cannot accumulate asset,
then both capital and labor taxes converge to finite values and these values depend on the
supply elasticities of these factors as in Proposition 1 in the text.

Environment

As in the text, we work with a representative household economy. Preferences over sequences
of consumption and work {(c0 , 0 ), (c1 , 1 ), . . .} are defined recursively as

(A.8)                                       Vt = W (u(ct , t ), Vt+1 ).

From this recursion, we can compute lifetime utility as a function of the time-paths of
consumption and labor as
                                       V0 = V (u(c0 , 0 ), u(c1 , 1 ), . . .).

     The aggregator W satisfies the following properties:

(W1) W is a continuous and increasing function from R2 to R.

(W2) Its partial derivative with respect to V satisfies WV  (0, 1).

(W3) Denote by V N (u0 , u1 , . . . , uN -1 ; y ) the value of receiving stage utility ut for t = 0, . . . , N -
        1 and a continuation value of y at time N . The aggregator W satisfies that, for all
        N  1 and y , the function V N (u0 , u1 , . . . , uN -1 ; y ) is concave in {u0 , . . . uN -1 }.

     The stage utility function u(c, ) satisfies

                            ucc u c                                       uc   u
(A.9)                          -    0                                        -    0.
                            uc   u                                        uc   u

These two assumptions imply that consumption and leisure are normal goods. They are
satisfied when u is quasi-linear as in the main text and as we impose for our second main
result in this Appendix.



                                                       A.35
    The notation in this section follows Straub & Werning (2020). We denote the derivative
                                                                                 -1
of X with respect to z at time t by Xzt . Also, it will be useful to define t = t
                                                                                s=0 WV s . With

this notation, the derivatives of V are

                       Vct =t  Wut  uct                            V t =t  Wut  u t .

We also use Mt to denote the marginal rate of substitution between consumption in periods
t - 1 and t, given by
                                           Vct-1    1 Wut-1 uct-1
                                    Mt =         =                .
                                            Vct    WV t-1 Wut uct
    Consider a constant path of consumption and labor yielding stage utility u and generating
                                                     ¯ (V ) = 1 WV (u, V )  (1, ), where u
lifetime utility V . Let us then define the function M
satisfies V = W (u, V ). When preferences are time-separable, we have V = u +   V and
M                                                                        ¯  (V )  0.
 ¯ (V ) = 1  . However, when preferences are not time-separable, we have M
    Starting from a given k0 > 0, and given sequences of effective taxes on capital and labor
{tk } and {t }, a competitive equilibrium is given by a sequence of consumption, labor,
capital, and automation levels, {(c0 , 0 , k0 , 0 ), (c1 , 1 , k1 , 1 ), . . .}, such that:

    · production is given by yt = f (kt , t ; t ), where t = m (kt , t );

    · the representative household's Euler equation holds:

      (A.10)                               Mt = 1 + (fkt -  )  (1 - tk );


    · the labor market clears:

                                               ut
      (A.11)                               -       = f t  (1 - )  (1 - t );
                                               uct

    · the resource constraint holds:

      (A.12)                         ct + kt+1 + g  f (kt , t ; t ) + (1 -  )kt .


Optimal Policy with an Intertemporal Government Budget

Optimal policy maximizes V0 subject to the recursion (A.8), the Euler equation (A.10), the
labor market-clearing condition (A.11), the resource constraint (A.12) and a government
budget restriction.



                                                     A.36
   We first study an intertemporal budget restriction of the form
                                  
                              0         Vct  (tk  (fkt -  )  kt + t  f t       t   - g ).
                                  t=0


The assumption here is that government can issue debt or accumulate assets that yield a
return equal to Vct-1 Vct , which is the gross rate of return required by the representative
household. We will also study a different version of this problem where the government
must keep a balanced budget every period.
   Following Straub & Werning (2020), the Ramsey problem boils down to choosing a
sequence of consumption, labor, capital, and automation, {(c0 , 0 , k0 , 0 ), (c1 , 1 , k1 , 1 ), . . .}
that maximizes V0 subject to the recursion (A.8), the resource constraint (A.12), and an
Implementability Constraint (IC) that ensures that the taxes needed to implement that
allocation are sufficient to cover government expenditure:
                                                    
                                                                           t
(A.13)                            Vc0  M0  k0             Vct  ct + V t            .
                                                    t=0                   1-

As is common in these problems, we assume that tk is bounded from above, so that the
government cannot expropriate the entire capital stock at time 0 to satisfy the IC. In par-
ticular, following Straub & Werning (2020), we assume that capital taxation is constrained
and one most have M0  1.
   Our first proposition shows that, as in our static model, when optimal (unconstrained)
taxes are in place, the planner will not distort automation decisions.

Proposition A.3 Suppose taxes are unconstrained. The solution to the Ramsey problem
                        r
always involves setting t = m (kt , t ).

Proof. In this problem, t only appears in the term f (kt , t ; t ) in the resource constraint
(A.12). Thus, the optimal  maximizes f (kt , t ; t ) and coincides with m (kt , t ).
   Our second result in this Appendix, presented in the next proposition, generalizes Propo-
sition 6 in Straub & Werning (2020) to the case with labor market imperfections.

Proposition A.4 Suppose that the Ramsey problem yields a solution where the resulting
allocation converges to an interior steady state with non-zero private wealth and optimal taxes
                  ¯  (V )  0, optimal policy in the long run involves a zero tax on capital and
 k,r and  ,r . If M
a subsidy to labor that corrects for the labor market distortion introduced by , i.e.,  k,r = 0
and    ,r   = 1 - 1 (1 - ).


                                                       A.37
Proof. Exploiting the recursive formulation of preferences, we can write the Ramsey prob-
lem as maximizing V0 subject to Vt = W (u(ct , t ), Vt+1 ), (A.12) and the IC constraint in
equation (A.13), which can be rewritten as

                                              
                                                                           ut    t
(A.14)                   Wu0  uc0  M0  k0           t  Wut  uct  ct +                .
                                              t=0                          1-

   Using the same notation as in Straub & Werning (2020), let us define

           1                             us          s            1   (s  Wus )            us      s
 At+1 =                s  Wus  ucs  cs +                   Bt =                  ucs  cs +             .
          t+1 Vt+1 s=0                   1-                       t s=0 ut                 1-

Because these objects depend only on allocations, asymptotically they converge to limiting
values, which we denote by Ast and B st . The same holds for all the derivatives of components
of the utility function or the production function with respect to changes in the allocation.
In what follows, we use the superscript st to denote steady-state values.
   Moreover, as shown in Straub & Werning (2020), Ast satisfies

                            M¯  (V st )
                     Ast = - ¯ st  Wu   st
                                             c  (1 + (f k -  )  (1 - 
                                            ust         st            k,r
                                                                          ))  ast ,
                            M (V )

where ast  0 (by assumption) is the representative household's wealth. Therefore, when
M¯  (V st )  0, we have Ast  0.
   Denote by t  t the multiplier on Vt = W (u(ct , t ), Vt+1 ); by t  t the multiplier on the
resource constraint (A.12); and µ the multiplier on the Implementability Constraint, IC,
(A.14). We can write the limit of the first-order conditions for the Ramsey problem as

                                                                  -t + t+1 + µ  Ast =0
                                                          c
                                                        ust         st
               -t  Wu
                    st
                        ust
                         c + µ  Wu  uc + ucc  c +
                                 st  st   st   st
                                                                                     c =t
                                                                         + µ  B st  ust
                                                         1-
                                                  ust   ust         st
               t  Wu
                   st
                       ust - µ  Wu
                                 st
                                     ust  c st
                                               +      +                  - µ  B st  ust =t  f st
                                      c
                                                 1-      1-
                                                    -t + t+1  WV
                                                               st
                                                                   (1 + f k
                                                                          st
                                                                             -  ) =0

   Subtracting the second equation at time t + 1 from the same equation at time t, and
substituting -t + t+1 from the first equation, we obtain

(A.15)                              t - t+1 = -Wu
                                                st
                                                    ust
                                                     c µA .
                                                         st




                                                    A.38
   Likewise, eliminating t from the first-order conditions for consumption and capital (the
second and third first-order conditions above), we obtain

                                                             ust ust      ust ust  st
(A.16) t  (f   st
                     ust   +u )=
                             st
                                   µ  Wu
                                       st
                                             ust   u  -
                                                    st
                                                           + st - st  c + st - st
                                                              cc  c    st   c
                                                                                                           .
                      c                       c
                                                        1-   uc  u        uc u    1-

Equation (A.9) ensures that the term in brackets is strictly negative.
   We next use (A.15) and (A.16) to prove the claims in the proposition.
   Suppose first that µ = 0. Then equation (A.15) implies that t = t+1 . The first-order
condition for capital (the fourth equation of the block) then gives

                                                          1
                                       1 + fk
                                            st
                                               - =         st
                                                              =M
                                                               ¯ (V st ),
                                                         WV

which is equivalent to having zero taxes on capital. Likewise, equation (A.16) yields f st 
 c + u = 0. From equation (A.11), this is only possible if 1 -                        = 1 (1 - ), or in other
      st
ust                                                                              ,r

words if there is a labor subsidy fully offsetting the distortion introduced by . Thus, when
µ = 0, the desired result is established.
   Now suppose that µ  0. Then equation (A.15) implies that t diverges to - or 
(recall that µ  Ast  0). In this case, (A.16) requires that f st  ust
                                                                   c +u
                                                                       st
                                                                          converge to zero.
This again implies from equation (A.11) that 1 -                 ,r   = 1 (1 - ), as desired. Likewise, the
first-order condition for capital (the fourth equation of the block) implies that

                                                          t ¯ st
                                        1 + fk
                                             st
                                                - =           M (V ).
                                                          t+1

                                                                                     ¯ (V st ),
Because t is an arithmetic series, the right-hand side in this equation converges to M
which implies a zero tax on capital.
                                                                                 ¯  (V )  0)
   This proposition implies that when capital is not perfectly elastic (that is, M
and the government can build as much of a positive asset position as it likes, optimal policy
involves zero capital taxation and a subsidy to labor in the long run, financed by (relatively
heavy) taxation of capital and labor along the transition.

Optimal Policy with a Balanced Budget

While Proposition A.4 is conceptually interesting, the government building a very large asset
position is unrealistic for various reasons. Most importantly, political economy considerations
would make it infeasible for the government to have a huge surplus and accumulate vast
amounts of assets. In this part of the Appendix, we explore the implications of limiting the


                                                         A.39
ability of the government to build vast asset positions. To do this in the simplest possible
way, we impose a balanced budget for the government in each period, so that its budget
constraint now becomes:39

                                       g  tk  (fkt -  )  kt + t  f t  t .

       With these series of budget constraints, the Ramsey problem is now to maximize V0 sub-
ject to the recursion in (A.8), the resource constraint (A.12), and the series of IC constraints

                                                                            ( t)    t
(A.17)                         g  f (kt , t ; t ) + (1 -  )kt - Mt  kt -                .
                                                                            1-

This IC is very similar to that in our static model, with the only difference that the in-
tertemporal marginal rate of substitution is now Mt (rather than u (y
                                                                    ¯ - k ) as in the static
model).
       To simplify the analysis and maximize the similarity with our static model, we now
assume that the stage utility function takes a quasi-linear form: u(c, ) = c -  ( ) (see the
next section of the Appendix for the implications of more general preferences). Finally,
throughout this section we assume that, for a given path of future consumption and labor
               
{ct+s ,   t+s }s=0 ,   the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution Mt is decreasing in ct-1 . In
economic terms, this requirement makes intuitive sense and holds even for the usual time-
additive separable aggregator W (u, v ) = u + v . This additional assumption ensures that
the solution to the savings problem faced by households has a well defined limit, with assets
converging to a fixed amount that could be infinite (see the Turnpike and Monotonicity
Theorems in Section 4 of Becker and Boyd, 1993).40
       Before providing our characterization of optimal policy in this environment, it is useful
to define the relevant capital and labor supply elasticities that will play a key role in shaping
optimal policy. We define the Hicksian elasticity of capital supply as the percent increase in
savings of a given household in response to a compensated change in net capital taxes. This
is analogous to the standard definition of the Hicksian elasticity of labor supply. Consider a
household that faces a constant after-tax net return r  (1 -  k ) and an after-tax wage rate
w  (1 -  ). In addition, the household receives a government transfer T , so that household
  39
     More generally, we may impose the constraint that the government's assets should not exceed a certain
amount. In that case, a similar constraint would apply with g denoting the expenditures that cannot be
covered by interest payments on the long-run assets of the government. See also the next section.
  40
     A necessary and sufficient condition for this is that Wuu  WV - WuV  Wu < 0. Property W3 of aggregators
introduced above implies that Wuu  0. Thus, all aggregators with WuV  0 (including the usual time-
additive separable aggregator W (u, v ) = u + v ) satisfy this property.



                                                      A.40
consumption is given by r  (1 -  k )  k + w  (1 -  )  + T . The long-run choice of capital and
labor by this household converges to some level k st and        st   pinned down by the optimality
conditions:

               1 + rst  (1 -  k,st ) =M
                                      ¯ (V st )              wst  (1 -     ,st
                                                                                 ) =  (   st
                                                                                               )

where in addition, the utility level V is a fixed point of (A.8):

                      V = W (r  (1 -  k )  k + w  (1 -  )  + T -  ( ), V ).

   The Hicksian elasticity of capital supply is given by the change in k following a permanent
increase in  k , where households get a rebate of dT = r  k  d k . This is the transfer required
to compensate households for the change in after-tax returns, so that if the household in
question did not change its plans, it would achieve the exact same utility as before. The
optimality condition for capital implies

                                                            ¯  (V )  dV.
                              r  (1 -  k )  d ln(1 -  k ) = M

Moreover, the definition of V implies

        (1 - WV )  dV = Wu  r  (1 -  k )  dk - r  k  d k + dT = Wu  r  (1 -  k )  dk.

These two equations together imply that the Hicksian elasticity of capital is

                                          d ln k     1 - WV
                                k =                =   ¯  (V )  k .
                                      d ln(1 -  ) Wu  M
                                                 k


   On the other hand, the Hicksian elasticity of labor supply is given by the change in
following a change in  . Using the optimality condition for labor, we obtain a Hicksian
elasticity given by
                                              ln       ( )
                                     =              =      .
                                           ln(1 -  )  ( ) 
Because the stage utility function is quasi-linear, this elasticity is independent of whether
the tax change is compensated or not. We are now in a position to state and prove our
second main result in this Appendix.

Proposition A.5 Consider the Ramsey problem of maximizing V0 subject to the recursion
in (A.8), the resource constraint (A.12), and the sequence of ICs in (A.17).

   · Optimal policy leaves automation undistorted at t
                                                     r
                                                       = m (kt , t ).

                                                  A.41
   · If the optimal allocation converges, optimal taxes are given by

                          k,r      ~st 1
                                   µ               2                 ,r     ~st 1
                                                                            µ         1
      (A.18)                    =          + O( k,r )                    =         -       ,
                        1-  k,r   1+µ st
                                     ~   k                        1 -  ,r 1 + µ
                                                                              ~st    1+µ
                                                                                       ~st

            ~st > 0 which gives the long-run social value of government funds. Moreover, if
      where µ
      k =  (or M   ¯  (V ) = 0), we have  k,r = 0; whereas if k  (0, ) (or M¯  (V ) > 0), we
      have  k,r > 0.

                                               r
Proof. The first part of the proposition--that t = m (kt , t )--follows from the fact that t
only shows up in the term f (kt , t ; t ) in the resource constraint (A.12) and the right-hand
side of the ICs in (A.17). Thus, the optimal choice of  maximizes f (kt , t ; t ) and coincides
with m (kt , t ).
   The rest of the proof establishes the second part of the proposition. We write Mt as a
function of Vt-1 , Vt , and Vt+1 . This can be done without any loss of generality, since the
recursive formulation of preferences implies

                                              1          Wu (ut-1 , Vt )
                                  Mt =                                   .
                                         WV (ut-1 , Vt ) Wu (ut , Vt+1 )

In addition, ut-1 and ut can be obtained implicitly as functions of Vt-1 , Vt , and Vt+1 using
(A.8). Thus, we write Mt = M (Vt-1 , Vt , Vt+1 ), and denote the partial derivatives of Mt
with respect to Vt-1 , Vt , Vt+1 by M1t , M2t , and M3t , respectively. These definitions imply
M¯ (V ) = M (V, V, V ).
   Denote by t  t the multiplier on Vt = W (u(ct , t ), Vt+1 ); by t  t the multiplier on the
resource constraint (A.12); and t  µt the multiplier on the IC in (A.17).
   The first-order condition for consumption is:

(A.19)                                        t = t  Wut ;

and the first-order condition for Vt is given by:

                                                                                1
           t-1 = t + M1t+1  WV t  µt+1  kt+1 + M2t  µt  kt + M3t-1                       µt-1  kt-1 .
                                                                             W V t- 1

Combining these two equations yields a single first-order condition for consumption:

            1
(A.20)              t-1 =
         W V t- 1
                                                                                           1
         Mt  t + Mt  Wut  M1t+1  WV t  µt+1  kt+1 + M2t  µt  kt + M3t-1                             µt-1  kt-1 .
                                                                                        W V t- 1

                                                   A.42
   The first-order condition for labor is:

                                                                                  ( t )   ( t ) 
                       t  Wut    ( t ) = t  f t + µt  f t -
                                                                                                      t
                                                                                       -                      ,
                                                                                1-       1-

which can be combined with the first-order condition for consumption:

                                                                                 ( t )   ( t ) 
                         0 = t  (f t -   ( t )) + µt  f t -
                                                                                                  t
(A.21)                                                                                -                   .
                                                                               1-       1-

   Finally, the first-order condition for capital is given by

                             1
(A.22)                            t-1 = t  (fkt + 1 -  ) + µt  (fkt + 1 -  - Mt ) .
                         WV t-1

   Suppose that the optimal allocation converges, as assumed in the proposition. In what
follows, we again use the superscript st to denote the steady-state value of different quan-
tities. As before, because they only depend on allocations, the derivatives of the preference
aggregator converge to WV t  WV
                              st
                                 and Wut  Wu
                                           st , and the derivatives of the marginal rate

of substitution M also converge to M1t+1  M1
                                           st
                                              , M2t  M2
                                                      st
                                                         and M3t-1  M3
                                                                     st
                                                                        .
   The first-order condition for labor in equation (A.21) implies that µt t  µ
                                                                             ~st , where
~st denotes the steady-state value of government funds. Moreover, because both of these
µ
                                      ~st  0. The first-order condition for capital in equation
multipliers are non-negative, we have µ
(A.22) then implies that t follows a geometric progression with t-1 = q st  t . Because µt =
~st  t and t = t Wu , these multipliers also follow geometric progressions with µt-1 = q st  µt
µ
and t-1 = q st  t .
                                                               ~st , q st , k st , cst ,
   The steady state can be computed as the unique solution for µ                                                       st   and V st
to the following system of equations:

                                                      1
                    q st =1 + µ~st  Wust
                                          M1  st
                                                  ¯ st st + M2 st
                                                                  + M3
                                                                     st ¯ st  q st  k st
                                                                        M
                                                  M q
              ¯ st  q st =f st + 1 -  + µ
              M                          ~st  f st + 1 -  - M
                                                            ¯ st
                             k                              k
                                                                    st )   ( st )      st
                        0 =f st -  st ) + µ
                                          ~st  f -                      -
                                                                   1-       1-
                cst + g =f (k st ,     st
                                            , m (k st ,     st
                                                                 )) -   k st
                                                                                                    st
                                                                                      ¯ st  k st -  ( ) 
                                                                                                                  st
                        g =f (k st ,   st
                                            , m (k st ,     st
                                                                 )) + (1 -  )  k st - M
                                                                                                     1-
                      V st =W (cst -  (         st
                                                     ), V st )
                      q st 1 M
                             ¯ st



                                                                   A.43
These equations correspond to the limits of the first-order conditions in (A.20), (A.21) and
(A.22); and the limits of the resource constraint in equation (A.12), the implementability
condition in equation (A.17), and the recursive definition of utility in equation (A.8). Finally,
the inequality q st  1 M
                       ¯ st is equivalent to the transversality condition.41
       We now characterize the solution to this system of equations.
       First, we show that, so long as g > 0, we must have µ
                                                           ~st > 0. Suppose to obtain a
                   ~st = 0. The first equation of the block implies that q st = 1 and the second
contradiction that µ
equation implies that M ¯ st = f st + 1 -  . The third equation of the block implies   ( st ) =
                                             k
 st
f . Thus, if       ~st
                   µ     = 0, the steady-state allocation coincides with the first best. However,
implementing the first-best allocation generates negative revenue for the government (as it
has to subsidize labor and cannot tax capital), and so the IC cannot hold. To see this
                   ¯ st = f st + 1 -  by k st and   ( st ) = f st by st and add these two equations
formally, multiply M                k
to obtain
                    0 = f (k st ,   st
                                         ; m (k st ,   st                        ¯ st  k st -   (
                                                            )) + (1 -  )  k st - M                    st
                                                                                                           )   st
                                                                                                                    ,

where we used the fact that f (k st ,              st ;  m (k st , st ))   = fk  k + f st 
                                                                              st st          st .   When g > 0, this equality
implies that

                    g > f (k st ,   st
                                         , m (k st ,   st                        ¯ st  k st -   (
                                                            )) + (1 -  )  k st - M                    st
                                                                                                           )   st

                                                                                               st
                                                                                 ¯ st  k st -  ( ) 
                                                                                                               st
                       f (k st ,    st
                                         , m (k st ,   st
                                                            )) + (1 -  )  k st - M                                  ,
                                                                                                1-

which contradicts the IC constraint.
   Second, we show that for any µ  ~st > 0 and a given allocation, the first equation of the
above block has a unique solution q st such that q st  1 M
                                                         ¯ st . Moreover, this solution satisfies
                 ¯  (V ) > 0 for all V , and q st = 1 if M
that q st > 1 if M                                       ¯  (V st ) = 0.
       To show this, write the first equation of the block as q st = 1 + µst  Wu
                                                                               st  h(q st )  k st , where


                                                   1
                                     h(q ) = M1
                                              st
                                                      + M2
                                                         st
                                                            + M3
                                                               st ¯ st  q.
                                                                  M
                                                 M q
                                                 ¯ st



For q st  [1 M
             ¯ st , 1], the function h(q st ) has an inverted U-shape with minima at the extremes,
where h(1 M  ¯ st ) = h(1) = M   ¯  (V st ) > 0. The fact that h(1) = M  ¯  (V st ) follows from the
  41
       The transversality condition of the Ramsey problem is xt = t  t  k st  0, which requires that
                                                                 xt-1  ¯ st  q st ,
                                                       1  lim         =M
                                                             t    xt
                                  ¯ st .
and is thus equivalent to q st  1 M




                                                                  A.44
                  st ¯ st
observation that M3  M = M1
                          st
                             , and thus M1  M + M3
                                         st ¯ st
                                                    M = M3
                                                 st ¯ st st
                                                            + M1
                                                               st 42
                                                                 . The fact that
h(q st ) has an inverted U-shape in this range follows from the fact that h(q ) = a q + b + dq ,
with a, d  0.43
   Suppose that M ¯  (V ) > 0. If q st  [1 M¯ st , 1], we have h(q st )  M    ¯  (V st ) > 0, and the first
equation of the block implies q st = 1 + µ~st  Wu   st  h(q st )  k st  1 + µ
                                                                            ~st  Wu st  M ¯  (V st )  k st > 1,
which contradicts the assumption that q st  [1 M
                                               ¯ st , 1]. Thus, any solution to the above
system of equations must have q st  1. We now show that there is a unique q that solves
q st = 1 + µ     st  h(q st )  k st , with q st  1. At q st = 1, we have q st < 1 + µ
           ~st  Wu                                                                  ~st  Wu  f (q st )  k st .
However, as q st increases, the left-hand side of this equation increases without bound and
the right-hand side declines, which implies a unique solution q st with q st > 1.
   Suppose next that M ¯  (V st ) = 0, then q st = 1 gives the unique solution with q st > 1 M
                                                                                             ¯ st to
the first equation of the above block.
      Rearranging the first-order conditions for capital (the second equation of the block), and
using the Euler equation in (A.10) to substitute for the marginal product of capital in terms
of capital taxes, we obtain optimal capital taxes as

                                         k,r       1     1
(A.23)                                         =              (q st - 1).
                                       1-  k,r   1+µ~ 1 - WV
                                                     st    st



This equation implies that, if M   ¯  (V st ) = 0 so that q st = 1, we will have  k,r = 0. However, if
M¯  (V ) > 0 so that q st > 1, we have  k,r > 0 as claimed.
      Furthermore, we can approximate the optimal tax on capital as follows. A first-order
  42
     Define the function g (Vt , Vt+1 ) implicitly by Vt = W (g (Vt , Vt+1 )). Denote the derivatives of g with respect
                            g                g
to its arguments by g1 = V   t
                                 and g2 = V   t+ 1
                                                   . The definition of g implies that 1 = Wu  g1 and -WV = Wu  g2 .
  Turning to the definition of M , we have

                                                            1               Wu (g (Vt-1 , Vt ), Vt )
                         M (Vt-1 , Vt , Vt+1 ) =                                                       .
                                                   WV (g (Vt-1 , Vt ), Vt ) Wu (g (Vt , Vt+1 ), Vt+1 )

  It follows that
                              M       W st  g st Wuu
                                                   st   st
                                                       g1      st
                                                              Wuu   st
                                                                   WV  - WVst    st
                                                                             u  Wu
                       st
                      M1  = lim    = - V ust2 1 + st     st
                                                            =       st2  W st2
                                                                                    ,
                            t Vt-1     WV        WV  Wu           WV      u

and
                           M              st
                                   W st  Wu   g2st     st
                                                   + WuV    st
                                                           Wu     st
                                                                 Wuu   st
                                                                      WV      st
                                                                          - WuV    st
                                                                                  Wu
                     st
                    M3  = lim   = - uu       st  W st2
                                                               =       st  W st2
                                                                                      .
                         t Vt+1           WV                          WV
                                                    u                        u
                                       st   st      st                  st ¯ st    st
Dividing these formulae, we obtain M3     M1   = WV    , which implies M3  M = M1     .
  43                      st ¯ st          st ¯ st                                                 st    st
     In our system, a = M1 M and b = M3  M . The claim that a, d  0 is thus equivalent to M1          , M3  0
which holds if and only if Mt is decreasing in ct-1 , as we assumed was the case. To show this formally, note
that an increase in ct-1 holding constant consumption at all other dates is equivalent to an increase in Vt-1
                                                                                               st ¯ st      st
holding Vt and Vt+1 constant. Thus, Mt is decreasing in ct-1 if and only if M1t  0. Because M3    M = M1       ,
            st   st
we have M3 , M1  0.




                                                             A.45
Taylor expansion of the first equation of the block gives

          q st - 1 = µ
                     ~st  Wu
                           st ¯  (V st )  k st + (q st - 1)  µ
                              M                              ~st  Wu
                                                                   st
                                                                       h (1) + O((q st - 1)2 ).

This equation implies
                                 ~st = D  (q st - 1) + O((q st - 1)2 ),
                                 µ

for some constant D, and we can therefore write

                         q st - 1 = µ
                                    ~st  Wu
                                          st ¯  (V st )  k st + O((q st - 1)2 ).
                                             M

Substituting this expression into equation (A.23) yields

                         k,r      ~st Wu
                                  µ      st  M¯  (V st )  k st
                               =                               + O((q st - 1)2 ).
                       1-  k,r   1+µ~ st     1 - WV st


                                                                                             2
The formula in the proposition follows from the fact that O((q st - 1)2 ) = O( k,r ), which is
a direct implication of equation (A.23).
   Finally, the optimal tax on labor, we can combine the first-order condition for labor (the
third equation of the block) and the labor market-clearing condition in equation (A.11) to
write optimal taxes on labor as

                                    ~st
                                    µ        ( st )         st         1
                                 =                               -          ,
                              1-   1+µ~st     ( st )                 1+µ~st

which completes the proof.
   The proposition above deals with long-run taxes and explores what happens when the
allocation converges. We next establish that capital and labor taxes away from the long-run
limit are given by similar expressions.

Proposition A.6 Consider the Ramsey problem of maximizing V0 subject to the recursion
in (A.8), the resource constraint (A.12), and the sequence of Implementability Constraints in
                                       r
(A.17). Optimal policy involves taking t = m (kt , t ), and for t  1, setting taxes on capital
and labor of

           tk     µ
                  ~t    Mt                     µt+1                          1 µt-1
(A.24)          =             Wut  M1t+1  WV t      kt+1 + M2t  kt + M3t-1              kt-1
         1 - t 1 + µ
              k     ~t Mt - 1                   µt                         W V t- 1 µ t
           t      µ
                  ~t    1        1
(A.25)          =            -        ,
         1 - t 1 + µ~t  ( t ) 1 + µ~t

where µ
      ~t gives the value of government funds in terms of units of the consumption good.

                                                 A.46
Proof. Combining equations (A.20) and (A.22), we obtain

            (t + µt )  (fkt + 1 -  - Mt ) =
                                        µt+1                         1 µt-1
            µt  Mt  Wut  M1t+1  WV t         kt+1 + M2t  kt + M3t-1           kt-1 .
                                         µt                         WV t-1 µt

Dividing both sides by Mt - 1 and using the Euler equation (A.10) to substitute for the
marginal product of capital in terms of taxes, we obtain the formula in the Proposition.
   Turning to labor, we can rewrite (A.21) as

                                                           ( t)     ( t ) 
                         t  (f t -   ( t )) + µt  f t -
                                                                                 t
                                                                =                    .
                                                          1-       1-

Dividing both sides by   ( t ) (1- ) and using the labor market-clearing condition in equation
(A.11) to substitute for the marginal product of labor in terms of taxes, we obtain the formula
in the Proposition.
   Proposition A.5 provides an approximation for optimal capital taxes in terms of Hicksian
elasticities, and Proposition A.6 shows that a similar formula applies along the transition.
We now show that for some commonly used preferences, the approximation in Proposition
A.5 is exact and holds along the transition as well, thus providing an exact analog to the
results in Proposition 1.

Corollary A.1 If preferences are generated by an Epstein­Hynes aggregator of the form

                            W (c -  ( ), V ) = (-1 + V )  exp(-c +  ( )),

or by a Koopmans­Diamond­Williamson aggregator of the form

                                                1
                           W (c -  ( ), V ) =     ln (1 +  (c -  ( )) + V ) ,
                                                
                        r
the optimal policy sets t = m (kt , t ), and for t  1, capital and labor taxes are given by

                  tk,r          µ
                                ~t 1                       t ,r          µ
                                                                         ~t 1      1
                           =                                        =           -       .
                1 - tk,r       1+µ~ t k
                                      t                  1 - t ,r       1+µ~ t t 1 + µ
                                                                                     ~t

Proof. For the Epstein­Hynes preferences, we have

                                                         1
                                            Mt = 1 -        ,
                                                         Vt

which implies M1t+1 = M3t-1 = 0.

                                                  A.47
   For the Koopmans­Diamond­Williamson preferences, we have

                                           
                                    Mt =    exp(  Vt ),
                                           

which implies that M1t+1 = M3t-1 = 0.
   The result follows from the formulae in Proposition A.6 by setting M1t+1 = M3t-1 = 0.




                                            A.48
                       A.4     Comparison to Atkinson­Stiglitz

In their seminal contribution, Atkinson & Stiglitz (1972) established several principles of
efficient commodity taxation. One implication of these principles is that, if consumption
and labor supply decisions are separable, then all commodities should face an homogeneous
tax, which in a context with multiple periods would imply no taxes on capital.
    This section explains why Propositions 1 and A.5 deviate from this paradigm, and provide
formulae where optimal taxes on capital are linked to the elasticity of capital supply--how
responsive savings are to changes in returns.
    The key difference is that in Atkinson­Stiglitz the government is free to transfer resources
across periods, whereas the key assumption behind our optimal tax formulae is that the
government must run a balanced budget.
    Proposition A.4 already showed that, if the government is allowed to accumulate assets,
optimal policy dictates that the government accumulates enough assets to finance all of its
expenditures out of interest income, reaching the first-best allocation in the long run. Here,
optimal taxes on capital converge to zero independently of how elastic its supply is. The
contrast between Propositions A.4 and A.5 thus underscores the importance of restricting
the government to run a balanced budget.
    We now return to a general version of our two-period model to elaborate on this point
and explain the connection of our results to those of Atkinson & Stiglitz (1972).

A.4.1      A General Two-Period Model

The economy operates for two periods, t = 0 and t = 1. As in the main text, we use the
subscript 0 for variables in period 0 and no subscripts for variables in period 1. Households
are endowed with k0 units of capital and face labor and capital taxes in each period. The
decide how much labor to supply and how many resources to save in order to maximize their
utility:

                             max u(c0 , c, 0 , )
               subject to: c0  (1 - 0 )  w0        0   + (1 + (1 - 0
                                                                   k
                                                                     )  (R0 -  ))k0 - ah
                           c  (1 -  )  w  + (1 + (1 -  k )  (R -  ))  ah ,

where ah are assets saved by households in period 0.




                                                   A.49
   The government faces the following budget constraints:

                   g0 0  w0        0   + 0
                                         k
                                            (R0 -  )  k0 - ag
                    g   w  +  k  (R -  )  k + (1 + (1 -  k )  (R -  ))  ag ,

where, analogously to the household side, ag are assets saved by the government. When
there are no restrictions on ag , the two budget constraints can be combined into a single
intertemporal constraint.
   For simplicity, we work with a generic production function given by y0 = f0 (k0 , 0 ) in
period 0 and y = f (k, ) in period 1. We also simplify the notation by setting             = 0, so that
labor market frictions, which are not important in the following analysis, are removed (this
has no effect on any of the analysis except for simplifying some of our expressions).
   A competitive equilibrium is given by an allocation {c0 , c, 0 , , k, ah , ag } and factor prices
{w0 , w, R0 , R} such that:

   · the Euler equation of households holds:

                                          u c0
                                               = (1 + (R -  )  (1 -  k ));
                                          uc

   · the supply of labor satisfies:

                            u0                                         u1
                        -       =w0  (1 - 0 )                      -      =w  (1 -  );
                            uc0                                        uc

   · factor prices are given by

                        w0 = f 0                      w=f                      R = fk ;


   · the market for capital clears:
                                                   k = ag + ah .

   · the resource constraint at time 0 and 1 holds :

                c0 + g0 + k f0 (k0 , 0 ) + (1 -  )  k0             c + g f (k, ) + (1 -  )  k.


   The model used in the main text is a particular case of this one where we imposed the
following simplifications:


                                                   A.50
   · government must run a balanced budget, and so ag = 0;

   · in period 0, f0 (k0 , 0 ) = k0 and y
                                        ¯ = (1 -  )  k0 ; and in period 1 y = f (k, , m (k, ));

   · quasi-linear preferences in c.

A.4.2    Implementability Conditions

As in Section A.2, we transform the government budget constraints into a series of imple-
mentability conditions. The implementability condition at time 0 becomes

                                               u0
            g0  f0 (k0 , 0 ) + (1 -  )  k0 +          0   - (1 + (1 - 0
                                                                      k
                                                                        )  (fk0 -  ))  k0 - ag ,
                                               uc0

which can be combined with the resource constraint at time 0 into

              uc0  (1 + (1 - 0
                             k
                               )  (fk0 -  ))  k0  uc0  c0 + u 0            0   + uc0  (k - ag ).

The implementability condition at time 1 becomes

                                                            u    uc0
                          g  f (k, ) + (1 -  )  k +            -      (k - ag ),
                                                            uc   uc

which can be combined with the resource constraint at time 0 into

                                 0  uc  c + u  - uc0  (k - ag ).

   Because k0 is given, taxes on capital income at time 1 are lump sum.
   Below we will consider two different scenarios. In the first scenario, ag is unconstrained
and we can combine both implementability conditions into a single one:

(A.26)         uc0  (1 + (1 - 0
                              k
                                )  (fk0 -  ))  k0  uc0  c0 + u 0           0   + uc  c + u  .

   Alternatively, we could have a scenario where we restrict ag  0 and this restriction binds.
This implies that only the first period IC constraint binds and can be written as

                                                                u    uc0
(A.27)                       g  f (k, ) + (1 -  )  k +             -      k,
                                                                uc   uc

which coincides with the IC constraint used in the main text.




                                                     A.51
A.4.3    The Atkinson­Stiglitz Theorem

The following is the version of the Atkinson­Stiglitz theorem that applies in our economy.

Proposition A.7 (Atkinson­Stiglitz) Suppose that utility is separable in consumption
and leisure and homothetic in c0 and c. If the government can tax all capital income at time
0 and accumulate assets in an unrestricted way, the optimal tax on capital income in period
1 is zero.

Proof. The government will expropriate all capital income at period zero and ensure that
(1 + (1 - ¯)  (fk0 -  ))  k0 = 0.
   The assumptions on the utility function imply that we can write utility as

                                           u(G(c0 , c), 0 , )

for some homogeneous of degree 1 function G.
   The Ramsey problem becomes

                                    max u(G(c0 , c), 0 , )
                subject to: c0 + g0 + k  f0 (k0 , 0 ) + (1 -  )  k0
                                     c + g  f (k, ; ) + (1 -  )  k
                                        0  uG  Gc0  c0 + uG  Gc  c + u 0    0   +u  .

   Denote by µ the multiplier on the IC constraint, by 0 the multiplier on the resource
constraint at time 0, and by  the multiplier on the IC constraint at time 1.
   The first-order condition for capital is

                                            0
                                              = 1 + fk - .
                                            

   The first-order conditions for c0 and c are given by:

                                                       (uG  Gc0  c0 + uG  Gc  c + u 0 0 + u )
0 =(1 + µ)  uG  Gc0 + µ  uG  (Gc0c0  c0 + Gcc0  c) + µ                                        Gc0 ,
                                                                        G
                                                     (uG  Gc0  c0 + uG  Gc  c + u 0 0 + u )
  =(1 + µ)  uG  Gc + µ  uG  (Gc0c  c0 + Gcc  c) + µ                                         Gc .
                                                                     G

Using the fact that G is homogeneous of degree 1, Euler's theorem implies 0 = Gc0c0  c0 + Gcc0  c
and 0 = Gc0c  c0 + Gcc  c. Dividing the first-order conditions for c0 and c and using these



                                                 A.52
identities, we obtain
                                           0 Gc0
                                            =    .
                                              Gc
Using this expression, the first-order condition for capital becomes

                                        Gc0
                                            = 1 + fk - ,
                                        Gc

and the Euler equation for households then requires zero taxes on capital as claimed.
   Note that because we are using linear taxes, we need to impose the stronger assumption
that utility is homogeneous in c0 and c. The original Atkinson­Stiglitz result only requires
separability between consumption and leisure because it allows for non-linear taxes.
   As the above derivation shows, the Atkinson-Stiglitz result hinges on three crucial as-
sumptions: separable (and homothetic) preferences, no other restrictions on taxes, and the
ability of the government to accumulate assets with no restriction.
   In what follows, we explore the consequences of requiring the government to run a bal-
anced budget. This is sufficient to break the result of zero taxes on capital and implies that
optimal capital taxes are linked to its supply elasticity. This is also the key assumption used
to derive Proposition (A.5) in the infinite horizon model.

A.4.4     Implications of Imposing a Balanced Budget

Before characterizing optimal policy in this case, we introduce some definitions.
   First, define the Hicksian elasticity of capital supply, k , as the percent change in k
following a compensated change in the keep rate 1 -  k announced after households have
already derived all of their income in period 0. Thus when this tax change takes place,
households can re-optimize their saving decisions and labor supply decisions in period 1, but
cannot adjust their hours in of work in period 0. Moreover, define by k the percent change
in employment induced by the percent change in savings.
   We now provide formulae for k and k . Let M = - u
                                                   u
                                                    c
                                                      > 0 denote the marginal rate of
substitution between leisure and consumption, and analogously to the previous section, let
Mk =    uc0
        uc    > 0 be the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution between consumption at
time 0 and time 1. Because the tax change is compensated, we have

                        dc0 = - k                   dc =M k  dk + M  d .

That is, consumption only changes due to the behavioral response of savings and labor
supply decisions, but not because of the changes in after-tax prices obtained by households.


                                             A.53
   Optimal saving decisions satisfy

                                  (R -  )  (1 -  k ) = M k - 1.

Totally differentiating this expression and using the formulae for dc0 and dc, we obtain

(A.28)     (M k - 1)  d ln(1 -  k ) = (Mc
                                        k
                                           M k - Mc
                                                  k
                                                    0 )  k  d ln k + (Mc  M + M )   d ln .
                                                                       k       k



   Optimal labor supply decisions satisfy

                                        w  (1 -  ) = M .

Totally differentiating this expression and using the formulae for dc0 and dc, we obtain

(A.29)             0 = (Mc  M k - Mc0 )  k  d ln k + (Mc  M + M )   d ln .

   Equations (A.28) and (A.29) form a system of two equations on two unknowns and imply
that

       1 (Mc
           k  Mk - Mk )  k   (Mc
                               k  M + M k) 
                                                                          (Mc  M k - Mc0 )  k
         =           c0
                           +                k ,                   k = -
       k      Mk - 1              Mk - 1                                   (Mc  M + M ) 

   Following analogous steps, the Hicksian elasticity of labor supply,  , and  k can be
computed as

       1 (Mc  M + M )    (Mc  M k - Mc0 )  k                          (Mck  M + M k) 
        =              +                      k,               k =-                     .
               M               M                                      (Mc
                                                                        k  Mk - Mk )  k
                                                                                 c0


   Finally, denote by k = (M k - 1)  k ((M k - 1)  k + M  ) and  = M  ((M k - 1)  k + M  )
the share of capital and labor income in household income.

Proposition A.8 Suppose that the government is restricted and must set ag  0, and that
this constraint binds. Optimal taxes are given by

                 k     µ 1                                   µ 1 k    k
(A.30)               =      -    k                         =    - k       ,
               1 -  k  + µ k  k    1-                   1- +µ       1 - k

where µ > 0 denote the multiplier on the first-period IC constraint and  the multiplier on
the first period resource constraint.

Proof. Because the constraint ag  0 binds, we have that the IC constraint in period 0 is

                                             A.54
slack and the IC constraint in period 1 binds. Thus we can rewrite the Ramsey problem as

                                                 max              u(c0 , c, 0 , )
                                            {k0 ,k,c0 ,c, 0 , }

                   subject to: c0 + g0 + k  f0 (k0 , 0 ) + (1 -  )  k0
                                       c + g  f (k, ; ) + (1 -  )  k
                                         g f (k, ) + (1 -  )  k - M k  k - M  ,

where M = - u
            u
             c
               > 0 denotes the marginal rate of substitution between leisure and consump-
tion and M k =   uc0
                 uc    > 0 denotes the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution between con-
sumption in periods 0 and 1. Both marginal rates of substitution are functions of c0 , c, 0 , .
   Denote by uc0  0 the multiplier on the resource constraint at time 0, uc   the multiplier
on the resource constraint in period 1, and uc  µ the multiplier on the IC constraint.
   The first-order condition for c0 is given

                                M k = M k  0 + µ  Mc
                                                   k
                                                     0  k + Mc0                     .

The first-order condition for c is given

                                     1 =  + µ  Mc
                                                k
                                                   k + Mc                  .

   Turning to labor, we obtain the first-order condition:

                            f - M + µ  (f - M ) = µ  M k  k + M                         .

Plugging in the first-order condition for c, we obtain

           f - M   + µ  Mc
                         k
                            k + Mc                     + µ  (f - M ) = µ  M k  k + M        ,

which can be rearranged to

                            µ Mk  k + M                      + M  [Mc
                                                                    k k+M  ]
                                                                         c
                          =                                                  .
                       1-   +µ                                M

   Turning to capital, the first-order condition is

                              (fk + 1 -  ) + µ  (fk + 1 -  - M k ) = M k 0 ,




                                                   A.55
which, using the first-order conditions for c0 and c, can be rewritten as

               (fk + 1 -  ) + µ  (fk + 1 -  - M k ) =M k  + µ  Mc
                                                                k
                                                                   k + Mc 
                                                      - µ  Mc
                                                            k
                                                              0  k + Mc0    .

This can be rearranged to

                       k             k  k + M  ] - [M k  k + M  ]
                            µ M k  [Mc
                          =                  c       c0       c0
                     1 - k  + µ              Mk - 1

   Using the definition of the Hicksian elasticities introduced above, we can rewrite optimal
taxes as

                              k     µ 1     M              
                                  =      -             k
                            1 -  k  + µ k (M k - 1)  k   1-
                                    µ 1 (M k - 1)  k       k
                                  =      -             k       ,
                            1- +µ           M            1 - k

which coincide with the formulae in the proposition.
   The optimal tax formulae in equation (A.30) are a generalization of those provided in
Proposition 1 (except that we abstracted from labor market frictions for the purposes of this
part of the Appendix). Here, optimal taxes are inversely linked to their supply elasticities.
But now, optimal capital tax also depends on its effects on employment via the cross-elasticity
k (put differently, the optimal capital tax now depends on the fiscal externalities it creates
by raising or lowering employment). Similarly, the optimal labor tax depends on its impact
on savings via the cross-elasticity  k .
   In practice, income effects on labor supply are weak.         This implies that the cross-
elasticities k and  k are small and these terms have a small effect on optimal taxes.
In particular, in the limit case with no income effects on labor supply (as in the quasi-linear
preferences used in the main text and in the infinite horizon version), the above formulae
boil down to those provided in Proposition 1 (except that we have simplified the expressions
by setting   = 0).

Corollary A.2 If there are no income effects on labor supply so that utility is given by

                                    u(c0 -  ( 0 ), c -  ( )),




                                             A.56
optimal taxes are given by

                        k     µ 1                                 µ 1
                            =                                   =     ,
                      1 -  k  + µ k                          1- +µ

where µ > 0 denote the multiplier on the first-period IC constraint and  the multiplier on
the first period resource constraint.

Proof. With these preferences we have k =  k = 0, which follow from the definitions of
the cross elasticities.
   This corollary shows that the formulae in the main text only require quasi-linearity within
periods. The stronger assumption of quasi-linearity on c used in the main text is imposed
to simplify the exposition by removing the cross-elasticity effects.
   The contrast between Propositions A.7 and A.8 underscores the role of allowing the
government to have a single intertemporal budget constraint. Once we depart from this by
constraining the government's capacity to regulate assets, the commodity taxation principles
in Atkinson­Stiglitz (1972) are no longer valid. In particular, Proposition A.8 has established
that when the government has to run a balanced budget, the formulae in equation (A.30)
apply exactly and reinstate the intuitive notion that optimal taxes should depend on the
supply elasticities of the relevant factors as well as on cross-elasticity effects. In particular, it
is optimal to set a lower tax on capital than on labor only when capital taxes reduce capital
and labor supplies more than labor taxes.




                                               A.57
                       A.5     Computation of Effective Tax Rates

Summary Table A.9 presents the sources and main computations required to obtain our
measure of net operating surplus. The following sections describe the procedure we followed
to compute the average taxes of interest, and the sources for our depreciation, investment
price, and interest rate series.

Average Business Tax Rate on C-Corporations,  c

We first determine the average tax rates imposed on firms' profits net of depreciation al-
lowances. The BEA produces series for capital consumption allowances for corporate and
non-corporate taxpayers. We recover these series from FRED.44 The national accounts clas-
sify as "corporate" all taxpayers that are subject to filing a form of the IRS series 1120, as
reported in the NIPA Handbook. In particular, both C- and S-corporations are considered
corporate. Notably, S-corporations are exempt from federal corporate income taxation, but
this favorable treatment does not extend to all state and local business taxes.45 In keeping
with the foregoing discussion, we compute the tax base for state and local corporate taxes
 c,SL as the net operating surplus of C-corporations, NOSCORPIRS , defined as the difference
between the gross operating surplus of corporations. We calculate this measure as the sum
of net operating surplus of corporations (line 8 of the BEA NIPA Table 1.14) and the con-
sumption of fixed capital of corporations (line 12 of the BEA NIPA Table 1.14) minus the
capital consumption allowances for corporations. We cannot directly use the consumption of
fixed capital reported in the NIPA tables because they estimate the economic depreciation of
the capital stock, while we are interested in recovering a measure of the fiscal depreciation of
capital stocks. For this reason, we need to add back the NIPA consumption of fixed capital
and then subtract the relevant allowances. The state and local tax revenues corresponding
to the corporate tax base are given by the tax revenues from corporations at the state and
local level (line 5 of BEA NIPA Table 3.3), CTSL . We can thus estimate the capital tax
faced by the corporate sector as

                                                     CTSL
                                        tc,SL   =      t
                                                             .
                                                  NOSCORPIRS
                                                          t
  44
     The corresponding codes are A677RC1A027NBEA and A1700C0A144NBEA.
  45
     For example, New York City, New Hampshire, California, Texas, and Tennessee do not recognize S-
corporations for tax purposes. Other states have special rules on S-corporation election which do not neces-
sarily match the federal criteria.




                                                   A.58
As mentioned above, the BEA also considers non-C-corporations as part of the corporate
sector. However, only C-corporations are subject to federal taxes at the entity level, and the
relevant tax base for federal corporate income taxes,  c,SL is given by the net operating sur-
plus of corporation that can be attributed to C-corporations, NOSCORPC,IRS
                                                                     t     . Since NIPA
tables do not provide a breakdown of corporate income by legal form of organization, we
obtain the net income of corporations from the IRS SOI Tax Stats-Integrated Business data
(IRS IBD), and compute share of C-corporations' net income in total corporate net income
reported in IRS IBD Table 1,46 which provides our estimate of the net operating surplus of
C-corporations, NOSCORPC,IRS
                       t     . The federal revenues corresponding to this corporate tax
base are given by the tax revenues from corporations at the federal level (line 5 of BEA NIPA
Table 3.2), CTFed . Accordingly, the federal tax rate on capital income from C-corporations
can be estimated as
                                                       CTFed
                                         tc,Fed =        t
                                                                 .
                                                    NOSCORPC,IRS
                                                             t

Combining the federal, stat and local taxes, the overall entity-level tax rate on C-corporations
is
                                             tc = tc,SL + tc,Fed .

Average Personal Tax Rates on Income from C-Corporations,  e,c and  b,c

In addition to entity-level taxes, incomes distributed from C-corporations are subject to
personal taxation. As described in the main text, we compute the corresponding tax rate
as

               share directly    share short-           share long-          share held     
      te,c =                                     to +                  tq +               0% ,
                  ownedt         term ordinaryt       term qualifiedt       until deatht    

 where to is the average tax rate on short-term ordinary capital gains and dividends, and
tq is the average tax rate on long-term qualified capital gains and dividends. For each
year, we compute the share of corporate stocks directly owned by households as the ra-
tio of share of equity held by households and non-profit organizations serving households
over total corporate equity using data from FRED.47 We build the share of profits real-
ized through ordinary dividends and short-term capital gains on stocks directly owned by
households using data from the IRS Individual Complete Report (Publication 1304, Table
     46
     This series only span the period 1980-2013, with a missing data point in 1990, which we fill by linear
interpolation. We assume that the share of net income of C-corporations in the total corporate sector has
remained constant after 2013.
  47
     The corresponding FRED series are HNOCEAQ027S and BOGZ1LM893064105Q, respectively


                                                     A.59
A) for the period 1990-2017 and the IRS SOI Tax Stats (Sales of Capital Assets Reported
on Individual Tax Returns) for the period 1990-2012. Publication 1304 reports households'
ordinary dividend income from corporate stocks, while the SOI Tax Stats reports the short-
term capital gains on corporate stocks. The share of profits realized by households in the
form of short-term gains or ordinary dividends can then be obtained by dividing the overall
income from theses two sources by the net operating surplus of C-corporations.48,49 We set
"share short-term ordinaryt " to the average of the same variable over the period 1990-2012
for all years in our sample. The shares of profit realized long-term or until death are then
computed assuming that half of the profits not realized in the short-term are never realized.
This is in keeping with the findings reported in Table 14 of CBO (2006). Accordingly, the
share of profits taxed at rate tq can be obtained as a residual, equal to half of the share of
profits not taxed at the rate to . The remaining share of profits is assumed to be unrealized
until death, and subject to zero income taxation.
       The average tax rates, tq and to , are computed using data from the Office for Tax Analysis
(OTA) for 1980­2014 (2019). Since both series exhibit trends over time, we extrapolate the
data point for 2014 for the years 2015­2018. Ideally, tq should be the average marginal
maximum tax rate for individuals realizing long-term capital gains and qualified dividends,
and to should be the average marginal ordinary income tax rate. However, these rates
cannot be recovered from OTA data without detailed information on individual tax returns.
We therefore proxy this quantity using the average tax rate on realized long-term capital
gains provided by the OTA, which provides us with a measure for tq .50 In addition to this
average rate, the same source also reports the average long-term capital gains realized and
the corresponding tax receipts. We combine this information with OTA data on total net
capital gains and total taxes paid on net capital gains to obtain our measure of average
taxes on short-term gains and ordinary dividends, to .51 In particular, we compute the tax
  48
       In the notation above, this corresponds to the product

                                       share directly    share short-
                                                                      .
                                          ownedt       term ordinaryt

  49
     In practice, the share of profits taxed at ordinary rates is not limited to the short-term and ordinary
dividends that accrue to the household from directly-owned corporate stocks. Capital gain distributions and
IRA distributions--which originate from indirectly owned stocks--are also taxed at the ordinary rate, and
constitute about 23% of realized profits over the period we considered. As a result, in our computations the
share of profits taxed at ordinary income rates is 48%. Of this number, 25% comes form short-term gains
and ordinary dividends from directly owned stocks (37% of stocks owned directly by households times 60%
of profits realized in the form of short-term gains or ordinary dividends).
  50
     Recovered         at      https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/tax-policy/tax-analysis/
Documents/Taxes-Paid-on-Long-Term-Capital-Gains.pdf.
  51
     We recover this data at https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/tax-policy/tax-analysis/


                                                     A.60
base for to by subtracting realized long-term capital gains from total net capital gains. The
relevant tax revenue is computed analogously, by subtracting total taxes paid on long-term
capital gains from total taxes paid on total realized net capital gains. The ratio of these two
quantities provides us with our estimate for to .
   The tax on interest income from C-corporations,  b,c , is computed as explained in the
main text. We obtained the share of fully taxable and temporarily deferred interest income
and the average marginal tax rate on interest income for 2014 from Tables A-3 and A-4 of
CBO (2014).

Average Tax Rates on Profits from S-Corporations,  o,s and  b,s

Although S-corporations do not pay corporate income tax, the capital income from these
corporations is taxed on the household side and the tax rate depends on how this income
is realized. Long-term gains are taxed at the maximum marginal tax rate, while profits
realized as short-term gains or net business income are taxed at the ordinary marginal tax
rates. We obtained short-term capital gains from the sales of partnerships and S-corporations
from the SOI Tax statistics Complete Year Data, Table 1 for years 1995-2011, and short-term
gains to S-corporations in proportion to their share on the net income of partnerships plus S-
corporations. We obtained profits realized through net business income from IRS Publication
4801, which provides yearly estimates for each item in IRS form 1040. In particular, taxpayers
use columns (f)­(j) of Schedule E to register passive and non-passive income and losses from
S-corporations and section 179 deductions.52,53 These data are available for 2003-2017 and
are reported in the yearly files of line-item estimates that can be downloaded from the IRS
website.54 This allows us to compute S-corporation profits realized in the form net business
income as the sum net passive and active income minus the Section 179 deductions. We add
this term to the realized short-term gains attributed to S-corporations as explained above,
and divide this quantity by the net operating surplus attributable to S-corporations to obtain
the short-term gain and business income share of S-coporation profits. Once again, we use
IRS IBD Table 1 to attribute a fraction of NOSCORPIRS to S-corporations in proportion
to their share of the net income of corporations. The long-term gain share of S-corporation
income is then simply obtained as the complement of the short-term and business income
Documents/Taxes-Paid-on-Capital-Gains-for-Returns-with-Positive-Net-Capital-Gains.pdf.
  52
     Passive income and losses are reported for taxpayers who own S-corporations but do not participate
actively to their administration. Active income and losses are for owners of S-corporation who actively
administer the business or provide labor services to it.
  53
     Section 179 of the tax code allows business owners to deduct investment expenses below a certain amount.
The TCJA of 2017 set the maximum section 179 deduction at $1 million.
  54
     https://www.irs.gov/statistics/soi-tax-stats-individual-income-tax-returns-line-item-estimates


                                               A.61
share. We set this share equal to its average over the period 2003­2011 for all our sample. As
mentioned in the previous section, the tax status of S-corporations is not recognized by all
state and local government authorities. To account for these additional taxes, we computed
the ordinary income tax rate for S-corporation owners as the sum of their personal income
tax and the state and local business tax rate,  c,SL , described above. We estimate the average
marginal income tax rate of S-corporation proprietors as the average income tax rate applied
to short-term capital gains realized by owners of C-corporation stocks. Doing so amounts to
assuming that the distribution of income of S-corporation proprietors coincides with that of
C-corporation investors. This assumption is supported by Table A.4 in CBO (2014), which
shows almost no difference between the average marginal tax rate on short-term capital gains
of corporations and the average marginal tax rate on passthrough business profits. Finally,
we calculate the tax rate on debt-financed investment analogously to C-corporations using
the data provided in Table A.3 and A.4 in CBO (2014).

Assigning Depreciation Schedules

Table A.10 presents the sources we used to assign depreciation schedules to specific (fixed)
asset types from BEA Table 2.7 of BEA FAT together with the resulting class lives and
depreciation systems. Tables B.1-2 of IRS Publication 946 detail the class lives and the
depreciation method according to the MACRS system, which applies to assets installed
starting from the 1986 fiscal year. This allows us to match each of the fixed assets categories
in BEA Table 2.7 to a class life. We then use the same class life to obtain the depreciation
schedules according to the ACRS system from IRS Publication 534, which applies to property
put in service in fiscal years 1981-1985.
   Tables B.1-B.2 of IRS Publication 946 divide all types of capital into asset classes with
corresponding class lives and depreciation methods. Tables B.1 collects asset classes for
general-purpose capital (e.g., autos, trucks, office equipment). Table B.2 instead attributes
class lives to the remaining asset classes according to the specific sector and application in
which capital is employed, with considerable degree of detail. For example, all equipment
used in the manufacturing of tobacco products (asset class 21.0) has a class life of 7 years,
while the equipment used for knitting goods (asset class 22.1) has a class life of 5 years.
Since BEA Table 2.7 does not allow us to distinguish the sector of application of many
asset classes, we use the following strategy to build the crosswalk in Table A.10: Tables
6.A-B in the BEA NIPA Handbook contain the deflators (PPI's) that the BEA uses to build
quantity indexes for each of the asset classes in BEA Table 2.7. This allows us to recover
information on the underlying sectors of application for each type of capital, which we then


                                             A.62
match to the types of assets mentioned in the description of asset classes contained in Table
B.2 of IRS Publication 946. For example, we match asset class 22.1 (equipment used for the
production of knitting goods) and 22.4 (nonwoven fabrics) in Publication 946 to "Special
Industry Machinery" in BEA Table 2.7, since the latter cites the PPI for textile machinery
among the PPI's used to build the quantity index for "Special Industry Machinery". As
this example illustrates, items in BEA Table 2.7 often correspond to multiple asset classes
in Publication 946, each with potentially different class lives. We set the class life of each
item in BEA Table 2.7 to the the mode of Publication 946 matching the class lives of asset
classes, obtained as in the example above.55
       The column "Sources P. 946" reports the items of Tables B.1-2 used to assign class lives.
In some instances, Publication 946 refers to other sections of the tax code, or provides specific
exceptions to the depreciation method that would apply following Tables B.1-2. When this is
the case, the column "Sources P. 946" cites either the passage of Publication 946 listing the
property under consideration, or the section of the tax code. We report the modal class life
according to the Asset Depreciation Range system (ADR), the Accelerated Cost Recovery
System (ACRS), and Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS). The ADR
applies to assets installed in 1970-1980, ACRS to assets installed in 1981-1986, and MACRS
applies to capital installed from 1986 onwards. MACRS consists of two depreciation systems,
the General Depreciation System (GDS) and the Alternative Depreciation System (ADS),
each prescribing different depreciation schedules. The ADS only applies to specific class lives
and uses of property. However, the level of detail in BEA Fixed Asset (FA) Tables is not
sufficient to attribute assets to this system precisely. We therefore follow the relevant GDS
schedules when computing allowances and apply the MACRS system listed in the "GDS".
"SL" denotes the straight-line method, while 200 and 150 denote the declining-balance (DB)
methods with 200% and 150% accelerated depreciation, respectively. Finally, the column
"HS" reports the classification in House and Shapiro (2008) when this is available.
       We use GDS depreciation schedules with half-year convention from Appendix A of IRS
Publication 946 (MACRS), and IRS Publication 534 (ACRS), and we apply the straight-line
method for ADR, with the class lives listed in Tables B.1-2 of IRS Publication 946.56 The
MACRS provides schedules for assets installed in specific quarters or months of the year.
We choose the half-year convention since we rely on annual data which does not allow us to
  55
      In only one case--fabricated metal products--we chose the generic equipment class life of 7 years fol-
lowing House and Shapiro (2008), instead of the modal life of 20 that follows from our method.
   56
      Using the class lives in Table B.1-2 and the straight-line method is likely to lead to some imprecision
since the ADR system allowed substantial discretion in the choice of class lives, as much as ±20% from the
baseline IRS class life. The choice of the depreciation method was also left to taxpayer discretion.



                                                   A.63
establish when capital was installed during the year.

Computing Total Discounts from Allowances

As discussed in the main text, depreciation allowances give rise to a discount on the purchase
price of capital goods. This discount is given by the present discounted value of current and
future tax payments that the business can deduct expensing the statutory allowance in each
year. Assuming that the business in question correctly anticipates future changes in taxes
and interest rate, and given a sequence of business tax rates {t } and depreciation schedules
 dj
  t , tax discounts are given as:


                                                                                             1 - dj
                                                                                             s
                                                                                                  t+k
            total discount from   allowancesj   =   dj    t +         dj
                                                                       t+s+1     t+s+1                 .
                                                                                        k=0 1 + rt+k+1
                                            t        t
                                                                s=0


Under our baseline assumption that depreciation rates and taxes are not changing, this
expression simplifies to:

                                                                                         s     1 - dj
                                            t = d0  t +
              total discount from allowancesj                                 s+1  t 
                                                 j
                                                                             dj                     k
                                                                                                        .
                                                                      s= 0              k =0 1 + rt+k+1


This term equals t t in the notation of the main text.

Computing Effective Taxes on Different Types of Capital

The final step to compute the average effective capital taxes reported in the main text
consists involves averaging the effective taxes for the various (legal) form of organization
and type of financing obtained above. To do, we first compute the share of debt and equity
financing for each legal form of organization. We obtain the series for total equity and
debt of the corporate and non-corporate sector from FRED.57 This allows us to directly
compute the share of capital financed through debt and equity in the non-corporate sector.
We follow the CBO (2006, 2014) and attribute debt and equity to C-corporations and S-
corporations. The IRS SOI provides income tax returns for all corporations for 1994-2013.
We compute total equity as the sum of the capital stock, paid-in capital, retained earnings
and adjustment to shareholders' equity, minus the treasury stock cost. We then compute
the share of total corporate equity in the tax returns that relates to S-corporations, and
attribute to them the relevant part of the aggregate stock of corporate equity (about 4%
of the total). The remaining fraction is attributed to C-corporations. We assigned debt to
 57
      Series BCNSDODNS, NCBEILQ027S, NNBCMIA, TNWBSNNB.



                                                A.64
the two forms of organization in proportion to their share in total interest deductions of
corporations, as reported by the IRS SOI. The share of debt financing for each legal form
of organization is therefore given by its stock of debt over the sum of debt and equity, while
its complement measures equity financing. Since the series exhibit trends, we use closest-
neighbor extrapolation to fill in the missing data for the years before 1994 and after 2013.
Armed with these shares, we can compute effective taxes on capital for each legal form
of organization. Finally, we construct the economy-wide average effective capital tax by
weighing the tax rate of each legal form of organization by its share of net business income
in each year. The source for net business income by form of organization is once again the
IRS IBD.

Sources for the Computation of the Effective Labor Tax Rate, 

We calculate the effective labor tax rate,  as the weighted average of labor income and
payroll taxes and the wedge introduced by imperfect valuation of employer-provided pension
and health insurance contributions:

                                    salaries  ( h +  p ) + benefits  (1 - )
                               =                                            .
                                                compensation

Line 2 in NIPA Tables 6.11B-D contains the value of employers' contributions for employee
pension and health insurance funds, while line 2 of BEA NIPA Table 1.10 provides the total
compensation of employees in the economy. Subtracting employers' contributions from total
compensations gives us total salaries. We use the average personal income tax rate of the
bottom 95% of the income distribution from IRS SOI Tax Stats for 1986­2017 as our measure
of the personal income tax rate,  h .58 The payroll tax rate,  p , is computed as the sum of the
Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance (OASDI) and Medicare's Hospital Insurance
(HI) rates for each year, that we retrieve from the Social Security Administration Website.59

Other Sources

We obtained investment in private fixed assets by type from BEA FAT 2.7. We computed the
depreciation rate of each type of fixed assets in each year, dividing current-cost depreciation
from BEA FAT Table 2.4 by the current-cost stock of each type from Table 2.4. The source
for fixed asset price changes is BEA FAT Table 2.8. When computing effective capital taxes
by category for equipment, software and nonresidential structures, we weigh the effective
 58
      "Individual Statistical Tables by Tax Rate and Income Percentile", Table 2.
 59
      https://www.ssa.gov/OACT/ProgData/taxRates.html.



                                                    A.65
capital tax constructed for each type of asset by the share of investment in each category
as listed in BEA FAT Table 2.7. As mentioned in the text, we use Moody's Seasoned
AAA Corporate Bond Yield from FRED (series AAA) deflated by the CPI for all urban
consumers (CPIAUCSL). For robustness, we also used allowances and effective tax series
using the lending interest rate from the World Bank adjusted for inflation using the GDP
deflator (World Bank indicator FR.INR.RINR). This has a minimal impact on our results,
slightly raising the present discounted value of depreciation allowances. The average real
return on S&P 500 stocks over the period 1957­2008 is computed deflating the FRED series
SP500 by the CPI for all urban consumers.




                                            A.66
                                    Table A.9: Components for the computation of capital taxation

       Variable Name        Full Name               Components/Formula             Elaboration on:                Notes
       NOSPCU          Net operating surplus Includes: net interest payments of    BEA Table 1.10
                       of private enterprises  domestic businesses; net transfer
                                               payments; proprietors' income;
                                               rental income of persons; cor-
                                               porate profits gross of corporate
                                               taxes; all variables are adjusted
                                               for inventory valuation and cap-
                                               ital consumption.
       NOSCORP         Net operating surplus        Component of the above         BEA Table 1.14
                       of corporations




A.67
       CFCPCU,         Consumption of fixed                    --                  BEA        Tables Represents economic deprecia-
       CFC-            capital of private en-                                      1.1.10, 1.1.14    tion of the capital stock
       CORP            terprises, corporations
       OS*             Gross operating sur- NOS* + CFC*                            BEA        Tables Represents the economic tax base
                       plus of private enter-                                      1.1.10, 1.1.14    before allowing for depreciation
                       prises, corporations
       OSPUE           Gross operating sur- OSPCU - OSCORP                               --                        --
                       plus of private unin-
                       corporated enterprises
       CCAll*          Capital consumption                     --                  BEA data from                   --
                       allowances for PUE,                                         FRED.
                       corporations
Table A.10: Class lives and depreciation schedules for equipment, structures, and intellec-
tual property products

  Type                    Sources P. 946              ADR   ACRS     MACRS     HS    GDS

  Computers and
                          0.12                         6      5         5       5    200
  peripheral equipment
                          36, 48.2, 48.37,
  Communication           48.42­.45, 48.13, 00.11,
                                                      10      5         7       5    200
  equipment               48.35­.36,48.38­42,
                          48.31, 48.34
  Medical equipment and
                          sec. 168(B)iv,                      5         5       7    200
  instruments
  Nonmedical              36,48.37, 48.39, 48.44,
                                                       6      5         7       7    200
  instruments             26.1, 37.2
  Photocopy and related
                          0.13,                        6      5         5       5    200
  equipment
  Office and accounting
                          0.13,                        6      5         5       5    200
  equipment
                          48.42, section 168(C),
  Fabricated metal        49.12, 40.52, 49.11,
                                                       6     10         7       7    150
  products                49.13, 49.21, 49.221,
                          49.3, 49.4, 51

  Engines and turbines    6                            5      7        15      200

  Computers and
                          0.12                         6      5         5       5    200
  peripheral equipment
                          34.01, 37.12, 33.21,
  Metalworking            37.33, 33.2, 33.4, 34.0,
                                                      12      5         7       7    200
  machinery               35.0, 37.11, 37.2, 37.31,
                          37.41, 37.42




                                             A.68
Type                            Sources P. 946               ADR       ACRS       MACRS       HS     GDS

                                20.5, 30.11, 30.21,
                                32.11, 22.1, 22.3,22.4,
                                23.0, 24.1, 24.3, 28.0,
                                36, 36.1, 57.0 , 20.4,
Special industry
                                22.2, 22.5, 24.2, 24.4,       10          5           7        7     200
machinery, n.e.c.
                                26.1, 26.2, 27.0, 30.1,
                                30.2, 31.0, 32.1, 32.3,
                                79.0 80.0, 13.3, 20.1­.3,
                                32.2
General industrial,
including materials             00.241,00.24260                6          5           5        7     200
handling, equipment
Electrical transmission,
                                48.38, 48.31, , 0.4,
distribution, and                                             10          5          20        7     150
                                49.11, 49.13, 49.14
industrial apparatus
Trucks, buses, and
                                00.23­00.242                   4          5           5        5     200
truck trailers
Light trucks (including
                                0.241,                         4          3           5        5     200
utility vehicles)
Other trucks, buses,
                                00.23,00.242,                  6          5           5        5     200
and truck trailers

Autos                           0.22,                          3          3           5        5     200

Aircraft                        0.21,                          6          5           5        7     200

Ships and boats                 0.28,                         10          5          10        10    150

Railroad equipment              40.1,                         14          5           7        7     200

Furniture and fixtures          0.11,                         10          5           7              200

Agricultural machinery          1.1,                          10          5           7        7     150

Construction
                                15,                            6          5           5        5     200
machinery
Mining and oilfield
                                13, 13.1, 10,13.2,             6          5           5        7     200
machinery

60
     Exclusion of general purpose from most sectoral class lives of conveyor belts and general-purpose tools.


                                                      A.69
  Type                          Sources P. 946                ADR       ACRS       MACRS        HS    GDS

  Service industry
                                57, 79­80,                      9          5            7        7     200
  machinery
  Electrical equipment,
                                Ch.4, p.28                      6          5            7        7     200
  n.e.c.
  Other nonresidential
                                Ch.4, p.28                      6          5            7        7     200
  equipment

  Residential equipment         Ch.4, p.28

  Structures                                                          15­18­19                          SL

  Nonresidential
                                Ch. 4 p. 31                                           3962
  structures61
  Commercial and health
                                Ch. 4 p. 31                                            39       39
  care
  Manufacturing
                                Ch. 4 p. 31                                            39       39
  structures
                                49.12,49.15, 49.11,
  Electric structures                                          20                      20       20     150
                                49.13, 49.14

  Other power structures        49.23, 49.24, 49.25            14                      15       15     150

  Communication                 48.14,                         15                      15       15     150

  Mining exploration,
  shafts, and wells
  Petroleum and natural
                                13.0, 13.1, 13.2                6         10            5        5     200
  gas

  Mining structures             10,                            10         10            7        5     200

  Farm structures                                                                      20       20     150

  Residential structures                                                              27.5              SL

  Nonresidential
  intellectual property         section 197                                            15               SL
  products63
  61
     Applies to religious, education, lodging, amusement and other nonresidential structures that are not
explicitly mentioned below
  62
     As per publication 946, structures put in service before 1994 should have a useful life of 31.5 years. For
simplicity, we use 39 for all years.
  63
     Applies to all intellectual property products not explicitly mentioned below.


                                                    A.70
Type           Sources P. 946           ADR   ACRS   MACRS      HS   GDS

Software                                                        5

               Ch. 1, p. 10, not
Prepackaged                                             3            SL
               sec.197
               Ch. 1, p. 10, not
Custom                                                  3            SL
               sec.197

Own account    sec. 167(f)1                          15 years        SL

Research and
               item 5, sec 197                         15            SL
development




                                   71
